@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Mind the gap – Deriving a compatible user mental model of the home heating system to encourage sustainable behaviour

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A novel approach to specify the ‘scaffolding’ underlying Norman's 7 stages of activity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Development of a compatible user mental model of the domestic heating system that supports sustainable behaviour.


                        
                        
                           
                           Demonstrating how different mental model elements are applied at the 7 stages of activity to target climate change strategies.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Mental models

Design: sustainability

Behaviour change

Design model

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Householders' behaviour with their home heating systems is a considerable contributor to domestic energy consumption. To create a design specification for the ‘scaffolding’ needed for sustainable behaviour with home heating controls, Norman's (1986) Gulf of Execution and Evaluation was applied to the home heating system. A Home Heating Design Model (DM) was produced with a home heating expert. Norman's (1986) 7 Stages of Activity were considered to derive a Compatible User Mental Model (CUMM) of a typical Heating System. Considerable variation in the concepts needed at each stage was found. Elements that could be derived from the DM supported stages relating to action specification, execution, perception and interpretation, but many are not communicated in the design of typical heating controls. Stages relating to goals, intentions and evaluation required concepts beyond the DM. A systems view that tackles design for sustainable behaviour from a variety of levels is needed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Home heating contributes 58% of domestic energy use in the UK (Department of Energy and Climate Change, 2011). Considerable differences in amount of energy used in homes results from occupant's behavioural differences (Lutzenhiser and Bender, 2008). Understanding the cause of behavioural differences in the way home heating systems are used provides an opportunity to develop approaches to encourage appropriate behaviour change for sustainability in householders. The purpose of this paper is to provide insights that could inform the design or evaluation of home heating interfaces to encourage appropriate heating control. The authors consider ‘appropriate heating control’ to be pragmatic operation of heating devices so householders fulfil their heating goals with minimal wasted energy. The approach taken by this paper is to apply Norman's (1986) theory of the Gulf of Evaluation and Execution to derive the form and content of a User Mental Model (UMM) that would enable appropriate heating control.

Key issues that prevent householders operating heating systems appropriately include the cognitive and physical usability of the system. Kempton (1986, 1987) proposed that variations in the way people operate their home heating thermostat, resulted from their differing ‘mental models’ of the way the device functioned. He found evidence that behaviour patterns associated with some mental models were more energy efficient than others, as they encouraged ‘night set back’. Revell and Stanton (2014) found faulty or incomplete mental models explained non-optimal operation of home heating devices; where energy was either being wasted, or heating goals failed to be achieved. Considerable energy savings could be made if heating systems were effectively programmed (Gupta et al. in Combe et al., 2011), yet in a study by Combe et al. (2011), 66% of participants were unable to complete the set programming task. Peffer et al. (2011) discuss how users can waste more energy by incorrectly programming their heating controls, than if they had used manual alternatives. It seems that users are not ‘in control’ of their heating system in the way manufacturers intend, if they misunderstand how home heating systems contribute to their goals, and find it difficult to operate the heating controls.

To gain insights that could help specify the needs of an interface to support appropriate heating control, this paper looks to Norman's (1986) theory of the Gulf of Evaluation and Execution. Norman (1986) introduced the idea of the ‘gulf of evaluation and execution’ to explain why computer users did not operate systems in the way system designers intended. Norman emphasised that this problem specification applied equally to physical systems, directing the authors to consider home heating as a suitable domain for application. Norman approximates 7 stages of user activity to describe how the user bridges the gulf. These stages take into account user goals, their perceptions, intentions and actions. Norman (1986) emphasised the need for user mental models to be compatible with the design model of the system to effectively bridge the gulf of evaluation and execution.

Norman's gulf of evaluation and execution represents the distance between a user's psychological goals (e.g. I want to be warm whilst watching TV with my spouse in the living room) and physical actions necessary, with a specific system, to achieve those goals (e.g. press the boiler override button on my programmer). This model shares similarities with Rasmussen's (1983) ‘decision ladder’ concept. According to Norman (1986), the user bridges these gulfs by going through a number of stages (Fig. 1
                        ). A user bridges the gulf of execution, by a) Forming their intention to use the system to achieve their goal, b) specifying the action sequence that will achieve their goal, and c) Executing the necessary actions with the input devices. They also need to bridge the gulf of evaluation by a) Perceiving the state of the system, b) Interpreting the state of the system so it can be compared to their goal, and c) Comparing the system state to their goal. Combined, with goal specification, these stages make up Norman's (1986) 7 stage model for user activity (illustrated in Fig. 1 within the home heating context).


                        Norman (1986) believes many systems can be characterised by how well they support the 7 stages of action and this approach has been adopted in the literature. Connell (1998) concluded that the gulf of execution and evaluation had advantages over analysis methods that considered taxonomies of error (e.g. Meister, 1997) or skills and rules (e.g. Reason, 1990). When performing error analysis on ticket vending machines, Connell (1998) found viewing erroneous button presses within the framework of the gulfs of evaluation and execution, more simply explained causes of error and pointed to practical design solutions. Cuomo and Bowen (1994) found analysis methods better addressed the stages that made up the gulfs of execution (intention, action specification, execution), than those responsible for the gulf of evaluation (perception, interpretation and evaluation), suggesting a gap in traditional system evaluation. The gulfs of evaluation and execution has also been used to inform improvements to direct manipulation interaction (Hutchins et al., 1985; Kieras et al., 2001; Mohageg, 1991), understand difficulties in using programming languages (Ko et al., 2004; Edwards, 2005) and to facilitate human–robot interaction (Scholtz, 2002). Norman (1986) suggests that users will be more successful at achieving their goals when interacting with systems, if efforts are made to facilitate users at each of the 7 stages of activity. Norman's (1986) 7 stages of activity has not previously been applied to the home heating context, and the authors believe that by illustrating how users are expected to bridge these gulfs, insights into why people waste energy by inappropriate interaction will be identified. These insights could inform design or guidance requirements to support appropriate interaction for reducing wasted energy.

Mental models are internal constructs that are considered important in predicting, understanding and explaining human behaviour (Wickens, 1984; Kempton, 1986; Craik, 1943; Johnson-Laird, 1983) The notion has proved attractive when considering interface design (Carroll and Olson, 1987; Williges, 1987, Norman, 2002; Jenkins et al., 2010), to promote usability (Norman, 2002; Mack and Sharples, 2009; Jenkins et al., 2011), or enhance performance (Stanton and Young, 2000; Stanton and Baber, 2008; Grote et al., 2010; Bourbousson et al., 2011). The definition of mental models has been the topic of much debate over the last 20 years (Wilson and Rutherford, 1989; Bainbridge, 1992; Richardson and Ball, 2009 & Revell and Stanton, 2012).

In this paper, Norman's (1983) definition of mental models will be used. He distinguishes between user mental models, (UMMs) and Design models (DM). The UMM is defined as ‘the actual mental model a user might have’ gauged by observations or experimentation with the user (Norman, 1983). The DM is defined as a conceptualisation of the system held by the designer (Norman, 1986). For a fuller discussion of the distinction between these and other definitions of mental models, see Revell and Stanton (2012). For effective bridging of the gulfs, Norman (1986) demands the UMM is compatible with the DM of the underlying system. This can be achieved, either by bringing the user closer to the system (through experience, or training), or by bringing the system closer to the user through system design (Norman, 1986). Evidence of this approach has been offered by Staffon and Lindsay (1989) in the design of power plant processes, where provision of an interface containing a thermodynamic model of plant performance ensured operators had a compatible user mental model (CUMM) of the system states, before executing the controls. In the home heating context, the designer does not control the level of experience of the user, nor can they demand they undergo home heating training. Norman (1986) proposes that the designer can promote compatible user mental models through the choices they make when constructing the system image, which in turn influences user mental models (see Fig. 2
                           ).


                           Norman (1986) considered the DM & UMM as the ‘scaffolding’ for the bridges that enable users to cross the Gulfs of Evaluation and Execution. If this underlying structure is unsound, this impacts the 7 stages of activity, ultimately affecting the way users behave with, and interpret the system. The relationship between these two concepts is introduced separately by Norman (1986). The authors find merit in combining them in a single representation (see Fig. 3
                           ) to illustrate how the concepts are integrated. Norman (1986) explains that the scaffolding allows the user to derive possible courses of action and possible system responses. Norman (1986) emphasises that the DM should be accurate, consistent and complete, representation of the system, but importantly needs to relate to the users tasks, requirements and capabilities. Norman (1986) argues that the UMM should be compatible with the DM, but that it is the job of the system image (and associated instruction manuals/training) to achieve this. The authors consider it necessary to understand the form, content and structure of the target CUMM for development of a system image tasked with its promotion. Focussing on what aspects are needed in the underlying ‘scaffolding’ for each stage of activity is a novel application of Norman's theory, that is absent from the literature. The goal of this paper is to demonstrate this approach in the home heating context, to offer a new perspective to help mitigate climate change. To achieve this, this paper will: 1) Present a DM model of a typical home heating system; 2) Derive a CUMM that supports appropriate home heating behaviour at each of Norman's 7 stages of activity; and 3) Summarise all elements needed in a CUMM to bridge the Gulf of Execution and Evaluation of a typical home heating system, as the scaffolding for appropriate home heating control. The consequences of incompatible UMMs and implications for energy consumption are discussed throughout. How insights gained could inform system interface design is also discussed.

@&#METHOD@&#

This paper refers to data collected from an expert in home heating systems from the heating control manufacturing company who designed the devices installed in the case study households from Revell and Stanton (2014). The method used was a semi-structured interview and paper-based activities described in detail in Revell and Stanton (2014). The method provides outputs in the form of mental model descriptions (similar to concept maps), graph based outputs of typical usage and interview transcripts. This data was used to represent a DM and ‘recommended execution’ of the home heating system, from which to derive the form of a compatible user mental model.

The Design model is the conceptual model of the system, determined by the designer and developers of the system (Norman, 1986). The Home heating system is a composite of a number of different components (boiler, programmer, thermostat etc.), often made by different manufacturers. All of these different components have their own DM at the component level, as well as a composite design model at the system level, based on how the components are combined within a household. Whilst DMs of specific components could be inferred from user instruction and installation manuals, these tended to discuss device function in isolation, or at most, with very general reference to connecting devices. This presented a problem to the authors when seeking a design model for the central heating system as a whole at a sufficiently high level to be generic for the types of devices used for these systems.

To overcome this difficulty, the authors interviewed an expert who could give an overview of a specified central heating setup. The expert approached had 40 years' experience with home heating systems and worked for the manufacturing company that produced the key control devices present in households used in the case study reported in Revell and Stanton (2014). The authors wish to emphasise that the aim was to derive a DM of the heating system that provides an accurate and complete representation of the devices at a high level integrated system, rather than an ‘expert model’ of the system. The method used was a semi-structured interview and paper-based activities described in detail in Revell and Stanton (2014). The method provides outputs in the form of mental model descriptions (similar to concept maps), graph based outputs of typical usage and interview transcripts. For reference, the expert was provided the layout and specification of the components present in the case study households so he could keep this in mind when describing his mental model of the system. As part of the interview process, the expert provided an example of ‘appropriate’ behaviour with this heating system to support generic heating goals. This was done by responding to questions as if he was making recommendations to a member of a family with school age children, with one adult at home during the day, and the other working outside the home. This reflected the family structure of householders in the case studies by Revell and Stanton (2014, 2015), allowing comparisons to be made. This outputs were used to represent a ‘design model’ and ‘recommended execution’ of the home heating system, from which to derive the form of a compatible user mental model.


                     Fig. 4
                      depicts the mental model description produced to represent the Design Model (DM) (redrawn for clarity). It shows at a system level, the different components, connections and rules associated with the central heating system from the case study. Each box in Fig. 4 represents a component of the central heating system with the benefit of the system (to influence ‘room temperature’) in dotted lines. The boxes outlined in bold, represent home heating controls that a user could adjust. The boxes with a light outline represent ways in which devices feedback the state of the system in this setup. The arrows between boxes represent the direction of ‘cause and effect’. Rules and functions of elements and links are annotated with text.


                     Fig. 4 illustrates an interrelated relationship between heating controls and the system benefit. This DM is far from straight forward, but Norman (1986) does not consider it necessary for a householder to understand the full complexity of the design model of a device, in order to use it effectively. Norman (1986) does require that the user mental model is ‘compatible’ with the design model, however. Following discussions of appropriate operation with the heating system, the home heating expert was asked to identify which parts of the DM shown in Fig. 4 were key for the user to understand how to operate the system appropriately (identified in Fig. 4 with bold italics, and tabulated with explanations in Table 1
                     ). The Expert had considerable contact with users of devices that made up part of this setup and the problems and misunderstandings they faced with operation. This provided the authors with a starting point for the form of a compatible user mental model (CUMM), which has been depicted in Fig. 5
                      in a simplified form. Elements from the DM in Fig. 4 will be added or removed as the authors progress through the 7 stages of activity. For clarity and brevity, the functioning of the home heating system will be described to the readers with reference to Fig. 5, rather than Fig. 4.


                     Fig. 5 depicts (from the left), the Master Switch that supplies electricity to the heating system, linked to the boiler. It shows the boiler with two controls attached to it, the programmer (with schedule/boost/advance features) and the thermostat control. The programmer schedule calls for heat to the boiler at specific times. It has a boost button that adds an ad-hoc single hour to the schedule from the time pressed, and an advance button, that will set the next part of the schedule to start immediately. The boiler has a conditional switch that requires the programmer and the thermostat to both be calling for heat before it will pump hot water around the pipes to the radiators. The radiators emit heat to the air in the room, resulting in a change in room temperature. The thermostat takes an estimate of the house temperature from the room where it is positioned. It compares this room temperature to its set temperature value, calling for heat from the boiler only if this is higher. Before reaching the radiators, the TRV can control if the hot water will enter the radiator. This is a crude slow response control and works like the thermostat. If the room temperature measured by the TRV is higher than the temperature range associated with its set point, then it will allow hot water to flow into the radiator. If lower, the TRV will slowly block access, so hot water must bi-pass that particular radiator, and that room will no longer continue to receive heat from the radiator.

Previous work by the authors (Revell and Stanton, 2014, 2015) collected mental model data on six householders using the same system on which the DM was based. Fig. 6
                      consolidates this data to illustrate the gap between heating system end users and the starting point for the CUMM presented in Fig. 5 (elements present in UMMs are depicted in black, missing elements are represented in light grey). A clear variation in the elements in different UMMs is evident and the next section discusses the impact of these variations on appropriate evaluation and execution of the home heating system by referencing the case studies from which this data is derived.

This section considers each of the 7 stages of activity for the home heating system, using recommendations from the expert's interview transcript to determine the approach users with this type of system are expected to undertake. The authors consider the elements required in a UMM for each stages, and compare these with the elements that can be found from the DM (Fig. 4). The intention is to illustrate both where the DM of systems need to communicate to the user elements necessary for sustainable behaviour, as well as understand the extent of the ‘scaffolding’ needed in CUMM at each stage. This understanding could aid the design of home heating control interfaces to assist householders'’ in minimising wasted consumption by shedding light on energy wasting behaviour.

Stage 1 of Norman's (1986) 7 stages of action represents goals. The Expert was asked to consider 2 generic home heating goals: 1) To provide routine comfort within the home without wasting energy (e.g. in the morning on waking and getting ready to leave the house, and at the end of the day when returning & relaxing before bed) and 2) To provide ad-hoc comfort on demand without wasting energy (e.g. by parent during the week, or whole family at weekend when the house is occupied). Fig. 7
                         shows the elements necessary to arise at these goals, which can be considered at a high level. Concepts relating to Energy, the Heating system and room temperature are all present in the DM (Fig. 4). The key criteria for success (User Comfort & Waste) are not represented. This is not surprising, since Fig. 4 is fundamentally a DM of how the heating system functions. The goal of the heating system is to raise & maintain room temperature, from which comfort and waste may ensue depending on the settings chosen. The link between room temperature and comfort or waste has to be inferred by the user in typical heating systems.


                        Norman's (1986) second stage of action, Intentions, are closely related to goals and represent the decision to act, to achieve the goal. The intentions described by the expert with this system, were to use the central heating system appropriately to achieve these goals. For goal 1, the experts intention was to set the long-term heating controls to provide comfortable living conditions that fit the routine of the occupants, making use of residual heat and limiting retention of heat when the home or long-term unused rooms were unoccupied. For goal 2, the intention was to override these pre-set heating controls after ensuring lower comfort levels were the result of the room temperature, rather than low activity levels. These intentions indicate that a CUMM should include an understanding that some controls are used to ‘set up’ the system long-term, whereas other controls are used for short term adjustments, which the authors have reflected in Fig. 8
                        . The DM (Fig. 4) does not explicitly distinguish which controls are intended for short or long term settings, revealing the risk that controls could be put to an inappropriate purpose. The misuse of the thermostat as a ‘short-term’ control has been cited widely in the literature (Revell and Stanton, 2014; Kempton, 1986; Richardson and Ball, 2009; Norman, 2002; Peffer et al., 2011). The energy saving components of these intentions, requires an expectation that there is some ability to custom heat rooms, an awareness of other variables that influence comfort, and some appreciation of the thermodynamics of heat retention and loss over time (see Fig. 8) in the CUMM. Custom heating is not explicit from the DM (Fig. 4) but can be inferred from the TRV controls present on each radiator. Absent is the relative nature of comfort and household thermodynamics, which again, along with waste, fall out of the specific functioning of the heating system. Revell and Stanton (2014) described how householders who were unaware of the ability to make custom adjustments to rooms experienced discomfort from over-heating as well as conflicts of comfort between different household members (P2, P3 & P5 in Fig. 6 all omitted the TRV from their UMM). Lack of awareness of other causes of poor comfort, as well as household thermodynamics, was shown to result in wasted energy (Revell and Stanton, 2015) for P4 in Fig. 6.

Stages 3 and 4 involve mapping the user goals and intentions onto a desired home heating ‘system state’. In this context, it represented the required adjustments of key heating controls to fulfil goals 1 & 2, and the actions necessary for execution. Fig. 9
                         uses an output of the semi-structured interview provided by the home heating expert (and redrawn for clarity) to depict stage 3, the intended ‘state’ of the home heating system controls following execution.

To fulfil goal 1, the expert recommended ‘action specification’ required use of the Programmer in conjunction with the Thermostat and TRV's. These 3 devices therefore need to be present in a CUMM to support stages 3 and 4. Fig. 6 provides evidence that end users may omit the programmer (P3), the thermostat (P1) and TRVs (P2,3 & 5), impeding users from enacting this action specification. Repeated routine timeslots in the programmer schedule are shown at the bottom section of Fig. 9. To incorporate heating up times, the programmer timeslots are set from one hour before the household awakes. To utilise residual heat, the timeslot ends 30 min after waking (this assumes reasonable insulation, and the family in the home for the next hour). A Time lag in heating up and residual heat are characteristics of a slow response system (Crossman and Cooke, 1974). Crossman and Cooke (1974) emphasise that in manual control of slow response systems, that operators need to be taught the control characteristics to secure the best results. Whilst Programmers are automated systems, they respond to manually imputed times. The householder's CUMM would need an appreciation of; 1) The pace of slow response systems; 2) The thermodynamics of their home and 3) The routine of their household, when making decisions about the appropriate time periods to program into the schedule. The evening time period for the programmer runs from 30 min before occupants return home until bedtime (Fig. 9). The longer timeslot is not wasteful where the house is occupied, as heat energy is only emitted when the thermostat calls for heat. It is important that the conditional rule for boiler operation is explicitly communicated to householders so it forms part of their CUMM. Without this understanding, householders could needlessly compromise comfort by assuming programmer times equate to consumption periods (a serious problem for vulnerable people).


                        Fig. 9 (dashed line) shows industry recommendations for a static thermostat set point at around 18–20 °C. Due to variations in the structure of the houses, the expert explained Initial experiment is necessary to determine a set point that achieves a comfortable temperature in the most used rooms. He also emphasised that it would not always be possible to achieve a comfortable temperature in all parts of the house at once with room temperature measured from a single source, and thermodynamics affecting room temperature according to the house structure and insulation. The absence of these concepts from a CUMM could explain householders assuming that default settings are appropriate for their home, during the action specification stage. Combe et al. found evidence that default settings were frequently retained, a circumstance that would have a knock on effect on evaluation stages, where comfort levels were not as expected (as seen in Revell and Stanton, 2014, whereby P1 from Fig. 6 was unaware of the default value of their thermostat, that resulted in the heating turning off during scheduled on times, as the thermostat was missing from their UMM). Similarly, the TRV set points are specified by the expert to largely be kept at static settings, and treated as a heat limiter rather than heat control (Fig. 9, light grey line) as they are also a slow responding control. To avoid wasting energy, only TRVs in long-term unused rooms (with doors kept shut), should be set to a low static set point. Communicating TRV function explicitly so that the CUMM incorporated them as slow responding feedback devices would dissuade users producing an action specification that included regular or frequent adjustments to the TRVs. A user (P4 from Fig. 6) who lacked this understanding was found in Revell and Stanton (2015) to unintentionally increase their boiler on times and low comfort levels.

To fulfil goal 2, providing ad-hoc comfort without wasting energy, the expert specified use of the ‘boost’ button (Fig. 9, bold line) due to the automatic off feature. This prevents energy being wasted by remaining on for longer than intended due to forgetfulness. This is a risk with other override options such as the on–off button or thermostat adjustment. Before operating the boost, the expert proscribed that users' comfort levels should be compared to the current air temperature shown on the ‘room temperature’ display on the thermostat device. Often, low activity levels, hunger or tiredness may make individuals feel cold, when the heating system has achieved the intended air temperature. The expert considered that energy is wasted if the air temperature is raised to compensate for other variables relating to comfort, that could be addressed directly (e.g. by increasing activity levels, eating, sleeping). The inclusion of the boost control and appreciation of the automatic off feature, as well as the room temperature display and other causes for low comfort levels, are all necessary concepts in a CUMM to enable this action specification for goal 2. Fig. 10
                         depicts these concepts alongside those necessary for goal 1. All participants shown in Fig. 6 omitted the boost button from their UMMs, preventing inclusion of this device in their action specification for goal 2.

The expert emphasised that ease of activating the boost (by pressing a push button) as a key feature of the control. This relates to stage 4 of Norman's (1986) stages of activity, how a user executes action specifications. To execute adjustments to the program schedule required the householders in the case study to make various mode changes and adjustments on the programmer device. This was an involved process that would need the user to refer to instructions. Norman (2986:p.40) succinctly positions the effect of usability of input devices on the interactions people have with system, “Because some physical actions are more difficult than others, the choice of input devices can affect the selection of actions, which in turn affects how well the system matches with intentions”. Easy to operate devices, therefore, may be operated more readily than more appropriate ‘less easy’ to operate devices. The literature shows a clear problem with the usability of home heating programmers (Peffer et al., 2011, 2013; Combe et al., 2011; Meier et al., 2011) illustrating a barrier the user needs to overcome at the execution stage, even if the user specified an appropriate cause of action. The thermostat device suffers from the opposite problem; by being easy to adjust for short-term adjustments (by turning a dial), but requiring considerable effort to determine a static set point to be left long term, there is a barrier to ‘resist’ frequent adjustment. For some device controls, like TRVs, the effort of making adjustments in multiple locations in the house may deter frequent adjustment for usability issues (as seen in Revell and Stanton, 2014), rather than an awareness in the CUMM that they are slow responding. If this barrier was removed (e.g. through an alternate interface) and adjustment was easier, frequent adjustment may then occur due to increased convenience, if the ‘slow respond’ element was missing from the CUMM. Bainbridge (1992) proposed that ‘metaknowledge’ (MK), (a form of data learnt through experience) is incorporated with mental model data to determine the chosen strategy. The ‘ease of operation’ is likely to be a component of MK that deters users from executing an appropriate strategy. It is essential, therefore, at the execution stage, that MK relating to the pay-off for proper set-up and negative consequences of ad-hoc use, is present in the CUMM for long term controls. Fig. 11
                         shows the elements needed in the CUMM to support stage 4, execution. To foster this MK, a range of design choices may be appropriate. For example, by altering the usability/availability of controls, or providing warnings at the point of adjustment. Since this paper is concerned with the underlying mental model structure, the authors believe the concepts relating to slow response, feedback links, long or short term controls and conditional rule of the boiler could foster MK that ensures, rather than deters, appropriate behaviour and as such have included these in Fig. 11. As a comparison of user comfort and room temperature is required as part of execution of the boost for goal 2 these variables are also represented in the CUMM for stage 4. Fig. 6 shows P6 omitted the room temperature from their UMM preventing this comparison to be made, as discussed in Revell and Stanton (2014).

The 5th, 6th & 7th stages of activity make up the Gulf of Evaluation, and involve the perception of feedback cues from the system to allow the user to interpret its state. This enables the user to evaluate if the original goals and intentions have been met through the adopted action specification (Norman, 1986). To aid interpretation, the CUMM needs to support perception (stage 5) by encouraging the user to seek out different types of feedback: 1) Those relating to the adopted action specification (i.e. status of devices), and; 2) those relating to the effect that action specification has had on the broader system to achieve the original intentions (in this case, those relating to comfort, consumption and waste levels). To perceive feedback that will enable interpretation that key devices are operating as expected, the user will need to perceive status indicators relating to the programmer, the thermostat and TRV control for goal 1, and the boost button and thermostat for goal 2. For both goals, to direct perception relating to the intentions formed in stage 2, the CUMM needs to include elements relating to boiler status (resulting from space heating), radiator status, room temperature, comfort levels and waste status. Norman (1986) warns that in slow responding systems, where the change in system state does not occur immediately following execution of the action sequence, the user may forget the details of the action sequence, impeding interpretation. At the perception stage, a reminder of the action sequence adopted by including set point values of the key devices in the CUMM would therefore aid interpretation (Fig. 12
                        ). The DM in Fig. 4 includes these elements and the thermostat control considered in this paper allowed easy comparison of the thermostat set point with room temperature. To access the schedule timings from many programmers is an involved process that does not facilitate comparison, however. The CUMM needs also to include the concept of lag for room temperature due to thermodynamics, and slow response of TRVs and Radiator temperature to direct the appropriate time at which perceptual cues are used for interpretation (see Fig. 12). Fig. 6 illustrates how whilst P1,4 & 6 include the TRV in their UMM, the concept that this is a slow responding device is omitted. In the DM represented in Fig. 4, elements of the heating controls that feedback the state of the system used in this case study, are shown with a thin border. To support appropriate perception status indicators for the programmer (red light), thermostat (flame) and boost (text) are present. The room temperature display on the thermostat also allows the user to perceive the state of comfort possible. However there are some clear omissions in the DM; there is no status indicator for the TRV, nor the radiator. The status indicator on the boiler is relevant but unreliable as it also indicates heating due to how water demand. Non deliberate feedback such as the sound of the boiler is similarly ambiguous, as well as the temperature of radiators to the touch, which may be warming up (rather than off) or cooling down (rather than on). The user is therefore tasked not only with perceiving relevant and reliable feedback from the system, which may be absent from their UMM (see Fig. 6), but also with ignoring relevant but unreliable feedback.

As both goals are based around balancing comfort and waste, data relating to the status of comfort and wasted heat is also needed but missing from the DM. It is no surprise that traditional heating systems do not include in their DM concepts that fall outside of the mechanical functioning of the system, as the original remit was to provide space heating rather than optimise comfort and waste. However where there are omissions, or ambiguities caused by the typical the DM of existing systems, that impede the development of a CUMM in the user, there is a risk that UMMs will include relevant (but unreliable) alternatives, resulting in mistaken interpretation and evaluation.

The Norman's (1986) 6th stage of activity is where the user interprets the system state and control settings to line with the original intentions. The intentions for goal 1 were to use long term heating controls to provide routine comfort for occupants, making use of residual heat and avoiding heating an unoccupied home. The intentions for goal 2 were to override long-term settings after ensuring low comfort levels resulted from room temperature (instead of activity levels). The householder is first tasked with differentiating the perceptual feedback of long-term and short-term devices as well as perception of boiler status, to ensure heating controls are operating as expected. Expectations are based on the action specification in stage 3, so perceptual feedback of device settings is also required in the CUMM. The DM in Fig. 4 shows status indicators for the programmer, boost and thermostat, though the indicator for the boiler is ambiguous as it also reflects hot water demand. Typical of most TRVs, the set point is the only available indicator of radiator state, so the user is not encouraged to construct a CUMM that allows them to make a reliable judgement.

For goal 1, the CUMM needs to prompt comparison of the thermostat and programmer status to determine if the boiler should be functioning. This interpretation requires comparison of the thermostat and programmer status indicators and relies on an understanding of the conditional rule. End users who have only the programmer (P1) or thermostat (P2) in their UMM (see Fig. 6) are clearly impeded from making an appropriate interpretation. Without this concept, the user may rely on single indicators in isolation providing an inappropriate interpretation (as was seen in Revell and Stanton, 2014). To interpret if the thermostat should be ‘calling for heat’, a comparison between the set point and the hall room temperature needs to be made, demanding the feedback link for the thermostat to be part of the CUMM (requiring both elements to be part of a UMM, shown not always the case in Fig. 6 (P6)). To perceive the status of radiator operation, the CUMM would include data following perception of a reliable status indicator for the TRV and radiator, as well as the feedback link for the TRVs. Without this, an understanding of thermodynamics (in terms of radiator lag times) and the slow response of TRVs is necessary, to prevent a reliance on feeling the radiator surface temperature, (which may be heating up or cooling down, and may be responding to TRV setting rather than the conditional rule of the boiler). Fig. 6 shows how a number of participants did not include TRVs in their UMMs, and those that did, omitted the slow response, feedback link and comparison between hall and room temperature from their UMM. Interpreting the radiators as ‘on’ when they are cooling down, or ‘off’ when heating up, may result in an interpretation that the programmer is not following the schedule correctly, or that the boost is not effective at overriding the schedule. To interpret the heating was working as expected when overriding the system (goal 2), the same elements would be needed in the CUMM, with the boost device taking the place of the programmer and the concept of ‘auto off’ being substituted for the programmed schedule (see Fig. 13
                        ).

The householder is also tasked with interpreting if the broader system state meets comfort expectations and if wasted consumption is minimised. To interpret if the heating system has succeeded in meeting routine and ad-hoc comfort, the CUMM needs distinguish between comfort status both in terms of the temperature display value, as well as the other variables affecting comfort levels, and remember what routine needs resulted in the scheduled times. The CUMM needs to evoke consideration of waste status to interpret if waste is being minimised (see Fig. 13). The concepts relating to the broader system fall outside the elements in the DM in Fig. 4.


                        Norman's (1986) 7th stages of activity captures the user's evaluation of the outcome of their actions. In this stage, the user compares their interpretation of the perceived system state, with the intentions created in stage 2, and their goals in stage 1. Based on the outcome of the evaluation, new goals may be set (Norman, 1986). Misunderstandings at the evaluation stage, resulting from problems with the underlying structure of their mental model of their home heating system, could result in the formation of new goals that unintentionally waste energy or compromise comfort.

Goal 1 sought “To provide routine comfort within the home without wasting energy”. This evoked the intention to set long-term heating controls to ensure the house was comfortable when occupied, using residual heat and minimising the heating of unused rooms. According to Norman (1986), the UMM needs to allow the user to compare their interpretation of the perceived system state, with their intentions, to determine if the original goals have been met. The correct functioning of the long-term heating controls, evidence of custom heated rooms, the status of routine comfort and the extent of wasted room temperature are all concepts that are necessary in the UMM (see Fig. 14
                        ), which Fig. 6 shows not always to be the case with end users.

Goal 2 sought “To provide ad-hoc comfort on demand, without wasting energy”. This evoked the intention to override pre-set controls after establishing the cause of discomfort was due to room temperature. The correct functioning of the short-term heating control, the status of ad-hoc comfort and other variables responsible for comfort are therefore necessary concepts in Fig. 14.

To evaluate how well wasted energy has been minimized, the link between energy entering the system, and contributing either to comfort of waste, would allow a comparison to be made between these key concepts. These concepts, as mentioned previously, are not present in the DM in Fig. 4 as they are outside the heating system model. As such, the user is not supported in making an energy conserving evaluation, which could affect new goals set. By incorrectly evaluating that energy is not being wasted, a new goal will not be made to determine energy saving settings. By assuming discomfort is due to the heating system rather than other variables, a goal could be made to adjust settings to increase room temperature, when other courses of action would be more appropriate. An awareness of the interpretation of correct system functioning is also crucial for stage 7, so appropriate goals to better balance comfort and waste are made.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This paper set out to demonstrate a novel approach whereby Norman's 7 stages of activity are applied to the home heating context in order to understand the requirements of the underlying ‘scaffolding’ needed for appropriate action. It first set out to present a DM model and using this, derive a CUMM that supports appropriate behaviour at each of Norman's 7 stages of activity. For sustainable behaviour goals that aim to minimise waste by balancing consumption and comfort, it was clear that elements outside of the home heating DM needed to be included. What this amounts to is a consideration of level. Kempton's (1986) brought to attention how focus on UMMs of the thermostat at the device level could provide insights into energy wasting behaviour. Revell and Stanton (2014) emphasized the need to extend understanding of UMMs of home heating at the heating system level (in agreement with Norman (1986)), as users varied in the choice of controls used in their behaviour strategies. Revell and Stanton (2015) highlighted the challenge users face when determining set points to minimise waste, in a dynamic, complex setting caused by thermodynamics of the building and variations in external temperature. This paper highlights the need for a CUMM to recognize understanding of concepts at each of these levels as well as include those relating to the user (e.g. comfort levels, timings of routine) and to sustainable goals (e.g. Energy consumption, wasted energy). Without these concepts, householders are impeded from being able to specify appropriate actions and evaluate the success of sustainable behaviour with home heating.


                     Norman (1983) specified that a design model should be based on the users task, requirements and capabilities and that if designed properly, would provide an accurate, consistent and complete representation of the system. It seems that heating systems with this type of DM were originally specified to provide space heating, rather than encourage energy conserving heating control. There is therefore a mismatch between how users are expected to behave and the systems original brief. For sustainable goals, the DM that drives the existing system image of the control devices and system is incomplete and requires additional concepts to be incorporated. It is not surprising, therefore, that householders, even those who have studied the operation instructions, may not hold a CUMM that supports sustainable behaviour. This opens up an opportunity for technology to pull together key information and relationships at all levels to promote a CUMM that enables the user to form the appropriate action specification. This could be in the form of an interface that facilitates appropriate execution, disambiguates home heating feedback for appropriate perception, and assists with interpretation of the system, to help evaluate not only if intentions have been met, but how also how realistic were the original goals. Revell and Stanton (2014, 2015), found unrealistic goals were the impetus for set point adjustments that led to wasted energy and compromised comfort. Ultimately, the move to space heating systems designed with sustainability, as a key goal would better support sustainable action by the user. However, the pressure of climate change does not allow householders or manufacturers to wait what is likely to be decades, until such heating systems are designed and have widespread adoption. A retro-fix of existing systems through interface design, guidance and instruction is therefore a pragmatic approach that this paper aims to support. With this position in mind, the authors undertook a study to compare a traditional home heating interface with that designed to promote a more CUMM for sustainable behaviour, both based on the same underlying DM. The results demonstrated a change in the UMM held, and corresponding behaviour displayed and forms a paper in progress by the authors.

This paper also set out to summarise the elements needed in a CUMM to bridge all 7 stages that contribute to the Gulf of Execution and Evaluation of the home heating system for the set goals. Table 2
                      provides this summary and details where the different elements act in Norman's (1986) 7 stags of activity. Highlighted in bold are the elements that are missing from the home heating DM to emphasise where new technological solutions could best support the householder. The table has been split into two parts, with elements relating to specific heating devices shown on the left, and elements relating to less concrete concepts on the right. Those relating to specific heating system devices act exclusively between stages 3–6 but provide limited help when setting of goals, forming of intentions and final evaluation (stages 1,2 & 7). For almost all devices, some concepts could not be derived from the DM, and many are not communicated in the design of typical device interfaces. The elements in Table 2 can be seen as a ‘design specification’ for the ‘scaffolding’ that underpins appropriate behaviour with heating controls. This analysis found stages 1,2 & 7 were better supported by concepts that often fell outside the scope of the DM, shedding light on why it is difficult for heating device manufacturers to present the information needed by users for sustainable behaviour, and in turn, why users have difficulty setting and fulfilling sustainable goals. Whilst there have been interesting developments in heating controls (e.g. Hive, NEST) the focus has been less on providing a CUMM of home heating control to enable behaviour, but rather to facilitate remote adjustments or learn behaviour based on existing UMMs of the heating system without reference to the influence of the broader context. The authors believe that the elements in Table 2 will direct designers and technologists to develop better strategies for sustainable behaviour, as well as better understand the success (or otherwise) of existing innovations.

The authors recognize that the DM constructed in Fig. 4 was generated with a single home heating expert, and comparisons made with a small case study of 6 home heating users. Hancock et al. (2009) argue that ideographic case representations are increasingly relevant for the design of human-machine systems, and Virzi (1992), R.A (1992) found 80% of problems when conducting research into usability, including the most severe, are detected with the first 4–5 subjects. The authors endorse this view that key insights can be gained with very small samples. However, to represent the potential of these initial insights quantitatively, and to increase the validity of claims of generalizability to the broader population, larger samples of users are necessary. To this end, a follow on study has been undertaken by the authors to capture UMMs from a larger sample of users interacting with a home heating simulator. The results are to be presented in a paper in progress.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The purpose of this analysis was to gain insights into what householders need to understand in order to use their heating system appropriately, to support comfort goals without wasting energy. This paper set out to apply Norman's (1986) gulf of evaluation and execution to the domestic heating system. It took a different approach to previous research, by examining the ‘scaffolding’ that underlies the bridges over these gulfs. In this paper, the authors presented a DM of home heating, applied the 7 stages of activity using expert recommendations of how a user should respond, and, constructed a CUMM of home heating that would enable appropriate home heating control. Additional concepts to those found in the DM were highlighted for appropriate home heating control. How the absence of key DM elements and additional concepts impacts energy consuming behaviour was discussed throughout. The elements in Table 2 that make up the CUMM should be considered in the design of home heating technology to support appropriate behaviour, and can be used to evaluate existing systems with a view to understand inappropriate behaviour.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the EPSRC under Grant [EP/I000143/1].

@&#REFERENCES@&#

