@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of thermal comfort in university classrooms through objective approach and subjective preference analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Fanger and Adaptive models are compared to occupants' questionnaires results.


                        
                        
                           
                           Analysis on thermal preference is performed, in terms of acceptability, neutrality and preference.


                        
                        
                           
                           Gender influence and relationship between microclimate control and thermal sensation has been investigated.


                        
                        
                           
                           A different thermal response can be appreciated comparing women and men thermal response.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Thermal comfort

Fanger's model

Adaptive model

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Assessing thermal comfort becomes more relevant when the aim is to maximise learning and productivity performances, as typically occurs in offices and schools. However, if, in the offices, the Fanger model well represents the thermal occupant response, then on the contrary, in schools, adaptive mechanisms significantly influence the occupants' thermal preference. In this study, an experimental approach was performed in the Polytechnic University of Bari, during the first days of March, in free running conditions. First, the results of questionnaires were compared according to the application of the Fanger model and the adaptive model; second, using a subjective scale, a complete analysis was performed on thermal preference in terms of acceptability, neutrality and preference, with particular focus on the influence of gender. The user possibility to control the indoor plant system produced a significant impact on the thermal sensation and the acceptability of the thermal environment. Gender was also demonstrated to greatly influence the thermal judgement of the thermal environment when an outdoor cold climate occurs.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Assessing the Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) is the first step to design a low energy building and to ensure the comfort of the occupants, according to high quality standards. This process becomes more relevant when offices or schools are taken into account; here, the workers' needs also must be “efficient” in terms of learning and productivity.

Recent studies have analysed the close relationship between performance and thermal comfort of the occupants in workplaces. Remarkable results (Lorsch and Abdou, 1994a, 1994b; Akimoto et al., 2010; Berglund et al., 1990; Clements-Croome, 2001; Jokl, 1982; Sensharma et al., 1998) must be considered. Better indoor comfort conditions correlated more than just the best result in terms of work productivity because thermal comfort is related to several factors. Furthermore, the lack of comfort causes an “environmental stress”, thereby producing a negative trend (Ossama et al., 2006). Office employees working in suitable hygrothermal conditions were proven to be more productive and less prone to absenteeism and grievances, also increasing the level of attention, thereby reducing the risk of accidents during working time (BOSTI, 1982).


                     Fisk and Rosenfeld (1997) analysed the impact on production and social costs that comfort conditions have in offices in the United States. The indoor comfort improvement causes a direct increase of 0.5–5% in U.S. productivity, i.e., potentially, an annual economic enhancement between 12 and 125 billion U.S. $ (Lan et al., 2012).

Similarly, students attending classes in a comfortable environment can improve their performances in terms of attention, concentration and learning. In the late 1960s, Pepler and Warner (1968) were the first researchers to investigate the effects of the thermal environment on the intellectual performances of students. The experiments were conducted on 36 women and 36 men in climatic chambers. The results indicated an inverse U-shape relationship with time to complete a task and temperature, with the best performance corresponding to 26.7 °C. At this temperature, the students involved completed the assigned work in the shortest time.

This paper provides an additional contribution to the investigations on thermal comfort performed in schools, validating different thermal models according to international standards. The correlation between hygrothermal comfort perception and control of climate parameters was investigated, considering the climate of Bari (Italy).

Physiologically, hygrothermal comfort is achieved when the thermoregulatory mechanisms of the body are minimised in response to the signals transmitted by the thermal receptors. In moderate thermal environments, the subjective individual condition must be considered significant regarding mental as well as physical comfort.

Current European Standards dealing with the “Ergonomics of the thermal environment” provide two different approaches for evaluating comfort in moderate environments, based on different assumptions: the rational model of Fanger (EN ISO 7730, 2005) and the adaptive approach (EN 15251, 2007).


                        Fanger's model is based on an energy balance of the human body, considered as a thermodynamic system that exchanges heat with the external environment. This model was first developed in the 1970s and is based on tests performed in a climatic chamber for 1296 Danish students (Fanger, 1970). The model is based on three fundamental assumptions:
                           
                              1.
                              passive people: users without any possibility of controlling the environment in which they are;

the same results are achieved for equal values of the six input variables;

steady-state model: only small time variations of the environmental parameters are allowed.

This model provides results that are very close to the real ones when the values do not vary, i.e., when considering an HVAC system with passive behaviour of the occupants and fixed wear. The best application for this model was for offices, often with a centralised HVAC, where the occupants had work schedules, fixed locations, and sometimes even a standard work wear.


                        The adaptive approach comes from field studies that began in the mid-1970s in response to the oil-shocks. This approach considers the individual user interaction with the environment, performing a thermal adaptation on three different levels (deDear et al., 1997):
                           
                              1.
                              conscious or unconscious behavioural adjustment, directly connected to the human body energy balance, classified as: individual (referring to wear, activity, posture, hot/cold drink consumption, moving to other rooms), technological (referring to the user's ability to change plant system settings, opening/closing windows, or window solar shadings), and cultural (working time and breaks);

physiological: a prolonged exposure to particular environmental conditions determines a reduction in stress and an increase in tolerance, which is distinguishable as genetic adaptation and acclimatisation;

psychological: regarding previous experiences, expectations, or the perception of microclimate control possibility.

The adaptive model is based on a simple correlation between the optimum internal temperature and the external reference temperature. ASHRAE Standard 55 (2013) considers a reference external temperature based on no fewer than 7 and no more than 30 sequential days prior to the day in question. EN 15251 Standard (2007) considers, accurately, a Running Mean temperature, i.e., a weighted mean value of the daily mean temperatures of the seven previous days. The individual thermal sensation was observed to be more strongly influenced by the outdoor temperature recorded in the days closer to the real one than by monthly mean temperature values (Brager and deDear, 1998).

Experimental tests have demonstrated that the adaptive model provides more realistic results in naturally ventilated environments, especially where the occupants can control the microclimatic parameters. In addition, the range of comfort values in naturally ventilated environments is larger than those in HVAC environments (Brager and deDear, 1998). Several researchers found that the experimental results are closer to the real judgement of the occupants than the results achieved in climatic chambers. McIntyre (1978), comparing the results obtained by Fanger in climatic chambers with those achieved by observations, considered that some variables of the real world cannot be reproduced in a climatic chamber. Oseland (1995) and Becker and Paciuk (2009) confirmed the McIntyre results involving study of hygrothermal comfort, both in offices and in residential buildings.

However, the Fanger model can be considered the most reliable and the only scientific model for the hygrothermal comfort assessment. The Fanger model takes into account the most important variables affecting the thermal sensation, unlike the adaptive model, which considers only an external reference temperature. To improve the model, Fanger and Toftum (2002) introduced a correction to the model by the new PMVe model. Fanger has corrected the expectation of the occupants in warm climates in buildings without air-conditioning via introduction of a factor of expectation in the comfort equation.

Several campaign surveys have been conducted in three different continents, and the PMVe model validation is still ongoing; further results are required before it could be considered a standard.

A completely different approach was provided by Yao et al. (2009) for the comfort evaluation. He defined a theoretical adaptive model of thermal comfort, aPMV (adaptive Predicted Mean Vote), based on the theory of black-box, whereas the cultural, climatic, social, psychological and behavioural adaptation factors play an important role in thermal sensation. Employing the aPMV model, based on the mechanisms of cybernetics in buildings without HVAC, note that the PMV predicted by Fanger overestimates the current average rating.

Recent studies on thermal comfort, taking into account the thermal preferences and people's acceptability (Corgnati et al., 2009; Dili et al., 2010; Buratti and Ricciardi, 2009), have determined that the thermal judgement of the users is more complex than a simple thermal vote.


                        McIntyre (1980) indicated that the preferred temperature is not the neutral one, but it depends on the place where the users are. People of cold climates may prefer what they call a “slightly warm” environment and vice versa.


                        Brager and deDear (1998) have defined this aspect as the “semantic effect”, describing the deviation between the preferred and the neutral temperature in full air-conditioned environments by a linear relationship, depending on the outdoor daily average temperature. In naturally ventilated environments, it is not possible to establish a general relation because it varies greatly depending on the geographical area due to the adaptation mechanisms of the people.

In offices, the clothing is often fixed, and the average age of the occupants is highly variable; there are centralised HVAC plants, and the users cannot control the microclimatic parameters (i.e., opening of windows and controlling solar shadings). On the contrary, in classrooms, a greater control of conditioning plants is possible by adapting the indoor microclimate during the hourly lesson breaks, but it is limited during school time.

Several surveys were conducted in schools at different levels. The microclimatic parameters were set in relation to the judgement of the occupants expressed by the questionnaires to validate the comfort model and analyse subjective preferences.


                        Mors et al. (2011), to test the efficiency of the Fanger and Adaptive models on children, have compared the real mean vote with the predicted mean vote and the limit temperatures in some classes of a primary school. The authors concluded that the Fanger model underestimates the thermal sensation, with a greater error in summer. Furthermore, children prefer lower temperatures than those predicted by the adaptive model.


                        De Giuli et al. (2014) evaluated the indoor environmental conditions and children's comfort levels in three Italian primary schools. The predicted mean vote and the predicted percentage dissatisfied indices were calculated, and an adaptive approach was also applied, but the results did not correspond to the students' subjective evaluation of thermal comfort.


                        Corgnati et al. (2007) investigated the thermal preferences in some schools in Turin (Italy) using both the rational approach of Fanger and the adaptive approach. The first survey was conducted in winter with the water heating system turned on, and the second one was conducted in September and May in free running conditions. The study demonstrated a gradual changing trend in the thermal preference from winter to spring. During the heating period, the students prefer slightly warm or warm environments; however, during the mid-season, they prefer a neutral environment. In mid-season, note that the percentages of students that were not satisfied according to predictions by the Fanger model (PPD) and the adaptive model are similar, with both being less than 10% (probably because no extreme outdoor environment conditions occur). However, taking into account the questionnaires, the real percentage of dissatisfied (PD) is significantly higher than those predicted; this deviation increases if the indoor operative temperature is above 20.5 °C or the PMV is above −0.5.

Furthermore, as Mayer argued in his studies (1997), the vote +2, considered unacceptable by Fanger, is instead accepted and preferred by the occupants. Considering that the unsatisfied people expressed scores of −3, −2 and +3 (excluding the vote +2), the index of Fanger PPD is closer to the real PD.


                        Von Grabe and Winter (2008) demonstrated that people who are voting with ASHRAE ±2 or beyond are not necessarily dissatisfied (which is the basic assumption of the classical PPD concept) and that people who are voting between −1 and 1 are not necessarily satisfied with their thermal environment.


                        Buratti and Ricciardi (2009) performed a survey in Perugia, Terni and Pavia University using a questionnaire given to the students and collecting data on the microclimate. The purpose of the study was to compare data provided by the theoretical models of Fanger and Wray with the experimental data. The Wray model (1980), based on the Fanger thermal balance equation, defines a new thermal index that is more intuitive. This model, designed for evaluating comfort in buildings with passive solar systems (so non-uniform environments), introduces two indices:
                           
                              -
                              The Comfort Uniform Temperature is defined as the temperature of an environment in which the heat balance in the Fanger equation is equal to zero (optimum comfort conditions);

The Equivalent Uniform Temperature is defined as the uniform temperature of an ideal environment in which the occupants would express the same degree of thermal comfort achieved in a real environment.

The study found that the Fanger and Wray models converge and that the results achieved by the two models are similar to the results obtained by the questionnaires.

The results presented in this paper were achieved from an experimental campaign performed at the Polytechnic University of Bari (Italy). The classrooms taken into account had different architectural features, conditioning plants, and solar exposure. The analysis was conducted in the first days of March, at the beginning of spring, during the teaching timetable and involved 126 students.

The study is divided into three parts. First, the models provided by the comfort technical standards were taken into account, comparing the expected results with those achieved by the questionnaires given to the students. Next, a more detailed analysis was conducted on the preferences expressed by the occupants. Finally, the influence of the individual control of the environmental parameters on thermal sensation was assessed.

Bari is a town located in southern Italy. According to the Koppen world climate classification (Koppen and Geiger, 1930), Bari has a Mediterranean climate characterised by hot humid summers and moderate winters. The Adriatic Sea mitigates outdoor temperatures: in January, the coldest month, the average temperature is 8.6 °C, while in July, the warmest month, the average temperature is 24.7 °C.

Two different types of classrooms were taken into account. The architectural and plant features are presented in Table 1
                        .

Classroom 10 (Fig. 1
                        ) is located on the second floor, and neighbouring classrooms have a similar geometric structure to that of classroom 10. The entrance to the classrooms is from an internal corridor. The external wall has a ribbon window that is equipped with solar shadings controlled by the users. There is an HVAC plant with ceiling diffusers, controlled by a thermostat. During the experimental measurements, there were 57 students and the air conditioning system was switched off.

Classroom 21 (Fig. 2
                        ), which is on the first floor, is quite large and partially below the floor level. Access is directly from the outside. The classroom has no windows; it has a ventilation system that was switched on during the test. There were 69 students in the classroom during the measurements.

Both classrooms have seats placed on a sloping floor. As a consequence of this geometric configuration, the temperature was recorded at different positions to verify the presence of different thermal zones. As a result of the measurements, two different thermal zones were identified (Fig. 3
                        ).

To control indoor microclimate, the Thermal Microclimate HD32.1 Delta Ohm station was used. For the control of the environmental parameters, the following probes were used:
                           
                              −
                              Globe-thermometer (Pt100, 150 mm diameter);

Omnidirectional hot-wire anemometer (NTC 10 kΩ);

Combined sensor with a capacitive sensor measuring temperature (Pt100) and relative humidity.

According to EN ISO 7726 (2001), the parameters were constantly measured at a height of 1.1 m above the floor level. During the lesson (1 h and 40 min), the measurements were performed at 2-min intervals. Because the globe thermometer and the temperature probe have a response time of at least 15 min, the first 15 min recorded were not considered.

To evaluate the thermal conditions of the environment, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2, the monitoring stations were installed near a desk in the lowest area of the classroom (coldest area) and a desk in the highest area (warmest area) to correctly evaluate the thermal uniformity of the environment. This last measurement was performed using a Delta Ohm HD 9021 device with a Pt100 thermal sensor (TP 870A).

The questionnaires were used to analyse the thermal perception by the occupants. The questionnaires were distributed to the students after 30 min from the lesson start while recording the parameters.

Each questionnaire is divided into four parts:
                           
                              
                                 Part 1. General information: gender, age and individual student position in the classroom.

Metabolism and thermal perception depends on the age and sex. Parsons (2002) demonstrated that women have a slightly lower metabolism, so they can tolerate warm better than men.


                                 Part 2. Individual thermal sensations: vote on thermal environment, thermal preferences, thermal satisfaction, thermal acceptability and air movement acceptability.

Thermal vote is expressed on the Fanger seven-point scale, allowing the evaluation of the actual mean vote (AMV) and the dispersion regarding the actual percentage of dissatisfied (APD). Preference, dissatisfaction, thermal unacceptability and acceptability of the air movement were analysed by a separate and specific procedure.


                                 Part 3. Clothing: according to the EN ISO 9920 (2009) check-list of clothing used to define thermal insulation of the occupants. According to EN ISO 7730 (2005), for people seated, the thermal insulation must be evaluated considering the additional contribution (0.1 clo) due to contact with the seat.


                                 Part 4. Individual environmental parameter control: possibility to influence microclimatic conditions of the environment, and the perception and satisfaction of this level of control.

The correlation between these results allowed the study of the influence of the behavioural and psychological adaptation on comfort perception.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Comparing the results from the questionnaires and the temperature values measured (21.6 °C in zone 1; 23.7 °C in zone 2) in classroom 21, the students placed in thermal zone 1 expressed votes that were more negative (Fig. 4
                     ).

This different thermal sensation was due to the different heights of the classroom caused by the sloping floor: the seats of thermal zone 2 are located higher than the seats of thermal zone 1.

The data collected from the questionnaires and the microclimate monitoring station were processed to evaluate the thermal comfort according to EN ISO 7730 (2005), which considers the Fanger model (Table 2
                           ). To determine the PMV and PPD values, a sedentary activity (1.2 met) was considered; the clothing values were obtained from the questionnaires.

Although the values obtained were very close to those provided by Fanger model, a slight overestimation of the mean vote was observed, predicting a cold sensation greater than the real one.


                           Fig. 5
                            shows the relationship between the thermal resistance due to clothing and the mean vote, comparing PMV to AMV. Examining the values collected, it was not possible to define a clear correlation between AMV and clothing. People wearing lighter clothing, who should be colder, are warmer than people wearing heavier clothing. This result is due to the human ability to adapt the body to the environment, changing the clothing according to the thermal sensation. This aspect is not taken into account in the Fanger model.

As previously described, the EN 15251 (2007) and ASHRAE 55 (2013) standards define the mathematical model to calculate the optimum internal operating temperature according to the adaptive approach. The Mean Monthly outdoor Temperature (T
                           mm) and the Running Mean Temperature (T
                           rm), being within the range of applicability, were also taken into account in the adaptive model (Table 3
                           ).

Comparing the questionnaire and the adaptive approach results, the measured indoor temperature values (T
                           indoor) were in the optimum internal temperature range achieved by the adaptive model (T
                           op). Additionally, the dissatisfied occupants' percentage (PD) is less than 6%, according to the results from the questionnaires.

Furthermore, the results of the rational approach and the adaptive model results are similar, with both exhibiting a PPD of less than 10%, according to the results from the questionnaires.

The second part of the study took into account the thermal sensation according to the Fanger seven-point scale and compared it to the individual preference.

To compare the occupants' votes to the thermal preference, the following indices were considered:
                           
                              
                                 Thermal Preference Index (I
                                 
                                    tp
                                 
                                 ) = (No. of occupants willing to change)/(No. of voting occupants);
                              


                                 Dissatisfaction Index (I
                                 
                                    d
                                 
                                 ) = (No. of dissatisfied occupants)/(No. of voting occupants);
                              


                                 Thermal unacceptability Index (I
                                 
                                    tu
                                 
                                 ) = (No. of occupants who feel the environment is unacceptable)/(No. of voting occupants);
                              


                                 Air movement unacceptability (I
                                 
                                    amu
                                 
                                 ) = (No. of occupants who feel the air movement is unacceptable)/(No. of voting occupants).

From Table 4
                        , a greater discomfort was clearly found in classroom 21 than in classroom 10: 21.7% of occupants preferred a hotter or colder environment, 24.6% of the occupants were dissatisfied with the thermal environment, but only the 11.6% considered the environment unacceptable. Furthermore, 36.2% of occupants considered as unacceptable the air movement produced by the ventilation plant, which reached an average speed of 0.10 m/s, as monitored during the test.

To assess the correlation between the thermal vote and the thermal sensation, the data collected in the two classrooms were combined and analysed. The votes expressed by the occupants were then connected to Thermal Acceptability (Fig. 6
                        ), Thermal Neutrality (Fig. 7
                        ), and Thermal Preference (Fig. 8
                        ).

Most occupants (96.8%) expressed a vote of −1, 0, +1; however, 9.5% of the occupants considered the environment as being “unacceptable”, and 21.4% reported a “slight discomfort”. Among occupants formulating a vote of neutrality (69.9%), 2.4% of the students considered the environment as unacceptable and 4.0% reported a slight discomfort. These values confirmed the subjectivity of the thermal comfort perception and the strict connection of the factors involved. It can be asserted that individual expectation and plant control possibilities must be added as objective factors.

In addition, the acceptability of the environment is connected to the level of the positive vote (warm sensation), as proved by Mayer (1997) and Corgnati et al. (2007). All students expressing a positive vote (+2) consider the environment as acceptable, and just half of them felt a slight discomfort. However, most people expressing a negative vote (−2) considered the environment as being unacceptable and annoying. As a consequence, it can be asserted that a warm environment is more acceptable than a cold environment.

In addition, 81% of the students expressed a vote of −1, 0, +1; they did not have a specific preference between a warmer or colder environment. Among the people expressing a vote of −1 (8.7%), just 1.6% would have preferred not to change the environment; however, 18.2% of students expressed a vote of +1; among them, 4.0% would have preferred changing the environment.

The intersection point between the thermal preference curves (Fig. 9
                        ) outlines the mean vote corresponding to the minimum number of dissatisfied. This point is not the point of neutrality but is slightly shifted towards positive values.

Several studies have investigated the difference between the responses of males and females in thermal comfort (Parsons, 2002; Lan et al., 2008; Breslin, 1996; Beshir and Ramsey, 1981; Indraganti and Rao, 2010). Fanger (1970) proved that women are more sensitive to a deviation from the optimum.

Studies conducted by Breslin (1996) and Webb and Parsons (1997) indicated that in neutral or light warm conditions, any significant difference between men and women response can be appreciated. However, in a cold environment, a great difference in thermal perception can be noted when comparing the responses of men and women; females tend to be cooler than males in cool conditions (Parsons, 2002).

The thermal sensation in a “moderate” environment was studied. Table 5
                         summarises the clothing insulation values and the AMV distinguishing vote of men and women. Comparing the clothing indices of the two genders, a difference of 0.09 clo in classroom 21 and a difference of 0.15 clo in classroom 10 were found. It can also be asserted that women are inclined to wear warmer clothing compared to men.


                        Fig. 10
                         shows the votes of men and women. In the same environment, 14.3% of the women were cold (vote −1); on the contrary, just 1.8% of the men were cold. Considering the warm sensation (vote +1), no significant difference between the two genders occurred. Additionally, the neutrality perception was found to be similar for men and women.

Thermal sensation, neutrality, and acceptability results are shown in Figs. 11–13
                        
                        
                        .

A greater percentage of women (31.4% of women vs. 8.9% of men) considered the thermal environment conditions uncomfortable. Women preferred a warmer environment (18.6% of women vs. 3.6% of men), in agreement with the vote of slightly cold.

Furthermore, considering the acceptability, note that a higher percentage of men (12.5% of men vs. 7.1% of women) expressed a judgement of unacceptability.

A study conducted by Karjalainen (2007) in Finland and in different type of buildings (homes, offices, and universities) confirmed a significant gender difference in the perception of thermal comfort. Females are less satisfied with thermal environments than males and feel both cold and hot more often than males. However, Karjalainen (2007) considered the different gender clothing and the building characteristics and concluded that the gender thermal comfort perception is connected to the process of human adaption.


                        Luo et al. (2014) investigated the thermal comfort perception in winter in residential apartments considering occupants with different personal control on heating systems. He demonstrated that occupants in apartments in which the heating facilities could be controlled were more likely to report neutral thermal sensations. In this latter case, the users had 2.6 °C lower neutral T
                        op than those without personal control.

From the questionnaires, the occupant adaptation activity was evaluated, analysing the relationship between microclimate control and thermal sensation.

The two classrooms had different microclimate control levels; as a result, different results can be obtained.

Classroom 21 has no windows and is equipped with a centralised ventilation plant, which was switched on during the experiment. The monitoring station recorded an average air velocity of 0.10 m/s, and 36.2% of the students believed that the value of air velocity was unacceptable and too high.

From the questionnaires, the students expressed an opinion regarding their satisfaction on the possibility to control the microclimatic parameters.

In classroom 21, 79.7% of the students believed to have some form of control on microclimate; 14.5% of them were satisfied with this condition. Fig. 14
                         shows the correlation between the perception of the occupants on controlling the microclimate and their thermal response. The increase in control perception causes the enhancement of the levels of acceptability, neutrality and vote “0”.

In classroom 10, there was a different environmental condition. The wall opposite to the entrance has a ribbon window, with fixtures and solar shadings adjustable by the user. There is also an HVAC plant with ceiling diffusers that the occupants can control via a thermostat. During the measuring campaign, the HVAC plant was turned off. The questionnaires indicated that just 15.8% of the occupants believed to have no control over the microclimate. This result is due to the real impossibility of the occupants to control the microclimate during the lessons. Furthermore, just 5.3% of the occupants were unsatisfied with the thermal conditions.


                        Fig. 15
                         shows that when increasing the microclimate control, the satisfaction feeling on environmental conditions improves. The satisfaction with the control possibilities and the thermal preferences are compared. The results indicated that just 5.3% of the occupants were unsatisfied with the control level. Among them, 2/3 of the occupants would not change the environmental conditions and 1/3 of the occupants expressed a neutral condition. Students considering the environment as satisfactory expressed a greater positive vote.

A comparison of the thermal preference expressed by students in the two classrooms is reported in Fig. 16
                        .

The different control possibility of the indoor climate caused a great difference in the comfort perception.

In classroom 21, 88% of the occupants considered the environment as acceptable, 75% of the students assessed the environment as neutral, 78% of the users did not change the thermal environment; and just 62% expressed a vote “0”.

In classroom 10, the expressed preferences are higher: 93% of the occupants considered the environment as being acceptable, 83% considered the environment as neutral, 86% did not want to change the microclimate, and approximately 79% expressed a vote “0”.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study considered thermal comfort in universities via field measurements in the classrooms at Polytechnic University of Bari. The experimental analysis was divided as follows: the first analysis involved a comparison of Fanger's model and the Adaptive approach and a comparison of these results with the real votes expressed via questionnaires; a second analysis involved the thermal sensation of the occupants and a final study of the correlation between the individual possibility of controlling the environmental parameters and the thermal sensation.

Significant results were found. The architectural geometry of the environments was found to have a great influence on the thermal conditions due to the different thermal zones. The different thermal conditions among the different thermal zones influence the student's vote. The PMV and PPD values are similar to the real votes reported in the questionnaires; a slight underestimation was found when using models. Comparing the optimal Operative Temperature determined by the adaptive model with the favourite real temperature, this latter one was found to be shifted toward the positive range of the thermal scale; this result is due to an individual warmer preference of the thermal environment.

Furthermore, a slight different thermal response was found when comparing the thermal response of women and men. Women were found to tend to feel cold more than men and they are inclined to wear warmer clothing. As a consequence, women prefer a warmer environment, and a greater percentage of women believe that the classroom is in a state of discomfort.

Additionally, the relationship between the microclimate control and the thermal sensation was investigated. The two classrooms have different microclimate control levels; thus, different results are possible. When increasing the microclimate control, the feeling of satisfaction on the environmental conditions was found to improve. Conversely, when decreasing individual control possibilities on the thermal environment, a negative thermal perception was found; the occupants were found to be more unsatisfied with the thermal environment conditions. As a consequence, the neutrality sensation was found to be reduced among the users, and each user prefers a warmer or colder environment.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

