@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Impact of experience when using the Rapid Upper Limb Assessment to assess postural risk in children using information and communication technologies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           RULA was used to assess a child's postural risk during mobile ICT use.


                        
                        
                           
                           Participants were either occupational therapy students or experienced practitioners.


                        
                        
                           
                           No significant differences in RULA outcome scores between groups were found.


                        
                        
                           
                           No conclusive differences in visual search strategies between groups were found.


                        
                        
                           
                           RULA can be used to assess children's postural risk, regardless of experience.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Child

ICT

Rapid Upper Limb Assessment (RULA)

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The Rapid Upper Limb Assessment (RULA) is an observation-based screening tool that has been used to assess postural risks of children in school settings. Studies using eye-tracking technology suggest that visual search strategies are influenced by experience in the task performed. This study investigated if experience in postural risk assessments contributed to differences in outcome scores on the RULA and the visual search strategies utilized. While wearing an eye-tracker, 16 student occupational therapists and 16 experienced occupational therapists used the RULA to assess 11 video scenarios of a child using different mobile information and communication technologies (ICT) in the home environment. No significant differences in RULA outcome scores, and no conclusive differences in visual search strategies between groups were found. RULA can be used as a screening tool for postural risks following a short training session regardless of the assessor's experience in postural risk assessments.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The use of information and communication technologies (ICT) by children has been associated with musculoskeletal discomfort (Burke and Peper, 2002; Harris and Straker, 2000; Jacobs and Baker, 2002; Ramos et al., 2005; Straker et al., 2009). This is concerning as children are still physically developing, and there might be negative long-term consequences on their physical health (Straker et al., 2009).

There are no risk assessment tools specifically developed to assess postural risks in children. However, researchers have previously used the Ovako Working Posture Analysing System (OWAS) (Karhu et al., 1977) and the Rapid Upper Limb Assessment (RULA) (McAtamney and Corlett, 1993), both originally developed to assess adult workers, to assess postural risks among children in school settings. The use of RULA to assess children's posture has been reported more extensively in the scientific literature (Breen et al., 2007; Dockrell et al., 2010, 2012; Kelly et al., 2009; Laeser et al., 1998; Oates et al., 1998) than the OWAS (Saarni et al., 2007a, 2007b).

The RULA is an observation-based screening tool used to quickly assess an individual's exposure to load factors due to posture, muscle function and forces they exert. Administration of the tool is simple to learn and does not require the use of special equipment or pre-existing skills in observation techniques (McAtamney and Corlett, 1993). The RULA involves assigning: 1) a numerical rating to the posture of the upper limbs, neck, trunk and legs, and 2) another numerical rating for additional factors that strain the musculoskeletal system, such as repetitive action, static loading and force exertion. These ratings are scored according to an algorithm to obtain a Grand Score ranging from 1 to 7, and an Action Level ranging from 1 to 4 that has associated implications for remedial action (Table 1
                        ). The RULA allows the left and right upper limbs to be assessed separately, yielding a Grand Score and Action Level for each side of the body.

Prior ergonomics studies have used the RULA to assess the postures of children when performing academic tasks at computer workstations in school environments; in these studies the children's postures were influenced by the classroom furniture (Breen et al., 2007; Dockrell et al., 2010, 2012; Kelly et al., 2009; Laeser et al., 1998; Oates et al., 1998). No prior studies have used the RULA to perform postural risk assessments in home environments wherein children have high exposure to mobile ICT for leisure (Rideout et al., 2010), and use ICT for longer durations than when at school (Ciccarelli et al., 2011; Kent and Facer, 2004; Kerawalla and Crook, 2002).

Due to the observational nature of risk assessments, visual search is an essential skill utilized by the assessor. Visual search depends primarily on eye behaviours of saccades and fixations (Falkmer et al., 2008; Liversedge and Findlay, 2000; Yang et al., 2002). Saccades are the voluntary rapid eye movements that direct the eye to points of interest in the environment; no visual information is projected on the fovea during this movement (Fuchs, 1971). Fixations are periods of gaze stability that occur between saccades (Duchowski, 2007). During fixations, the eye is directed such that information from the environment is projected onto the fovea, registered and processed (Fuchs, 1971).

It is recognized that visual attention can be influenced by characteristics of the visual environment (bottom–up) and cognitive processes (top–down) (Henderson, 2003; Wolfe et al., 1989). Bottom–up factors that can affect visual attention include salient characteristics of the visual scene such as movement, contrast, and colour. On the other hand, top–down cognitive processes are related to short-term visual memory of the present scene, long-term memory about similar scenes and knowledge related to the visual search task (Henderson, 2003). During skilled, purposeful and active search, top–down cognitive processes tend to influence visual attention more than bottom–up processes (Henderson, 2003; Yang et al., 2002). The fixation point is assumed to reflect the focus of attention in a top–down approach (Henderson, 2003), and therefore is commonly used to provide an insight into the cognitive processes involved during visual search tasks (Falkmer et al., 2008).

Previous studies have demonstrated that experience influences an individual's visual search strategy. In radiology, experts have significantly fewer numbers of fixations while making a greater number of correct judgements, and have a tendency to use a more global perception strategy (Kundel et al., 2007; Manning et al., 2006). In driving studies, experienced drivers have more flexible search strategies, indicated by larger spread of visual search on horizontal and vertical planes, shorter fixation durations and shorter hazard processing times (Hosking et al., 2010; Underwood, 2007; Underwood et al., 2002). Experienced gymnastics coaches displayed fewer numbers of fixations, but longer fixation durations, during evaluation of gymnastics routines (Moreno et al., 2002). Training in a systematic visual search strategy for a visual inspection task resulted in improved task performance (Wang et al., 1997). These studies showed that experience and training could make a difference in visual search strategies and the interpretation of information obtained from visual search (Yang et al., 2002). However, it is not known if this is the case in postural risk assessment scenarios.

The aims of this study were to determine differences between experienced and novice assessors in their RULA scores (Grand Scores and Action Levels) and their visual search strategies during a postural risk assessment of a child using mobile ICT in the home environment.

@&#METHODS@&#

This was an experimental study conducted under controlled, standardized conditions within a laboratory setting. Between-group comparisons of the RULA Grand Scores and Action Levels, and visual search strategies measured in terms of durations and locations of the participants' initial fixations, were performed.

The desired difference between the groups was 0.51, which is just above half a scale step on the RULA Action Level. With an estimated standard deviation of 0.5 derived from pilot data of 19 participants, the desired effect size was Cohen's d of 1 or larger. A power calculation based on a critical α-value of 0.05 and a 1 − β of 0.2, i.e., a power of 80%, indicated that a minimum of 16 participants in each group was required to detect this effect size.

A convenience sample of students enrolled in the third year of the undergraduate Bachelor of Science (Occupational Therapy) program at Curtin University in Perth, Western Australia; who had successfully completed the introductory ergonomics course entitled ‘Ergonomics & Safety Science I’ during the second year of the program were invited to participate. Students with prior work experience in vocational rehabilitation and ergonomics were excluded from the study. Fourteen female and two male occupational therapy students (mean age 24.7 years, standard deviation (SD) 8.1) participated in the study. None of the students had prior knowledge about the RULA as a postural risk assessment tool.

Occupational therapists who possessed a minimum qualification of a Bachelor of Science in Occupational Therapy recognized by the World Federation of Occupational Therapists and had more than four years of experience in the field of ergonomics and/or vocational rehabilitation were invited to participate via telephone and email recruitment. Eleven female and five male occupational therapists (mean age of 40.7 years, SD 9.9), with relevant work experience ranging from four to 35 years (mean length of experience 15.3 years, SD 9.0) participated in the study. All participants reported that they had not previously used the RULA in their professional practice.

All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, which enabled them to view the visual images presented during the experiment. All participants were offered a movie ticket as a token of appreciation of their time. The study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee at Curtin University, and all participants provided informed consent prior to data collection.

Data collection sessions were conducted in a laboratory at Curtin University. Prior to data collection, the study protocol and the apparatus were explained, and written informed consent obtained from participants. Visual tracking screening was conducted to ensure smooth eye movements, and visual acuity screening was conducted to ensure that participants were able to view the visual images presented in the experiment. Following this, training in the use of RULA was conducted; the eye-tracker fitted, and the video scenarios were presented to participants.

Participants viewed a 9 min training video created by the first author. This video provided 1) an overview of the RULA, 2) instructions on rating, 3) a practice video scenario of a 21-year-old female working on a laptop in a home environment, and 4) correct responses on the RULA rating form. This video was paused and replayed as many times as each participant required, and the same researcher was present to answer the participants' questions regarding the RULA. The total duration of the RULA training component ranged from approximately 10–20 min, depending on the length of time required by each participant. The researcher ensured that all participants reported being comfortable and confident in independently using the RULA, before proceeding with data collection.

Throughout the session, participants used printed paper copies of the RULA rating form (Osmond Ergonomics) to assess the right and left side postures of the individual in the training video. The researchers calculated the RULA Grand Scores and Action Levels after the data collection session. Participants were not provided with feedback about the accuracy of their responses during or after data collection.

A pilot survey was conducted to explore some of the common postures adopted by children and adolescents during mobile ICT use. Photographs and video recordings that demonstrated postures and locations in which children and adolescents commonly use mobile ICT in their natural home environments were taken. Next, a discussion with an expert in children's ergonomics was held to decide on the specific postures and locations within the home that should be included to best represent the information from the pilot study. The final selection was considered to be a sufficiently diverse, yet accurate representation of the variety of both simple and complex postures typically adopted by children during mobile ICT use in the home.

A 12-year-old child was featured in the video scenarios, because prior research identified the RULA demonstrated moderate to good intra-rater and inter-rater reliability among physiotherapy students and physiotherapists when used to assess children aged 8–12 years completing computer-based tasks in a school environment (Dockrell et al., 2012). The video footage was filmed using a Pentax K-x dSLR camera after the child was sufficiently engrossed in the task in order to capture natural postures. The camera was positioned relative to the height of the child to avoid distortion of the body joint angles. Each scenario was filmed from a minimum of two different stationary viewing angles to provide a comprehensive view of the child's posture. Video files were trimmed and edited so that the duration of each video clip for each scenario lasted between 140 s and 165 s.

The study participants were presented with one practice video scenario and 11 test video scenarios (images from the videos are presented in Table 2
                        ), featuring one 12-year-old female who was using either a laptop, i.e., notebook computer, or a tablet computer to perform leisure activities in different postures and locations around the home. All the video scenarios were presented in a scene of 44 cm height × 78 cm width on a 42″ LG™ liquid crystal display screen (Model: 42LK450-TA).

The same practice scenario was presented to each participant to familiarize them with the experimental procedures. Subsequently, each participant was presented with the 11 test scenarios in a counterbalanced rotated random order within both groups to remove possible learning effects. Each test scenario was presented only once, and participants were allowed to take as much time as required to complete the RULA score sheet. To monitor and ensure eye-tracker calibration accuracy throughout the session, a black dot on a white background was presented to participants before the presentation of each video clip. Each participant's eye-tracking data were separately recorded for each video scenario. To minimize the effects of fatigue, participants were allowed to request breaks between the presentation of each test scenario, and a break was offered to all participants after the first five test scenarios were presented.

Participants were seated at a desk 70 cm away from the screen that displayed the video clips. RULA Assessment rating forms were placed on an adjustable document holder (31 cm height × 41 cm width) tilted at an angle of 40°–60° from the surface of the desk, between the participant and the screen. Simultaneous to viewing the video clips and rating the observed postures using the RULA, each participant's right eye movements, i.e., number of fixations and fixation durations, were measured using a head-mounted eye-tracker (Arrington ViewPoint™ EyeTracker, operating in 60 Hz). A chinrest (Arrington Ultra Precision Head Positioner™) was used to stabilize the participant's head to improve accuracy of eye-tracking data. For each participant, a 16-point calibration of the eye-tracker was carried out before the presentation of video scenarios and data collection, in accordance with the user manual.

The methodology for processing eye-tracker data was adopted from past studies on eye movements (Falkmer et al., 2010, 2011; Falkmer and Gregersen, 2005). This methodology provided information about the duration of each fixation, as well as to which areas or objects fixations were directed. Initially, data from the eye-tracker were analysed with a fixation generation programme based on the centroid mode algorithm (Falkmer et al., 2008). Fixations are typically defined as mean x, y coordinates of the fixation points, yielding an area of a° × a°, lasting a minimum of t milliseconds (ms) (Chapman and Underwood, 1998; Falkmer and Gregersen, 2005). The a-value was set to 1° since foveal vision is limited to the visual angle of 1° around the fixation point. The t-value of 100 ms was used because fixations are rarely less than 100 ms (Cohen, 1977).

Each test video scenario was divided into three or four time segments based on the changes in viewing angles or position of the child in the video. In total, the 11 video scenarios comprised 34 time segments (as shown in Table 2). The participants' initial fixations on the screen across the 34 time segment in each video scenario were processed, since prior research showed that given a top–down approach, the location of an individual's initial fixation on a scene usually occurs on an object or region that is highly informative (Antes, 1974). Locations of initial fixations on the screen were classified into one of two different general areas, and one of 14 categories of specific locations according to the classification matrix presented in Table 3
                        . When there were uncertainties regarding the classification of fixation areas or specific locations, a decision tree was used to guide the data processing process.

Data were analysed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences 20.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) and Statistical Analysis Software 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to test for normal distribution of RULA Grand Scores, Action Levels and fixation durations. RULA data from the total sample were not normally distributed for each video scenario, with the exception of video scenario 9. Within groups, RULA data were normally distributed, except where indicated in Tables 4 and 5
                        
                        . Between-group differences in the RULA Grand Scores and Action Levels for video scenario 9 were analysed using an independent samples t-test, while all other RULA Grand Scores and Action Levels were analysed using a Mann–Whitney U test. A Bonferroni correction was applied because the two variables (Grand Scores and Action Levels) within each side (right or left) of the child were correlated and measured the same construct. Hence, a critical α-value of 0.025 was used as the level of significance for analyses of RULA Grand Scores and Action Levels.

Multivariate analyses were conducted for fixation durations and fixation locations because each participant provided repeated observations for each analysis. Fixation durations demonstrated a non-normal distribution. Hence, a log transformation was completed to improve the assumption of normality and decrease standard error. A random effects regression model was fitted using restricted maximum likelihood for fixation durations. Each participant was applied as a random factor and the fixed independent variables were group (student occupational therapists and experienced occupational therapists), time segment, and general areas of fixations. Analyses of fixation locations were conducted using generalized estimating equations (GEE). In each GEE model, the dependent variable was one of the 14 different specific locations, while the independent variable was the group. A critical α-value of 0.05 was used for all multivariate analyses. Effect sizes for significant results were calculated using Rosenthal's r. Results from the GEE analyses are presented as odds ratios (OR) with 95% Confidence Intervals (CI).

@&#RESULTS@&#

There was a general trend that the experienced occupational therapists had equal or higher median RULA Grand Scores compared to the student occupational therapists. However, there were no significant differences between groups in RULA Grand Scores within each video scenario after the Bonferroni correction was applied, as presented in Table 4.

There was a general trend that the experienced occupational therapists had equal or higher median RULA Action Levels compared to the student occupational therapists. However, there were no significant differences between groups in RULA Action Levels within each video scenario after the Bonferroni correction was applied, as presented in Table 5.

The expected total sample size of initial fixations was 1088. However, there were 19 missing values due to technical issues with the eye-tracking recording, and there were no on-screen fixations during the final time segments of five video scenarios. Hence, the total number of fixations analysed was 1,064, with 542 fixations made by the student occupational therapists and 522 fixations made by the experienced occupational therapists.

The p values provided for the fixation durations are based on log transformed data. However, the means and standard error of means (SE) provided are based on the raw data, as presented in Table 6
                        . Overall, there were no significant differences in the estimated mean fixation durations between both groups.

Across the total sample, the top three specific locations of initial fixations were: 1) wrist, hands and fingers, 2) head and neck, and 3) the physical environment, as shown in Table 7
                        .

Experienced occupational therapists were about four times more likely (OR 4.28, 95% CI = 1.10–16.67, p = 0.04, Rosenthal's r = 0.21) than students to have initial fixations on the physical environment in Video 4, as shown in Table 8
                        .

Experienced occupational therapists were almost six times more likely (OR 5.88; CI = 1.17–30.26, p = 0.03, Rosenthal's r = 0.22) than students to have initial fixations on the child's right shoulder and upper arm in Video 9, as shown in Table 9
                        .

There were no other significant differences in initial fixation locations between students and experienced occupational therapists.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In the home environment, children are free to adopt a wide variety of postures over a range of locations such as the dining table, couch, floor, or on the bed (Sommerich et al., 2007). This study presents a sample of some of the unique postures that children typically adopt when using mobile ICT in the home; such as side-lying, reclining, crouched, and cross-legged, and which are similar to children and adolescents' postures reported in the literature (Harris and Straker, 2000). The portability and size of the mobile ICT used in this study also contributed to the wide variety of postures adopted by the child.

Since there were no significant differences in the RULA Grand Scores and Action Levels between the students and experienced occupational therapists, this suggests the RULA can be used regardless of the assessor's experience in postural risk assessments. The fact that all participants did not have experience in using the RULA as a risk assessment tool prior to the study but achieved similar scores confirms that the RULA is simple to use, with minimal training required (McAtamney and Corlett, 1993). From a utility perspective, the RULA is free and easily accessible online (http://www.rula.co.uk), quick to complete and does not require specialized equipment. This makes it a useful screening tool for postural risk that professionals working in the field of ergonomics can use as part of a wider ergonomics assessment. The RULA needs to be used in conjunction with knowledge of ergonomics principles to make the appropriate recommendations to address postural risks identified (McAtamney and Corlett, 1993). This study did not measure differences between groups on this aspect.

This study presented the opportunity to use the RULA in the novel context of assessing a child using mobile ICT for leisure activities in the home environment. However, during the pilot survey that was conducted prior to filming the video scenarios, it was observed that some children adopt non-upright postures, e.g., lying in supine and prone, when using mobile ICT. These postures were not included in the test scenarios for this study because the RULA, being originally designed to assess upright postures, did not accommodate them. Other researchers have also reported that the RULA does not address the slumped posture commonly adopted by children in the classroom, where they slide forward in the chair while the thoracic trunk is supported by the backrest (Breen et al., 2007; Dockrell et al., 2012). These suggest that although the RULA can be used to assess paediatric populations, it has limited capacity to assess all possible postures typically adopted by children during ICT use. Other postural risk assessment techniques would be needed to fill this gap when assessing these postures. Suggestions for future research include a rigorous investigation of the validity of the RULA to assess paediatric populations, and if necessary, make modifications to the RULA Action levels when assessing children and adolescents using ICT; as previously noted by Dockrell et al. (2012).

This paper does not present or discuss the accuracy of the RULA scores assigned by each participant group. All participants in this study had formal education in aspects of ergonomics and postural analysis through the occupational therapy curriculum. Future research could explore the use of the RULA when used by individuals who do not have formal training in postural observation techniques, such as teachers, parents, and even children and adolescents themselves, as a tool to assess postural risks when using ICT in order to raise awareness of potential risky behaviours.

The visual search strategies investigated in this study were primarily influenced by top–down cognitive processes because participants were given a visual search task that required skilled, active search. The larger numbers and higher proportions of initial fixations on the wrist, head and neck regions suggest that these regions could be either more highly informative or highly complex compared to others, when using the RULA to assess a child using mobile ICT. This is not surprising given the participants in this study had training in occupational therapy; one of the core concepts of occupational therapy is the nature of the dynamic inter-relationships between the person, environment and activity in which a person is engaged (Law et al., 1996). During the leisure activity involving the use of mobile ICT in this study, the hands and eyes (and hence the head) were the key body regions used to interact with the ICT device, and would likely have been of interest to the participants when conducting the postural risk assessments. The findings may also reflect the participants' awareness that the neck and wrist are commonly affected by musculoskeletal complaints among ICT users (Gerr et al., 2004), and consequently are more informative areas. Moreover, wrist and hand postures are difficult to evaluate through two-dimensional video recordings because they are smaller than other joints, and can move in many axes (Dartt et al., 2009; Lowe, 2004; Stetson et al., 1991). Therefore, assessment of the wrist posture using the RULA in this study was a cognitively-demanding task, which could have explained the largest numbers of fixations on this region.

Differences in visual search strategies, i.e., initial fixation durations and locations during each time segment, were only found in two out of the 11 video scenarios. However, due to the small effect sizes and 95% CI being close to 1, these findings were inconclusive. The lack of significant differences in visual search strategies between students and experienced occupational therapists in this study could be due to several reasons. It is possible that the visual search tasks presented could have been equally cognitively demanding for both groups, minimizing the degree to which experience in postural risk assessment could contribute to visual search strategies. Participants were required to integrate their understanding of postural analysis principles with the use of the RULA; a tool that was unfamiliar to all participants. The fact that this unfamiliar tool had to be applied to assess several novel scenarios of a child using mobile ICT in non-traditional working postures further increased the complexity of the visual search task. Moreover, using the RULA could have resulted in a systematic effect on the cognitive processes that directed the visual search strategies used by participants in both groups.

A limitation of this study is that only the initial fixations in each time segment were analysed. Further research needs to be conducted to determine if there are differences in visual search strategies throughout the entire duration of the visual search task. Future research can expand on exploring the fixation durations, number of fixations on specific locations, and time series analyses.

The findings from the experimental laboratory conditions in this study might differ from studies where participants are studied in a naturalistic setting. The participants assessed the child's posture from two-dimensional video clips and were limited by the viewing angles available in the videos. The video clips were time-limited, and unlike the study protocol by Dockrell et al. (2012), participants were not given the option of pausing or replaying the test video scenarios. These test conditions may have impacted on the accuracy of some of the RULA ratings assigned by the participants, as well as the visual search strategies they employed. However, these conditions were necessary to ensure standardized conditions for all participants, and any impact would most likely have been the same across the two groups.

This study only examined the use of the RULA to assess one female child using two mobile ICT devices to perform leisure activities in the home environment. However, children use ICT in far more varied contexts, e.g., multi-tasking and during social activity with peers, and with different devices, e.g., mobile phones, videogame consoles, handheld gaming devices and MP3 players (Rideout et al., 2010), than presented in this study; each with their unique postural risks. Hence, the generalizability of the findings regarding the RULA to assess the wider paediatric population when using the whole range of information and communication technologies is limited.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Experience in postural risk assessments did not contribute to significant differences in RULA outcome scores, or conclusive differences in visual search strategies when using the RULA to assess a child using mobile ICT in the home environment. RULA can be used as a screening tool to assess postural risks following a short training session, regardless of the amount of experience the assessor has in postural risk assessments.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We would like to thank the study participants, and the children and their families involved in the development of the video scenarios. Special thanks to Marita Falkmer, Chiara Horlin and Rhianna Benson, who assisted with eye-tracking technology, and Gal Rose, Deepti Sharma and the Autism Association of Western Australia for assistance with data entry.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

