@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Physical workload, trapezius muscle activity, and neck pain in nurses' night and day shifts: A physiological evaluation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Trapezius muscle activity and workload were assessed over full day and night shifts in nurses.


                        
                        
                           
                           During day and night shifts, heart rate was very high compared to resting values.


                        
                        
                           
                           Physical workload and load on the trapezius muscle were smaller during night than during day shifts.


                        
                        
                           
                           Perception of neck pain and mental well-being at work were similar during day and night shifts.


                        
                        
                           
                           Night shifts were perceived to be as burdensome as day shifts despite the smaller physical workload.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Electromyography

Shift work

Stress

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The purpose of this study was to compare physical workload, electromyography (EMG) of the trapezius muscle, neck pain and mental well-being at work between night and day shifts in twenty Swiss nurses. Work pulse (average increase of heart rate over resting heart rate) was lower during night (27 bpm) compared to day shifts (34 bpm; p < 0.01). Relative arm acceleration also indicated less physical activity during night (82% of average) compared to day shifts (110%; p < 0.01). Rest periods were significantly longer during night shifts. Trapezius muscle rest time was longer during night (13% of shift duration) than day shifts (7%; p < 0.01) and the 50th percentile of EMG activity was smaller (p = 0.02), indicating more opportunities for muscle relaxation during night shifts. Neck pain and mental well-being at work were similar between shifts. Subjective perception of burden was similar between shifts despite less physical burden at night, suggesting there are other contributing factors.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) commonly affect nurses (Harcombe et al., 2009; Long et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2004), possibly due to the strenuous workload (Baptiste, 2011; Heiden et al., 2013) and irregular shift schedule that are an integral part of nursing (Caruso and Waters, 2008). The financial consequences of MSDs are substantial and the direct cost of low back pain in Switzerland accounts for 6.1% of total health care expenses (Wieser et al., 2011). MSDs have a detrimental effect on occupational and private activities and thereby reduce quality of life (Scuffham et al., 2010). This might explain the relatively short careers of Swiss nurses, who work for an average of only 13.5 years in nursing (Dolder and Grünig, 2009).

The most common MSDs in nurses are low back and neck pain. The prevalence of neck pain is between 50 and 60% (Harcombe et al., 2009; Warming et al., 2009), and a prevalence of even 83% has been reported (Long et al., 2012). Several studies have reported that sustained trapezius muscle activity correlates with the presence of neck pain or may predict the development of neck pain (Aaras, 1994; Hanvold et al., 2012). The commonly used method to evaluate trapezius muscle activity is surface electromyography (EMG, Mathiassen et al., 1995). The most important determinant for neck pain was reported to be a lack of rest time, demonstrated by no periods without measurable activity in EMG (Hagg and Astrom, 1997; Veiersted et al., 1993). This concept is based on the so-called Cinderella hypothesis (Hagg, 1991) which states that during a prolonged low-level activity the same muscle fibers are always active. Such prolonged low-level activities are frequently observed in the trapezius muscle (Ostensvik et al., 2009). If rest time is lacking, these so-called Cinderella fibers may become overloaded (Hagg, 1991). Early histological studies of trapezius muscle found changes at the cellular level in subjects suffering from neck pain (Lindman et al., 1991). Newer studies found evidence for the malfunctioning of single muscle cells (Sjogaard et al., 2010) but additional mechanisms, such as sensitization, are also assumed to play a role (Visser and van Dieen, 2006). The discussed insufficient rest time is strongly correlated with the type of workload and mental stress and neck pain was shown to be correlated with shift work (Elfering et al., 2008; Farina et al., 2008; Läubli and Müller, 2009).

The type of workload has an effect on prolonged periods of low-level activity. During a variable load the trapezius muscle demonstrates a shift of activity (Falla and Farina, 2007), while no shift of activity occurs during a constant load. Without a shift of activity and if the duration is long enough overexertion results (Farina et al., 2008). During standardized stress tasks in laboratory experiments, Sjogaard et al. (2010) reported higher EMG levels in females with trapezius myalgia compared to females without myalgia, and the relative load was higher in females with trapezius myalgia. In an earlier study where assessments were conducted at the subjects' work places using the same case definitions, Larsson et al. (2008) found no difference in EMG measurements between cases and controls. The authors suggested that under normal working conditions at the actual workplace, cases and controls work at the same relative load, leading to the same strain for cases and controls.

Mental stress increases the activity of the trapezius muscle (Nimbarte et al., 2012) and is suggested to cause prolonged low-level activity of muscles which prevents muscle relaxation and regeneration of the allostatic system (Sjogaard et al., 2000). Elfering et al. (2008) found a correlation between MSDs and the stress hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine. Time pressure also causes higher levels of trapezius muscle activity (Birch et al., 2000).

Rotating shift work is a well-known risk to health (Conway et al., 2008; Costa, 1996) and the associated health risks are assumed to be caused by a disruption of the circadian rhythm (Bonde et al., 2012). Estryn-Behar et al. (2008) showed that nurses working shifts that included night shifts demonstrated a higher risk of burnout than nurses not working night shifts, while nurses with regular day work or shift work excluding night shifts did not differ for this risk. Läubli and Müller (2009) showed an association between night shifts and MSDs. In addition, shift work increases the risk of work-family conflict (Camerino et al., 2010), which in turn is associated with neck pain (Hammig et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2013).

The aim of the present study was to investigate physical workload and trapezius muscle activity during night and day shifts and their association with neck pain and mental well-being at work in nurses. Based on the burden associated with the disruption in the circadian rhythm and the fact that in Switzerland nursing staff is reduced during night shifts, we assumed that night shifts would be associated with more burden than day shifts. Therefore, we hypothesized that workload and trapezius muscle activity would be greater during night than day shifts and that night shifts would be associated with more neck pain and worse mental well-being at work.

@&#METHODS@&#

Twenty female nurses (aged 33.5 ± 10.1 years) employed at four Swiss secondary care hospitals of similar size participated in the study. They were recruited through the head of the unit or through personal contacts. Participants worked in an orthopedic clinic (n = 11), in intensive care (n = 6), the emergency department (n = 2), or in the post anesthesia care unit (n = 1). On average, night shifts were of longer duration than day shifts. All participants had an education equal to a registered nurse and had worked for at least one year in the present job, either part-time (≥80%) or full-time. Exclusion criteria were: skin disease; clinical findings of MSDs; cardiovascular, psychological or neurological disease; intake of muscle relaxants or any other medication. The Ethical Committee of the canton of Zurich (Switzerland) approved the study and all participants gave their written informed consent.

Bipolar surface EMG (PS11-UD, THUMEDI GmbH & Co. KG, Thum-Jahnsbach, Germany) was used to record the activity of the descending part of the trapezius muscle of the dominant arm at a sampling rate of 2048 Hz. Before analysis data was filtered with an analog 3rd order high pass filter with a cut off frequency of 4 Hz (−3 dB) and a 10th order anti-aliasing filter adjusted to 650 Hz (−3 dB). Subsequently, a digital high pass filter at 12 Hz, a digital band replacement filter at 50 Hz, 100 Hz, 150 Hz, 200 Hz, 250 Hz, 300 Hz and 350 Hz, and two algorithms which used low and very low frequencies (7–13 Hz and 0.5–1.7 Hz) were applied. The flatness (ripple) of the transfer function from 20 Hz to 500 Hz of the device is ±0.1 dB and the intrinsic effective noise of the entire system was about 250 nV (12–650 Hz).

The electrodes used were pre-gelled Ag/AgCl electrodes (35 × 26 mm, Kendall Arbo, Covidien, England) and the subjects' skin was prepared with abrasive paste (Nuprep, Weaver and Company, Aurora, CO, USA). To ensure that the position of the electrodes remained the same for all three measurements of a participant, the distance from the acromion to the midpoint of the electrodes was noted.

A two-electrode electrocardiogram (ECG) was acquired by the PS11-UD to remove ECG artifacts by a template-based algorithm (Clancy et al., 2002). The heart rate calculated from the ECG was used for the classification of work activities. An accelerometer and a position sensor were also part of the measurement device PS11-UD.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

For each participant measurements were taken during three shifts (one night shift and two day shifts on the same ward). The order of the shifts was randomized. The night shift selected was the second in a row of night shifts, and on one occasion the third.

On each shift participants were asked to measure their resting heart rate on waking. Before starting work, the measurement devices were applied. Based on the recommendation of SENIAM (2012) the EMG electrodes were placed on a line from the acromion to the cervical vertebra 7 (C7). The midpoint of the two electrodes was 2 cm medial of the midpoint of this line. The electrode–electrode distance was 2 cm. The reference electrode was placed on C7. For the ECG one electrode was placed on the left side of the chest wall below the breast, the other below the clavicle. The accelerometer was placed on the top third of the upper arm and was used to measure arm acceleration. The position sensor was placed on the thoracic spine allowing the assessment of trunk flexion and extension. To reduce movement artifacts the cables were taped to the skin. The recording device was worn at the waist.

At the beginning of every shift, participants performed a submaximal reference contraction, slightly modified from the description by Mathiassen et al. (1995). Participants were requested to hold their arms in a horizontal position laterally extended in 90° abduction for 20 s. This was repeated three times with a 40 s break in between. At six different time points across each shift, participants completed a diary to assess neck pain/mental well-being at work/time pressure on a scale from “1” to “5”, where “1” meant “no pain”/“very stressed”/“great time pressure” and “5” meant “intense pain”/“totally relaxed”/“far too little work”.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

All data were processed with Matlab R2010b. The 250 ms root mean square (RMS) of the EMG was normalized with the reference voluntary electrical activation (RVE) of the three reference contractions and given as % RVE. Thereby RVE was the mean of the averaged values from every reference contraction. All data above 1000% RVE were removed. Rest time and the 50th and 90th percentile of the activity were calculated, where rest time was defined as percentage of the shift duration below 5% RVE (based on the recommendation of Hansson et al., 2000). Work pulse (Grandjean, 1991; Kroemer and Grandjean, 1997) was defined as the difference between current heart rate and resting heart rate (average of the five lowest values of every shift and the resting heart rate, assessed after waking).

Data from arm acceleration and trunk position were normalized: arm acceleration data were expressed as a percentage of the average of all three shifts. To normalize trunk position the average of data recorded during the reference contractions was deducted from every value. The trunk position during reference contractions was defined as upright.

For classification of work activities, 3-min-averaged-intervals were calculated using the parameters work pulse, relative arm acceleration and trunk position. These 3-min-intervals were z-transformed and afterward cluster analyzed (SAS 9.2 Institute Inc., USA). For every participant 20 clusters were built and the clusters containing at least ten intervals (30 min) were used for further analysis. Based on these results characteristic work activities with high face validity were defined: “upright, active”, “forward bending, active”, “slightly moving”, “sitting, forward bending”, “sitting, backward bending”, “upright, resting”, “rest, forward bending” and “rest, backward bending” (Table 1
                        ). The output values (n = 136) of the cluster analyses were used to calculate the mean values of the three dimensions (relative arm acceleration, trunk position, work pulse) of the work activities. For every work activity a range of ±40% was added to the mean value of each of the three parameters used. If the value of a parameter was not critical for distinction from the other work activities, the range of ±40% was extended (defined ranges are shown in Table 1). A 3-min-interval was only assigned to a work activity if the values for all 3 parameters were within the given range. Only participants with complete measurements (n = 17) were included in the cluster analysis. Overlap of the constructed work activities was minimal (only 0.7% of the identified work activities).

For ease of understanding, the scale was inverted for the questions about mental well-being at work and time pressure (so that a higher score indicates worse mental well-being at work and more time pressure). In the inverted scales “1” meant “totally relaxed”/“far too little work” and “5” meant “very stressed”/“great time pressure”. Of the six times that values for neck pain, mental well-being at work and time pressure were recorded during every shift, only the last value, recorded after the end of the shift, was used for analysis, since the recorded values did not differ across the shift and some participants forgot to complete their diary during the shift.

One participant withdrew from the study after the first shift, and two single day shifts were excluded from the analysis because of poor data quality. Mixed model analysis was used for statistical analyses (SAS 9.2). The dependent variables used were the three defined EMG parameters (rest time, the 50th and the 90th percentile of trapezius muscle activity), the eight measures of physical activity (work pulse, relative arm acceleration, “upright, active”, “forward bending, active”, “slightly moving”, “sitting”, “upright, resting” and “rest”), the three variables from the questionnaire (neck pain, mental well-being at work and time pressure) and the shift length. For each participant the measures of the three shifts were compared (within-subject design) and the participant was treated as a random factor. Explaining factors were the shift type (night or day) and the shift order (measurement one, two or three). For EMG statistics the level of RVE was used as a covariate. Additionally, neck pain, mental well-being at work, and time pressure were correlated with trapezius muscle rest time. To compare the wards, “orthopedic surgery”, “intensive care” and the pooled group “others” (emergency department and post anesthesia care unit), the factor ward as well as the crossed factor shift type*ward were additionally included in the model.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Workload was similar across the different wards. Within-subject differences between day and night shifts varied slightly across the different wards. However, for all wards the assessed variables were either greater during the night shift, or greater during the day shift. The two variables “slightly moving” and “upright resting” were an exception since the intensive care nurses reported a similar workload regardless of the shift, in contrast to the nurses on the other wards. Therefore, we felt it was justified to pool the data from the different wards for analysis.

Shift duration was significantly longer for night than day shifts (Table 2
                        ). Arm acceleration and work pulse were lower during night compared to day shifts. During night shifts nurses spent less time in the “upright, active” (Fig. 1
                        ; p = 0.002) and in the “forward bending, active” (p = 0.030) position than during day shifts. “Upright, resting” (p = 0.036) and “rest” (p < 0.001) were observed more often at night. “Slightly moving” and “sitting” were similar between night and day shifts. Work activities could be defined for 64% of shift durations.

Rest time of the trapezius muscle was longer during night than day shifts (Fig. 2
                        ). No order effect was found between the three shifts (Table 3
                        ). RVE positively correlated with rest time. The 50th percentile was lower during night than day shifts, while no order effect was present (Table 3). Night and day shifts did not differ for the 90th percentile and no order effect was present. The percentiles were not influenced by RVE.

By the end of the shift, neck pain was never rated “5” and it was rated “4” on only 3 of 57 occasions. Levels of neck pain, mental well-being at work and time pressure were similar for night and day shifts (Table 2). Trapezius muscle rest time did not correlate with the level of neck pain (p = 0.88; n = 55) or time pressure (p = 0.52; n = 56). A correlation was found between mental well-being at work (p = 0.03; n = 55) and trapezius muscle rest time.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The present study showed that the two least strenuous work activities, i.e. “rest” and “upright, resting”, were more frequent during night than day shifts and the two most strenuous work activities, “upright, active” and “forward bending, active”, were least frequent at night. Trapezius muscle rest time was longer and mean load was lower during night compared to day shifts, while maximal load of the muscle was similar. Perception of neck pain, mental well-being at work and time pressure were similar for the two shift types. Thus, in contrast to our hypothesis, physical workload and trapezius muscle activity were less during night than day shifts. However, night shifts were subjectively perceived to be as strenuous as day shifts.

In contrast to our hypothesis, average physical workload in the present study was less during night shifts than during day shifts. On the one hand, arm acceleration, one marker of physical workload, was smaller during night shifts than during day shifts and the “upright, active” and the “forward bending, active” positions were significantly less frequent during night than during day shifts. On the other hand, the two least burdening activities “rest” and “upright, resting” were more frequent during night shifts, while “slightly moving” and “sitting” occurred similarly during night and day shifts. This lighter overall workload at night might be because some work activities are not performed at night, such as washing patients or distributing food. This is in agreement with recent data from Salerno et al. (2012) who found fewer actions per hour during night shifts compared to day shifts.

The use of physical measurement to assess activity is well justified and the use of activity questionnaires may lead to inaccuracies (Zhao et al., 2012). Instead of using questionnaires we continuously registered physical activity. Eight defined work activities were determined using clustering techniques, which allowed us to quantitatively characterize work activities during 64% of shift duration without the need for an investigator to be present or to use video analysis, which poses serious ethical problems within a hospital environment.

In the present study, work pulse was smaller during night shifts (27 bpm) than during day shifts (34 bpm). According to Grandjean (1991), 30 bpm is the acceptable threshold of the work pulse for an 8-hour working day. Therefore, day shifts appear to be very strenuous. The lower work pulse during night shifts is likely to be a consequence of reduced physical workload and longer rest periods plus known differences resulting from the intrinsic circadian rhythm, such that the heart rate rises less in response to a given exertion during the night phase (Scheer et al., 2010). Despite this, during night shifts the work pulse remained close to the threshold suggested by Grandjean (1991), implying that night shifts are also quite arduous. The present findings suggest that despite less physical workload during the night shift, physiological strain was not markedly reduced.

Corresponding to the smaller physical workload during night shifts, the load on the trapezius muscle was less at night as well. Trapezius muscle rest time, which seems to be the most relevant EMG-factor in relation to pain (Hagg and Astrom, 1997; Veiersted et al., 1993), was longer during night shifts, the 50th percentile was smaller, and the 90th percentile was the same as during day shifts. The duration of trapezius muscle activity was quite long. During an entire day shift, the trapezius muscle only relaxed for a total of 7% of the shift duration (corresponding to approximately 34 min). The relaxation time of the trapezius muscle during night shifts was also short, amounting to a total of 13% of the shift duration (corresponding to approximately 72 min).

However, the most demanding tasks on the trapezius muscle (90th EMG percentile corresponding to 16% of maximal force) were present for a similar duration during both types of shift. This workload level was exerted for a total of 1 h but was spread over the entire shift duration. Nevertheless, this load is not expected to cause physical impairment. These findings are supported by Village et al. (2005) and Menzel et al. (2004) who also found no association between “highest-risk tasks” and the degree of neck pain in nurses.

The longer trapezius muscle rest time observed during night shifts contradicts our hypothesis. One major reason for this finding is likely to be the smaller overall physical workload in night shifts. Another reason might be the positive attitude of the nurses towards night shifts. Many nurses reported in conversation that they preferred working night shifts. Reasons given were better payment and more days off following periods of night shifts. The psychological effect of a positive attitude towards night shifts might improve muscle activity (Schleifer et al., 2008). It may also be possible that we studied nurses with a good tolerance to night shifts (Natvik et al., 2011).

In the present study subjects under treatment for neck pain were excluded and none of the participants suffered from intense pain. Despite this, slight pain was reported in 37 of 55 shifts. Neck pain, mental well-being at work, and time pressure were all similar between night and day shifts. Thus, despite the lower workload and the smaller muscle activity at night, night shifts were subjectively as strenuous as day shifts. One reason for the high rating in the questions on mental well-being at work and time pressure during night shifts could be the disruption of a regular sleep-wake rhythm and the associated shift of the circadian rhythm in relation to the sleep-wake cycle, which is a significant problem in workers on rotating shifts (Bonde et al., 2012; Gold et al., 1992).

We found a correlation between trapezius muscle rest time and mental well-being at work. No correlation was found between trapezius muscle rest time and time pressure or neck pain. Our term “mental well-being at work” should be compatible with the term “stress” that is often used in the literature. Therefore, our study confirmed the results from the literature. The lack of correlation between time pressure and trapezius muscle rest time might be caused by the participant's definition of time pressure. Time pressure per se is not implicitly something negative, and if not perceived as detrimental by participants there would be no related effects on trapezius muscle relaxation and therefore rest time.

In the literature a correlation between trapezius muscle rest time and neck pain was often found in laboratory settings and in office work (Jensen et al., 1993; Sjogaard et al., 2010). In dynamic activities, like the activities of nurses in our study, the correlation is controversial (Jensen et al., 1993; Westgaard et al., 2001; Veiersted et al., 1990). It is possible that in dynamic activities, as suggested by Larsson et al. (2008) for real work places, nurses with neck pain are able to reduce the load on the neck. This may be achieved by avoiding sensitive tasks or by changing the work position alleviating the neck region by transferring more load to other body regions. Using such techniques nurses suffering from neck pain may be able to work under the same relative neck load as nurses without neck pain. Another possibility is that in dynamic work, as described by Falla and Farina (2007) and Farina et al. (2008), the focus of activity in trapezius muscle is changing and therefore the overload and pathological change of single muscle cells, as described in the Introduction, do not take place.

The present study concentrated on the description of workload and participants suffering from trapezius myalgia were excluded so the ability of this study to detect a significant relationship between neck pain and muscle activity was limited. However, a correlation between mental well-being at work and trapezius muscle rest time was found. It could be assumed that if the situation for the participants did not change a correlation between trapezius muscle rest time and neck pain might be detected at a later stage.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

One limitation of the present study is that it might be difficult to translate the results of muscle activity and physical workload to nurses working in hospitals with a different work schedule. Another limitation is that none of the participants rated “very stressed”, “great time pressure” or “intense pain”, thus correlations between neck pain or time pressure, and EMG parameters were weak and relationships with more severe symptoms could not be elucidated.

To interpret physical strain it might be advantageous to measure the workload exactly by video analysis, which is very time-consuming and problematic ethically. Our analysis lacked this detail, but work activities were still identified for 64% of the shift duration. Since “slightly moving” and “upright, resting” were rated differently on the different wards, some uncertainties remain in the evaluation of these two physical workloads.

Night shifts were longer because of organizational reasons, not because of overtime. After checking the course of activities during full shift lengths, we did not find indications that the longer night shift duration affects the results, but such a possible effect could not scientifically be excluded.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The present study demonstrated that nurses' day and night shifts are extremely strenuous, illustrated by the high work pulse, the high workload and the short trapezius muscle rest time. During night shifts workload and trapezius muscle load were lower, yet subjectively the load was reported to be similar. This might be explained by circadian rhythm disruption and other contributing factors not examined in this study.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We express our thanks to Prof. PhD M. Nakaseko from the Occupational Ergonomic Unit, Management in Health Care Sciences, Graduate School of Health Sciences, Jikei Institute, 1-2-8 Miyahara, Yodogawaku, OSAKA 532-0003, Japan for providing the diary used in this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

