@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Postural dynamism during computer mouse and keyboard use: A pilot study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Postural dynamism related to keyboard and mouse use is explored.


                        
                        
                           
                           Postural dynamism and spinal positions in three dimensions are used as parameters.


                        
                        
                           
                           Mouse use is associated with a generally fixated spinal posture.


                        
                        
                           
                           Keyboard use demonstrates a more dynamic spine than mouse use.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Sitting posture

Computer use

Postural dynamism

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Prolonged sedentary computer use is a risk factor for musculoskeletal pain. The aim of this study was to explore postural dynamism during two common computer tasks, namely mouse use and keyboard typing. Postural dynamism was described as the total number of postural changes that occurred during the data capture period. Twelve participants were recruited to perform a mouse and a typing task. The data of only eight participants could be analysed. A 3D motion analysis system measured the number of cervical and thoracic postural changes as well as, the range in which the postural changes occurred. The study findings illustrate that there is less postural dynamism of the cervical and thoracic spinal regions during computer mouse use, when compared to keyboard typing.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Spinal pain is common amongst computer users (Janwantanakul et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2009). Spinal pain refers to pain experienced in the cervical, thoracic or lumbar regions. Of these, the most prevalent areas of pain among computer users are the upper thoracic and cervical spinal regions (Côte et al., 2008). When considering the increasing computer use worldwide, this burden of computer related spinal pain, particularly in the thoracic and cervical regions, is of public concern (Carroll et al., 2008; Côte et al., 2008).

Risk factors associated with computer related thoracic and cervical pain is a topical research area (Andersen et al., 2011). These risk factors include, but are not limited to, gender, work stress, type of computer used, psychometrics, duration and frequency of computing, and posture (Andersen et al., 2011; Da Costa and Vierra, 2010). Although it is acknowledged that risk factors follow a multifactorial causal pathway, researchers often follow a pragmatic approach by investigating a specific individual risk factor. Posture is a potentially modifiable risk factor and knowledge about the relationship between posture and computer related musculoskeletal pain is thus clinically meaningful. Brink and Louw (2013) showed that the impact of sitting posture on upper quadrant (cervical, upper thoracic and upper limb) musculoskeletal pain remains controversial. Further research into postural risk factors of computer related thoracic and cervical pain is therefore needed.

Research related to sitting computing posture has mainly focussed on postural alignment by measuring spinal position or angles (Brink and Louw, 2013, Marcus et al., 2002). The underlying rationale is that if a spinal position is maintained for a prolonged period of time, it will lead to micro-damage of soft tissue structures and consequent pain (Tittiranonda et al., 1999; Troussier et al., 1999; Ariens et al., 2001; Straker et al., 2010). While these studies have provided some insight into the relationship between computing spinal position and musculoskeletal pain, to our knowledge no published research has as yet investigated the number of three dimensional (3D) spinal movements (postural dynamism) during computer tasks.

Postural dynamism refers to the number of frequent involuntary postural or movement changes whilst sitting. Dynamic chairs are designed to encourage postural changes during sitting, which may influence postural dynamism and spinal pain (Lewis and Fowler, 2009). A systematic review by O'Sullivan et al. (2012) indicated a lack of evidence to support postural dynamism as a stand-alone approach in the management of computer related lumbar pain, as the nature of spinal pain is multi-dimensional. However, in an isolated study of 105 subjects (aged 8–12 years), an increase in postural dynamism was shown to decrease spinal pain in scholars (Geldhof et al., 2007). Increased postural dynamism whilst sitting is associated with less intervertebral disc compression and reduced loss of disc height due to radial bulging in the lumbar region (Lewis and Fowler, 2009). It is possible that a similar response may occur in the cervical and thoracic spine with increased postural dynamism. This underlying mechanism may partially explain why increased postural dynamism is postulated to reduce spinal pain.

Postural dynamism (measured as the number of postural changes in cervical and thoracic angles) varies between computer tasks (Van Dieën et al., 2001). Van Dieën et al. (2001) analysed only two-dimensional (2D) sagittal plane trunk kinematics, implying that there is currently no knowledge about postural dynamism in the transverse and coronal planes. Three-dimensional (3D) analysis adds to knowledge since postural dynamism is described in all three cardinal planes. 3D analysis thus provides an enhanced reflection of how postural dynamism occurs in reality. The specific aim of this study was to explore 3D postural dynamism during two common computer tasks, namely mouse use and keyboard typing. In addition, we describe a new method of postural dynamism where the number of changes in cervical and thoracic angles is analysed over a period of computing time (Van Niekerk et al., 2014).

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

Twelve freshman physiotherapy students volunteered to take part in the study. The exclusion criteria included a history of spinal or neurological pathology, a body mass index ratio higher than 25 and/or a high waist-hip ratio less than 0.8 in females and 0.9 in males, as increased skin folds may obscure markers.

We used G-Power (version 3.1.7) sample size calculator to calculate sample size. A sample size that seven subjects were required to detect a statistical difference between the two computer tasks (typing and mouse clicking) for an effect size of 1.66, using a paired t-test, at least (alpha level of 0.05).

The Vicon Motion Analysis system (Vicon, Oxford, United Kingdom) which consists of eight (either wall-mounted or tripod-mounted) T-10 MX cameras was used to film the participants as it has demonstrated high accuracy and reliability (Ehara et al., 1995) and has less than a 1.5-degree error (Richards, 1999).

The Vicon system detects retro-reflective markers in a capture volume and reconstructs these marker positions in three dimensions. A biomechanical model is used to calculate spinal angles based on marker positions. Data processing was done using Nexus software.

A custom-made desk with a U-shaped foot piece was used to optimise marker visibility (Fig. 1
                           ). The participant was seated on a regular typist's chair with the backrest removed to enable visibility of the posterior anatomical landmark markers. A flat-screen computer monitor, computer mouse, keyboard and a ball and cup were positioned at marked areas on the desk. The heights of the chair and/or monitor were adjusted individually for each participant, so that their hips and knees were at a ninety degree angle and their gaze angle was approximately 30° to the horizontal (Cook and Burgess-Limerick, 2003). A footrest was used where necessary to improve the foot to floor contact (Fig. 1).

The Conventional Gait Model was used as this provided the angle output sought for the analysis undertaken in this research (Baker and Rodda, 2003; Davis et al., 1991). Although the Conventional Gait Model had not yet been validated for sitting, its established validity for standing and the likely transferability of the model to sitting, enabled the same model to be used.

Prior to data capture, anthropometric measurements were done according to the Conventional Gait Model, currently an industry standard in motion analysis (Lind et al., 2013; Van der Krogt et al., 2012). These measurements included the height, weight, leg length, shoulder offset as well as the widths of the ankle, knee, elbow and wrist. Marker placement was done according to the Full-body Conventional Gait Model Marker Placement Protocol of the Stellenbosch University FNB-3D Movement Analysis Laboratory. Although the Full-body Conventional Gait Model Marker set was used, we only report on the markers relevant to this study (Table 1
                           ). All anthropometric measurements and marker placements were done by a physiotherapist with training and experience in marker placement and a sound understanding of the full body Conventional Gait Model.

The output of the angles of interest (cervical and thoracic angles) was calculated from the YXZ cardan angles derived by comparing the relative orientations of the two segments being measured. This does not affect the Cardan angle calculation of the other angles since the flexion angle is the first in the rotation sequence. The progression angles of the thorax and cervical spine were the YXZ Cardan calculated from the rotation transformation of the subject's Progression Frame, for the trial onto each segment orientation.

The cervical angle is defined as the angle between the head and the laboratory coordinate system. The thoracic angle is the angle between the thorax and the laboratory coordinate system.

Postural dynamism was described as the total number of postural changes that occurred during the data capture period. A postural change is defined as the difference in degrees between one turning point (change in movement direction) and a successive turning point in the data of a given angle (cervical or thoracic angles) (Van Niekerk et al., 2014). As each angle is a continuous function, the derivative of the data was used to calculate the turning points concerned. The absolute difference between successive turning points was calculated per subject.


                     Fig. 2
                      illustrates example raw sitting posture data for an angle over a period of time. The red points (in web version) indicate the turning points.

In addition to describing the number of cervical and thoracic postural changes, the range in which the postural changes occurred was also determined. Neutral was defined by the starting sitting position the subject assumed at commencement of data capture. The range of movement was determined by minimum and maximum position away from neutral in all three movement planes (Fig. 3
                     ).

The range of movement in which the postural changes occurred was also presented as a percentage of the total available range of movement (%ROM) for each subject to accommodate for intra-subject specific variability. This %ROM provides an indication of the percentage of total available range of movement in which the changes in movement occurred.

During calibration and data capture, the system captured at a frequency of 250 Hz. However, due to the planned duration of the experiment, movement occurring at 25 times per second or faster was not captured during data trials. Since a postural change during sitting does not involve high-frequency movement, the capture frequency mentioned was considered sufficient for the purposes of this study.

During the initial part of the data capturing process, the participants were requested to move through their full available ranges of motion of the cervical and thoracic spinal segments, whilst sitting at the workstation (Table 2
                     ). These movements were explained and facilitated by the researcher, with data then captured while participants actively performed the movements.

The participants then performed a series of computer tasks that were again briefly explained to them prior to data capture. A custom-designed computer program was used to give detailed commands and vary the different tasks according to a specific time frame (Table 3
                     ). Tasks were performed consecutively interspersed with short breaks during which the participants read commands and familiarised themselves with the following task. These breaks were marked with a beep sound at the end of a task. As soon as the participants started with the next task, another beep sound followed.

Data capture took place for the entire duration of each task with beeps indicating to the researcher when to stop data capture at the end of one task, and commence data capture at the beginning of the next task.

The sitting posture data were processed using Nexus Version 1.7, with the full-body Plug-In-Gait model being used to calculate the 3D kinematic data. A trained laboratory technician performed the data processing. Sometimes, gaps occurred in the captured data due to markers temporarily being obscured, and were thus not detected by the two minimally required cameras. These gaps were filled by means of the Pattern fill function, where the movement pattern of a marker on the same rigid body segment (e.g. right wrist A and right wrist B, or toe and heel) is followed. The pattern fill function used was that of a spline fill, which corrected the discontinuities in order to follow the pattern of the second marker. After completion of data processing, it was exported to Microsoft Excel (Microsoft, USA) for analysis.

Descriptive statistics were used to describe the postural dynamism (total number of cervical and thoracic postural changes per minute) between the mouse clicking (T03) and typing tasks (T05). Due to the time difference between these two tasks, the number of postural changes was expressed per minute. For the typing task, the total number of postural changes, were divided by five (as the duration of this task was 5 min) to obtain the mean number of postural changes per minute Line graphs were used to illustrate the number of 3D postural changes each task per subject. A paired t-test was performed to determine significant differences (p > 0.05) in the spinal movement when performing the mouse clicking task and the typing task.

The range in which the postural changes occurred was determined by subtracting the lowest and highest value of the thoracic and cervical angles in all three planes. Outliers were corrected by using only the values between the 10th and 90th percentile of data collected. A paired t-test was performed to determine significant differences (p > 0.05) in the range in which the postural changes occurred when performing the mouse clicking task and the typing task.

The range of movement in which the postural changes occurred was also presented as a percentage of the total available range of movement. This was calculated as: 100 (range in which postural changes occurred/available ROM) for each subject.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Number of 3D postural changes for each participant (S01 to S08) are represented (Fig. 4
                        ). Without exception, the number of postural changes in all three planes was considerably less in the computer mouse task compared with that in the keyboard typing task. There were significant differences in postural dynamisms (number of postural changes) between the mouse and typing tasks for the cervical (flexion/extension (p = 0.0003); side flexion (p = 0.0000); rotation (p = 0.0002)) and thoracic (flexion/extension (p = 0.0173); side flexion (p = 0.0163); rotation (p = 0.0399)) spinal angles in all three movement planes.

The range of movement in which the postural changes occurred and percentage that this range represent of the full available range (% ROM) are tabulated in Table 4
                        .

The values representing % ROM were all remarkably low, with only one value exceeding 12%. Generally, the range of movement was statistically larger in the typing task compared with the mouse task, except for cervical lateral flexion.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This is the first published study to describe postural dynamism, in terms of the number of cervical and thoracic spinal movements, during common computer tasks. Novel measurement methodologies using 3D analysis of the cervical and thoracic spinal regions were also investigated. The study findings illustrate that there is less postural dynamism of the cervical and thoracic spinal regions during computer mouse use, when compared to keyboard typing.

Study findings could possibly be explained by the nature of keyboard typing which is a bilateral upper limb activity. Many individuals constantly alternate their gaze from the screen to the keyboard and/or to a relevant document during keyboard typing, which may possibly lead to a greater number of cervical and thoracic spinal movements. Using a computer mouse is a unilateral activity and may cause a compensatory weight shift to the contralateral side in sitting. This would improve stability, but reduce postural dynamism. Computer mouse use also requires higher demands on hand-eye coordination and visual focus, which may lead to a more constrained sitting posture, compared with keyboard typing (Arvidsson et al., 2008).

The results of our study (Table 3) show that different outcome measurements of spinal position (The range of movement in which the postural changes occurred versus the %ROM) may have different clinical interpretations. For example, when comparing S03 and S04 in the computer mouse task for ‘Thoracic F/E’, the range of movement in which the postural changes occurred, between these subjects differs by only 0.02°, with S03 being the smaller of the two values. However, when considering the percentage ROM, a difference of 0.58 can be seen with S03 now having the highest value. Thus, although S03 performed a smaller movement than S04, S03 moved through a much larger available ROM when compared with that of S04. This example shows that when only the true ROM is considered during inter-subject comparison, there is a risk of extrapolating inaccurate clinical information due to intrinsic factors related to spinal ROM. Therefore, besides postural dynamism, it is also important to measure spinal position to provide clinically relevant information.

A previous study by Bruno Garza et al. (2012), measured the postural angles of the torso, head and neck in relation to computer keyboard and mouse use. They found that computer keyboard typing was associated with more extreme positions/angles of the cervical and thoracic spinal region, particularly extension of the cervical spine. Similarly, end of range spinal postures have been associated with spinal pain, particularly in the cervical spine (Brink and Louw, 2013). In this review, other risk factors associated with spinal pain in the cervical area, include the duration of sitting and postural dynamism. In our study, spinal position was described in terms of the range of movement in which the postural changes occurred and the percentage of available ROM. These outcomes may provide better clinical information than measuring only postural angles, as was done in the 2012 Bruno Garza study, as sitting is dynamic in nature and measure posture as a static would not give a good representation of what happens in reality.

To date there is insufficient or no empirical evidence of biomechanical differences between computer tasks, albeit general anecdotal opinions. We found that mouse use is associated with less movement changes whilst sitting compared to keyboard use. However both of these input devices lead to monotonous sitting posture, which is sustained for prolonged periods. The use of computers is inevitable in the occupational and academic environment. Therefore, futuristic alternatives to traditional computer input devices should be developed. Computer users should also be advised to use a range of different input devices to encourage postural dynamism whilst sitting. Types of input devices to consider include touch screen technologies, voice recognition systems and even virtual reality applications. However, until more evidence is generated to improve our understanding of the association between postural dynamism and pain, re-assessment to ascertain whether the adjustments had an impact on the computer related pain is advised. The relationship between postural dynamism and spinal pain requires further research.

Limitations of our study are our sampling method, which precludes generalizability to other subgroups such as students with spinal pain. For this reason our results cannot be generalised to the broader student population. The workstation set-up had limitations due to limited height adjustability of the typist's chair, which may have influenced spinal position and postural dynamism. It is also advised that the tasks should be captured for the same duration of time in future studies. Future studies should also consider using portable motion analysis technology, as this will enable “real life” data capturing in a school or workplace setting.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This pilot study is the first study that describes 3D postural dynamism of the cervical and thoracic spinal regions during two common computer tasks. The main findings suggest that postural dynamism of the thoracic and cervical spine sitting is less during mouse use compared with keyboard typing. Alternatives to traditional computer input devices should be developed. Computer users should also be advised to use a range of different input devices to encourage postural dynamism whilst sitting. Future studies should also consider using portable motion analysis technology, as this will enable “real life” data capturing in a school or workplace setting and to measure task of a similar duration.

The study has been funded by the Medical Research Council of South Africa. The funding source had no involvement in the study design, report writing or article submission. The funds were primarily used for data collection and processing at the FNB 3D-Movement Analysis Laboratory.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

