@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Investigating shoulder muscle loading and exerted forces during wall painting tasks: Influence of gender, work height and paint tool design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A novel paint tool had lower muscular demand for females than two existing designs.


                        
                        
                           
                           A high work height increased muscular demand compared to low and middle heights.


                        
                        
                           
                           Males applied greater force than females with a paint tool.


                        
                        
                           
                           Lower average applied paint force was produced at a high work height.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Shoulder load

Wall painting

Muscular demand

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The task of wall painting produces considerable risk to the workers, both male and female, primarily in the development of upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders. Insufficient information is currently available regarding the potential benefits of using different paint roller designs or the possible adverse effects of painting at different work heights. The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of gender, work height, and paint tool design on shoulder muscle activity and exerted forces during wall painting. Ten young adults, five male and five female, were recruited to perform simulated wall painting at three different work heights with three different paint roller designs while upper extremity muscle activity and horizontal push force were recorded. Results demonstrated that for female participants, significantly greater total average (p = 0.007) and integrated (p = 0.047) muscle activity was present while using the conventional and curly flex paint roller designs compared to the proposed design in which the load was distributed between both hands. Additionally, for both genders, the high working height imposed greater muscular demands compared to middle and low heights. These findings suggest that, if possible, avoid painting at extreme heights (low or high) and that for female painters, consider a roller that requires the use of two hands; this will reduce fatigue onset and subsequently mitigate potential musculoskeletal shoulder injury risks.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

House painters are a sub-group of construction workers with a high reported incidence of shoulder complaints (Stenlund et al., 2002). These shoulder complaints have in turn lead to a high risk of early retirement with disability pensions related to shoulder injuries (Lindbeck et al., 1997). Supraspinatus tendonitis is a common shoulder injury incurred by house painters (Stenlund et al., 2002). According to a research study funded by The Center to Protect Workers' Rights conducted in Washington, D.C. (Hunting et al., 2004), 5% of injured construction workers reporting to emergency rooms over a 7-year period were painters and 4% of all construction workers had shoulder-related injuries. Repetitive strain injuries are the most common and costly occupational health problem according to the U.S. Department of Labour (RSI Statistics, 2007). The cost of a worker compensation claim for a repetitive stress injury is between $20,000 USD and $100,000 USD (RSI Statistics, 2007).

Limited research exists evaluating the effects of painting or sanding techniques on shoulder loading. However, research by Stenlund et al. (2002) has examined this specifically for ceiling work. Researchers described three possible techniques employed by the worker. Of these three techniques, the “pushing technique” produced the least amount of strain on the supraspinatus muscle. This technique required the worker to hold an extension handle with both thumbs pointing upwards while they moved the shaft back and forth in the sagittal plane. The main difference between this technique and others (the “normal grip” and “reversed grip”) was the way in which the shaft was moved; with the remaining techniques requiring pivoting and rotating movements. Researchers used a biomechanical model to predict individual supraspinatus muscle forces, which were expressed as relative values proportionate to the respective maximal capacities of the supraspinatus muscle. The average normalized supraspinatus muscle force was 5.19% for the “reversed grip” technique, 5.11% for the “normal technique” and 2.15% for the “pushing technique”. Similarly, workers who used the “pushing technique” reported fewer shoulder disorders, suggesting that this technique may reduce the occurrence of shoulder tendonitis. No further research has been presented that examines shoulder loading during vertical wall painting. Additionally, the influences of paint tool design on shoulder loading remain unknown; with few attempts made to improve the tool's original design from an ergonomic perspective.

Though the research examining wall painting specifically is limited, other researchers have evaluated tasks that involve comparable upper extremity loading. The design of current paint roller handles require elevated shoulder postures in order to perform horizontal paint strokes. Numerous research studies have documented that arm elevation leads to large increases in shoulder muscular activity levels (Chopp et al., 2010; DeLuca and Forrest, 1973; Walker and Poppen, 1977; Sigholm et al., 1984; Inman et al., 1944; Hagberg, 1981). This increase in muscle activity can subsequently lead to muscle fatigue development (Grieve and Dickerson, 2008) and subsequent pain and discomfort (Wiker et al., 1989). Specifically, occupations that involve elevated arm tasks may lead to “degenerative tendonitis” in the biceps and supraspinatus muscles (Bjelle et al., 1973, 1987; Herberts et al., 1981; Hagberg, 1988). Due to the high incidence of shoulder pain among house painters, it is critical to evaluate the work-related factors that may contribute to excess shoulder load demands and provide recommendations for reducing the risk of upper extremity discomfort.

House painting is a task performed by both genders, which is an important consideration that needs to be addressed. Females are more strength limited than males, with differences greater than 50% in the upper extremity (Miller et al., 1993). As this task has the potential for significant upper extremity loading, it is important to evaluate the possible additional demand experienced by females from executing the same wall painting task.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of gender, work height, and paint tool design on shoulder muscle activity and the horizontal force applied to a vertical paint surface by the paint roller during simulated wall painting. This included testing four specific linked hypotheses:
                        
                           •
                           Females will demonstrate increased muscle activity compared to men for a given painting task. This is based on the established lower upper limb strength of females, and the consistent paint tool designs used in the study (Miller et al., 1993).

Work height will influence shoulder muscular activity during simulated wall painting, such that the middle work height produces the lowest muscular loading. This is consistent with other studies that have shown middle or low work heights to have lower mechanical demand for electrical meter installation (Chopp et al., 2011), and lower subjective ratings for a screw-driving task (Ulin et al., 1990) than high work heights.

The force exerted on a wall will not differ across all work heights as the external task requirements are the same.

Different paint tool designs will influence the level of shoulder muscular activity associated with simulated wall painting due to their difference in weight, as well as the postures that participants will adopt when using the painting tools.

@&#METHODS@&#

Five male and five female participants took part in this study. Inclusion criteria consisted of right-handed undergraduate students between the ages of 18–25 years with no self-reported history of musculoskeletal symptoms in the past 12 months. Demographic information (height and weight) of study participants were recorded and the mean values were calculated. The mean height and weight of male participants were 178.2 cm (SD = 7.76) and 87.6 kg (SD = 14.77) respectively. Alternately, the mean height and weight of female participants were 161.2 cm (SD = 4.16) and 54.2 kg (SD = 3.31) respectively.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

An experimental counterbalanced design was utilized in this study. All participants completed each of the nine randomized experimental conditions described in Section 2.3. Each trial was coded with a specific number (1–9). Using the website “research randomizer”, trial order was randomized. The following parameters were specified to use the program: sets of numbers = 10 (10 participants); number range 1–9 (9 trials); each number in the set was unique. This resulted in 10 sets of randomized numbers ranging from 1 to 9 which were used for trial order.

Three variables were considered in this study; gender, work height and paint tool design (Table 1
                        ). Each gender performed each of nine conditions, which included combinations of three work heights (high, middle, and low) and paint tool design (conventional, curly flex, and a proposed novel design).

Three wall sections were examined in this study (high, medium and low). Due to anthropometric variations in the participants tested, wall sections were normalized to each subject. The middle of the high, medium and low wall sections were aligned with the participants stature, elbow and knee heights, respectively. A height adjustable frame was developed to ensure the wall sections could be adjusted with ease (Fig. 1
                           ). The dimensions of the wall sections were 3 feet long by 2 feet high and the overall height of the adjustable frame was 6 feet 1 inch.

Currently, there are three major different paint tool designs on the market; two were evaluated in this study (Table 1). The “Conventional Paint Roller” used consisted of a 5-wire roller frame that fits all 240 mm roller covers (Fig. 2
                           a). It has threads for attaching extension poles. The “Curly Flex Paint Roller” by Curly Flex claims that its ergonomic design will require less wrist strength (Fig. 2b). It further claims to create more pressure on the paint surface than traditional paint rollers. Finally, it asserts that applying paint with this tool will be smoother and will require less effort than other rollers. A modified conventional paint tool design was also developed for this study to provide more flexibility in the grip orientation of the paint handle (Fig. 2c); this new design, termed the “Proposed Paint Roller”, was the third paint roller tested.

Electromyography and horizontal force were collected to identify changes in shoulder loading and force application caused by the manipulated independent variables.

Surface electromyography (EMG) was used to record muscle activity from six muscles of the right upper arm and shoulder using the Noraxon Telemyo 2400T system (Noraxon, AZ, USA). Specifically, the following muscles were examined: anterior deltoid, middle deltoid, posterior deltoid, pectoralis major (clavicular insertion), biceps brachii and upper trapezius (according to sites indicated by Cram and Kasman, 1998). Skin was first prepared using a single use disposable razor and rubbing alcohol to minimize impedance and allow for acceptable skin-electrode contact. Noraxon Ag/AgCl dual electrodes with a fixed 2 cm spacing were placed on each muscle over the center of the muscle belly and in the line with the muscle fibers. Raw EMG signals measured from each muscle were band pass filtered from 20 to 500 Hz, and differentially amplified (common-mode rejection ratio >90 dB at 60 Hz, input impedance 2 MΩ) to generate maximum signal amplification. EMG signals were A/D converted at 1500 samples/second using a 16 bit A/D card with a ±2.5 V range.

Prior to beginning the painting trials, each participant performed two repetitions of muscle-specific isometric maximum voluntary contractions (MVCs) using recommended exertions for each of the recorded muscles (Cram and Kasman, 1998; Table 2
                           ). Each MVC trial was collected for 5 s, which provided the subject with time to ramp up to maximum, maintain this maximal level for 1–2 s and then reduce the exertion level to rest.

A MC3A-500 multi-axis force transducer (AMTI, MA, USA) was used to measure the force exerted by the participants and subsequently imparted by the paint roller during each vertical wall painting trial. The transducer was mounted to the back of the vertical painting surface with the positive x-axis pointing in the upward direction. The force along the z-axis, which was perpendicular to the painting surface, was recorded for this study.

To ensure consistency between trials and participants a number of variables were controlled. These variables included the roller cover weight, the painting technique, the rest period duration and practice trials, as well as the tool handling. Each of these variables will be subsequently described.

Real paint was not used in this study in order to prevent potential damage of laboratory equipment. In a realistic work scenario, the weight of a paint roller will change dynamically over time as the paint is loaded and unloaded from the roller cover. To account for this change, the roller cover weight was adjusted to estimate the average paint weight experienced during wall painting. To calculate this value, the weight of a roller cover with a light coating of paint and the weight of a roller cover fully saturated with paint were measured and the average of the two was applied to the roller cover and used in the experimental trials.

The “zigzag” technique was identified as the most effective method of painting with a roller (Curtis, 2007). One cycle of the technique was completed for each experimental trial. The steps to perform this technique were as follows:
                              
                                 1.
                                 First, a zigzag pattern was painted on the wall with the first stroke moving away from the participant.

Without lifting the roller, horizontal strokes were then performed to further spread the paint.

Last, light vertical strokes were used to ensure the paint was evenly spread (Curtis, 2007).

To ensure all participants correctly followed this technique, directional lines were marked on the paint surface (Fig. 3
                           ) and participants were asked to follow the markings when performing their painting trial. To follow the markings, the participants were instructed to start at the red line located in the bottom right corner, follow the red path and then proceed to the green path, and finish with the black path.

After each trial (work height × paint tool design) was completed, the participants received 2 min of rest to reduce the likelihood of fatigue development. Each participant performed three practice trials at the medium work height for each paint roller prior to experimental trials to increase their comfort with the painting technique.

Participants were restricted to use their right hand when using the traditional paint roller and the curly flex plaint roller, as this arm was instrumented with EMG surface electrodes. The proposed ergonomic design required participants to use two hands. For up and down strokes the paint roller was held as shown in Fig. 4
                           a and side to side strokes were performed as shown in Fig. 4b.

Raw EMG signals were full wave rectified and low pass filtered at 3 Hz using a 4th order Butterworth filter to produce a linear enveloped EMG response, which was then normalized to the MVC trials. The MVC normalization magnitude was calculated as a 1 s time windowed average activation determined about the midpoint of the MVC contraction. After each trial was normalized to its maximum value, average electromyography and integrated electromyography were calculated for each muscle, from which total average EMG (AEMG) and total integrated EMG (IEMG) were used to make comparisons between experimental trials.

The horizontal push force along the z-axis of the force transducer was obtained from each trial. From this, the peak (maximum) and average push forces (N) were captured. Forces along other axes were also monitored and found to be relatively negligible, with magnitudes less than 5 N. They were therefore not analyzed nor will they be discussed further.

Four mixed model repeated measures ANOVAs were used to evaluate the effect of each independent variable on the EMG response and force outputs, along with first-order interaction effects. Specifically, the influences of paint tool design, work height, and gender, were evaluated for: total average EMG (AEMG) and total integrated EMG (IEMG), as well as peak and average paint force. Statistical analysis was performed using JMP software (SAS Institute, North Carolina, USA). A p-value of 0.05 was used to determine significance with post-hoc Tukey tests used to evaluate interactions.

@&#RESULTS@&#

All independent variables (gender, work height and paint tool design) influenced both EMG and force measures, either as main effects or through interactions with each other (Table 3
                     ).

A gender-paint tool design interaction existed for both AEMG (p = 0.007) and IEMG (p = 0.047). Specifically, for female participants, the conventional paint roller (and the curly flex paint roller were associated with higher AEMG (Fig. 5
                        a) and IEMG (Fig. 5b) than the proposed paint roller design. Male values were not influenced by paint tool design. Main effects for each of the three independent variables existed for AEMG and for gender and work height for IEMG. The work height effect indicated that higher AEMG (p < 0.0001) and IEMG (p < 0.0001) occurred at the high height than the other heights as well as the low height compared to the middle height.

Each of the independent variables significantly influenced average applied force, while peak force was predominantly influenced by paint tool design. For average applied force, main effects of gender (p = 0.006), work height (p = 0.0001) and paint tool design (p < 0.0001) were present. Male participants applied greater force than females. Unlike for muscle activity trends, the high work height was associated with lower average applied force than both low and middle work heights. Further, the proposed paint roller design had greater applied average force than other rollers. However, despite these statistically significant differences, between each variable, applied force magnitude differences were modest (approximately 3 N). For peak applied force, only a main effect of paint tool design (p < 0.0001) existed. The proposed paint roller demonstrated higher peak applied force (46.3 ± 13.5 N) than the curly flex roller (39.0 ± 15.8 N), which had higher peak applied force than the conventional roller (32.3 ± 8.9 N). There were no interactions between the independent variables for either average or peak applied force.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The main objective of the present study was to determine the effect of gender, work height and paint tool design on shoulder muscle activity, and the force applied to a paint surface by the paint roller. The following sections address the experimental hypotheses with respect to these independent variables.

It was expected that the muscular effort of females required to perform the same wall painting task would be greater than that of males; this was supported by experimental findings, with females eliciting significantly higher %MVC compared to males. However, the average force and peak force of females was significantly lower than males. This suggests that females used a greater percentage of muscular effort to complete simulated painting, though they did not exerting the same level of force on the roller compared to men. This difference may be attributable to physiological upper extremity gender differences. Previous research has documented differences in upper extremity strength and muscle fiber characteristics between males and females. Miller et al. (1993) found that females are between 52% and 66% as strong as men in the upper extremity and have 45% less cross-sectional area in the biceps brachii muscle compared to males. A high correlation exists between muscle cross-sectional area and strength, indicating that the absolute strength of men is greater than females due to their larger muscles (Maughan and Nimmo, 1984; Ryushi et al., 1988). Therefore, with higher muscle demands for females compared to males, they are at probable higher risk of developing upper extremity fatigue from a wall painting task, which can subsequently lead to pain or discomfort (Wiker et al., 1990). The reduction in force exerted by females compared to males may influence painting performance; though this was not evaluated as simulated painting was tested in this study. However, this suggests that if females were required to exert the same force magnitudes as males to achieve adequate performance, the muscular demands may be exceed those reported here.

Shoulder muscular activity was expected to be the greatest at the high work height, which was reinforced by greater total average EMG (AEMG) and total integrated EMG (IEMG) at the high working height compared to both middle and low heights. Additionally, lower activity existed for the middle work height compared to both high and low work heights. Ulin et al. (1990) found similar results for a screw driving task using psychosocial scales. Subjects preferred driving screws between 114 cm and 139 cm above the standing surface (which is comparable to the middle work height in the current study), regardless of anthropometric differences (Ulin et al., 1990). Various researchers have also documented the relationship between arm elevation and increases in shoulder muscle activity levels (DeLuca and Forrest, 1973; Walker and Poppen, 1977; Sigholm et al., 1984; Inman et al., 1944; Hagberg, 1981). It is probable that the lower muscle activity at the middle height was due to the reduction of arm elevation at this level.

The expectation that the force applied to the wall during wall painting would be consistent among the tested work heights was verified by the peak results, however average paint force results indicated that lower force was applied at the higher paint height. This may relate to the reach distance, in that participants were unable to attain the same force magnitude with their arms reached overhead (high height). However, while significant, the average force magnitude for the high height was 9.9 ± 2.4 N, which was just 0.9 N less than the middle height and 1.2 N less than the low height. Given these modest magnitude differences, and the lack of significance for the peak force, this implies that while using a given paint roller, the average and peak forces are largely consistent regardless of the height. Despite these modest differences in force at each work height, the total average and integrated muscle activity were influenced by work height, implying that arm posture may be the predominant factor relating work height to muscle demand.

The conventional paint roller was expected to produce the greatest muscular loading at the shoulder. Results demonstrated that for female participants, both the conventional and curly flex paint roller designs had higher AEMG and IEMG than the proposed paint roller design. However, for male participants, neither AEMG nor IEMG was influenced by paint tool design. Therefore, given the design of the proposed paint roller, results indicate that females benefited from distributing the load between both hands, while no benefit occurred for males.

Average force and peak force were significantly higher for the proposed roller design, compared to the conventional roller and the curly flex roller. This result can be interpreted in one of two ways. First, the higher average and peak force produced by the proposed paint roller suggests that this roller may be less efficient than the alternate rollers overall. All participants were instructed to use the same technique to complete the painting task for each roller. This resulted in an additional average force magnitude of 3 N and additional peak force magnitude of 7 N and 14 N for the proposed paint roller, compared to the curly flex and conventional paint rollers, respectively. Thus, with the additional system demand posed by the proposed paint roller, the conventional roller can be viewed as more mechanically advantageous, as significantly less peak force was required while using this roller. Alternatively, a contrasting interpretation would be to consider the proposed paint roller more advantageous than the competing rollers as participants were able to apply greater force to the paint surface while sustaining lower total average EMG in the right shoulder. It is probable that this effect was a result of the participant applying force and distributing the load between two hands while using this paint tool design. The additional force could also be attributed to the increase in postural symmetry attained while using the proposed paint tool design, in that more force may have been produced by subjects leaning towards the paint tool, thus using more body weight to achieve the force level. While contrasting, both interpretations are plausible. However, given that the total average EMG magnitude was less than a modest 15% and the average force magnitude less than 12 N, across all genders and conditions, it is unlikely that the additional force produced using the proposed paint tool design was due to difficulty in performing the task.

As wall painting is a prolonged task with considerable muscle demands, it is plausible that the task could elicit upper extremity muscle fatigue. Previous research has documented that prolonged static elevated arm tasks at 10% MVC is adequate to cause muscular fatigue (Jonsson, 1988). Comparable results have also been obtained in repetitive arm loading (Jonsson, 1988). Since wall painting is a repetitive elevated arm task, it may be generalized that conditions resulting in %MVC values greater than 10% is sufficient to cause muscular fatigue. With respect to the current study, the average %MVC of females was above the 10% threshold whereas males were below. This indicates that females will be more susceptible to fatigue during wall painting then males. Despite this finding, previous researchers have documented that individual worker upper-extremity strength capabilities are not very good predictors of fatigue and discomfort in the shoulder complex for small manual exertions at or above shoulder height (Wiker et al., 1990). Therefore, although males were below the 10% MVC threshold indicated by Jonsson (1988), the nature of painting work (low exertions at or above shoulder height) is sufficient to cause fatigue and discomfort in the shoulder complex.

The average %MVC for work height showed a similar trend such that the middle work height was below the 10% threshold and the other two heights were above. Therefore individuals are least likely to become fatigued while working at the middle height. Paint tool design also displayed similar results whereby the proposed design was below the 10% MVC threshold and the other two rollers were above. This suggests that the proposed design is least likely to cause muscular fatigue.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Specific assumptions and limitations of this study must be considered when interpreting and applying the findings. First, assumptions regarding the painting technique were required in order to maintain consistency between participants. As the zigzag painting technique was identified to be most effective, it was assumed that this technique is dominantly used to paint walls. In addition, it was assumed that the traditional and curly flex paint tool designs are operated with the dominant hand only. Further, in the present study, the relatively small sample size (5 males and 5 females) is limiting. Although statistical significance existed for the majority of the factors, a larger sample size may have shown more prominent differences between conditions. In addition, the subject population consisted of undergraduate students. This limits the generalization of results to the professional work sector; however the results are appropriate for student painters. Next, muscle activity patterns were only monitored in the right arm. The proposed roller design appeared to be reduce muscular demands for the right shoulder; however, this roller requires bilateral effort. The implications of reducing muscle activity in one shoulder and introducing it in the other shoulder were not examined. These potential implications of bilateral shoulder loading should be addressed prior to implementing this roller to ensure the tool does not introduce overall higher demands. Subjective data, including comments regarding their preferred choice of roller, perceived exertion and comparisons regarding their balance and strength limitations while using unilateral versus bilateral rollers would have complimented quantitative results, gathering a clearer picture of the mechanical and psychophysical demands of the wall painting task while using each of the rollers.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In general, results from this research suggest that for female painters, the proposed paint tool design decreased overall upper extremity muscular demands. Additionally, it is advisable to avoid both height extremes, particularly high work heights. Thus, when painting at a high work height, it is recommended that painters stand on a sturdy platform or ladder to relocate the painting at the middle work height.

The amount of force applied to the wall changed modestly with respect to work height, with the high height demonstrating a reduction in average and peak force of 1.2 N (significant) and 3.8 N (insignificant), respectively. However, the amount of force applied to the wall increased up to 3 N and 14 N for average and peak force, respectively with the proposed paint tool design. Thus, future research should investigate the bilateral effect of the proposed roller design in addition to the effect of alternative tool handling to more conclusively evaluate the efficiency of this roller in comparison to conventional rollers.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank Steven Fischer for his assistance with data processing.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

