@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Design and evaluation of small, linear QWERTY keyboards

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A miniature keyboard is vital for small devices to shrink the size of the devices and expand the display area.


                        
                        
                           
                           The number keys of small linear keyboards should be separated from the letter keys.


                        
                        
                           
                           Small linear keyboards with square-shaped keycaps had better accuracy than keyboards with rectangular-shaped keycaps.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Keyboard design

Miniature keyboard

Ergonomic keyboard

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Miniature keyboard design is motivated by the need for smaller mobile devices with maximum user display area. Thus, this study developed four miniature keyboard designs which varied from conventional keyboard design in terms of their configuration and layout. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the input speed, accuracy, comfort, likability and learnability of four miniature keyboards. Sixteen fast typists and 16 slow typists were recruited to use these four miniature keyboards. The results showed that the rectangular-shaped keycaps of 3 letters with separated keycaps of numerals obtained the best proficiency speed, highest comfort and greatest user acceptance among the four keyboards. Moreover, the keyboards with square-shaped keycaps had better input accuracy compared to rectangular-shaped keycaps. Finally, the proposed keyboards were smaller than current keyboards, and the performance for all of the small keyboards was worse than that of the conventional keyboard.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Rapid advances in information technology have resulted in new methods of data entry (e.g., cell phone keyboards and touch screens) and new forms of language (e.g., short message service). Users increasingly want to use text intensive software on mobile devices (Sandnes and Aubert, 2007); however, smaller devices inevitably employ smaller displays (Ziefle, 2010; Hashimoto et al., 2003) and keyboards (Colle and Hiszem, 2004), which reduce usability. When users obtain information from portable devices, they prefer the largest possible display area and the smallest keyboard that provides good usability and typing speed (Yoshitake, 1995; Pereira et al., 2013). Ha et al. (2004) indicated that existing entry methods on mobile communication devices suffer from poor typing efficiency and impose a cognitive processing burden on users. To meet the challenges posed by miniaturization of these devices, many designers have developed variants of conventional QWERTY keyboards, including changes to the layout or integration of multiple keys on a standard-sized keyboard (Sheng, 1985). However, more research on the usability of miniature keyboards is needed.

Ease of use has become a critical design factor for input devices (Beddoes and Hu, 1994; Lee and Zhai, 2004). More specifically, users prefer and expect high input speed and ease of learning for new technologies, and show a marked aversion to products that are perceived as overly cognitively demanding (Sanders and McCormick, 1993; Sandnes and Aubert, 2007). Because one key per character is considered the minimal design specification for the 36 characters (26 letters and numerals 0–9) that are needed for English entry, the state-of-the-art in miniature keyboards shrinks the keys to fit them into a limited space. However, there are two limitations for these miniature keyboards. First, they demonstrate a greater reliance on thumbs, which might result in physical discomfort (Baker et al., 2007; Olszewska et al., 2009) and often lead to a reduction in input efficiency (Colle and Hiszem, 2004; Harada et al., 1996). Another limitation is that most people are comfortable with the QWERTY design and find it very difficult to accept other layouts (Beeching, 1974; Gopher and Raij, 1988). Consequently, some researchers have proposed maintaining a QWERTY-based system as these devices reduce the time typists use for searching (Sandnes and Aubert, 2007; Bi et al., 2010). However, to the best of our knowledge, no system has been developed with a combination of QWERTY layout and miniature keyboards. Investigating miniature keyboards with a QWERTY layout yields useful insights into the input devices required to improve entry methods.

Because humans' limit of short-term memory is 7 ± 2 items (Miller, 1956), combining an appropriate number of characters (e.g., less than seven) on a single keycap strengthens the relationship among these characters. That is, the relationship of characters on the same keycap provides additional hints for users to help them memorize the positions of characters (Sanders and McCormick, 1993) and, thus, to improve input efficiency (Bürdek, 2005).

Therefore, we proposed four multi-character keyboards that do not follow the conventional one-to-one alphanumeric-symbol-to-key ratio for small devices. Although the proposed keyboards have a reduced number of keys, they still maintain the QWERTY layout so that they are familiar to users. Accordingly, the present study evaluated four miniature keyboards on input efficiency, accuracy, comfort, likability and learnability for users.

@&#METHOD@&#

Thirty-two participants were recruited in this study. No participant reported musculoskeletal problems with his/her hands. All participants had normal visual acuity or corrected to normal with glasses or contact lenses. All participants were right-handed with a mean computer experience of 10.4 ± 3.8 years. Their ages ranged from 18.0 to 52.0 years, with a mean age of 24.2 ± 5.8 years. All participants read and signed the consent form.

The participants were categorized as fast or slow typists based on their typing ability, which was evaluated by the English Typing Credential System with 30 words per minute (wpm) as the benchmark for basic typing ability. The participants were asked to use ten-finger typing on a conventional QWERTY keyboard (Acer KU-0355) (Fig. 1
                        ). The Typing Credential System software (Chinese Computer Education Association of Taiwan) was used to test English typing ability. This study used the articles provided by the system as typing materials for each participant. The typing speed of the participants was measured using the conventional QWERTY keyboard. Typing speed = (total hit number – number of errors * 50)/(5 * period). Each participant was tested twice with the same given article (10 min for each test); the higher score was recorded and defined as his/her typing ability. The fast group (6M and 10F) typed 38.7 ± 4.5 wpm, whereas the slow group (7M and 9F) typed 23.4 ± 7.3 wpm when tested with a QWERTY keyboard. The typing ability of the participants ranged from 13.28 to 51.34 wpm, with a mean of 29.05 ± 9.46 wpm.

Four keyboards were designed in the current study. All of the keyboards contained keycaps, either square or rectangular; a previous study showed that square targets are reached more efficiently than are round ones (Whisenand and Emurian, 1999). Moreover, a 19-mm horizontal centre spacing of keycaps, which is the same as the Acer KU-0355 keyboard, was used to avoid the influences from centre spacing. In addition, using the proposed keyboard with the ten-finger typing method, the index finger of one hand can handle two keycaps and the middle, ring and little fingers of the hand can handle one keycap, respectively. There are four characters in a keycap. Thus, the left little finger can enter 1QAZ, the left ring finger enters 2WSX, the left middle finger enters 3EDC, the left index finger enters 4RFV5TGB, the right index finger enters 6YHN7UJM, the right middle finger enters 8IK and comma, the right ring finger enters 9OL and the period mark, and the right little finger enters the 0P, semi-colon and slash marks.

The internal structure of each keycap, which controls four characters, was determined. Because there is no available switch for controlling four characters simultaneously, electrical tactile switches were used to control each character. The four switches within each keycap were closely arranged to shorten the finger movement distance, and to enhance input speed. There were two types of tactile switches with different connection sizes used in the current study: a 2-pin switch and a 4-pin switch (Fig. 2
                        ). The 4-pin switch contained a smaller-sized connection and was used on the smaller keycaps. The number of pins represents the number of signal lines soldered on the circuit board. Users pressed the keycap in one of four locations to indirectly trigger the tactile switches and transmit a signal. Moreover, a layer of foam was adhered to the outside of switch and marked with corresponding characters.

The arrangement and the keycap structure of four proposed keyboards: linear, separated linear, edge and corner keyboards are described below (Fig. 3
                        ). The area taken by all of the keycaps and the space between (excluding the space bar) was 4887 mm2 in the linear and separated linear keyboards, whereas the edge and corner keyboards covered 2196 mm2 and 3196 mm2, respectively. The area of the full-sized (conventional) keyboard, the Acer KU-0355, was 14697 mm2. The area of the linear and separated linear keyboards took up 33% of the area of the Acer KU-0355 QWERTY keyboard. The area of the edge keyboard took up 14.67% of the area of the Acer KU-0355 QWERTY keyboard, whereas the area of the corner keyboard took up 21.75% of the area of the Acer KU-0355 QWERTY keyboard. The area of the four proposed keyboards was significantly smaller than that of the conventional QWERTY keyboard.
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 Linear keyboard (type B1): four characters were arranged in a straight line on each rectangular keycap (Fig. 3) with an internal structure of 2-pin switches (Fig. 4
                                 ). The users could sense the raised edges on the keycaps to distinguish corresponding characters by moving slightly forward or backward.

The Separated linear keyboard (type B2) was very similar to the linear keyboard, retaining the rectangular shape (Fig. 3). However, the numeral keycaps with 4-pin switches were raised compared with linear keyboard, so that they could be pressed with a very light touch. The other keycaps used 2-pin switches (Fig. 4).

The Edge keyboard (type B3) was a modification of the conventional QWERTY keyboard. There were four characters on each square key, arranged counter-clockwise on each keycap with the numeral in the upper-right corner (Fig. 3). Pressing one side of a keycap could input the corresponding character. Note the internal structure was based on 2-pin switches (Fig. 4).

A Corner keyboard (type B4) was adapted from the edge keyboard with the square shape rotated 45°, which was a diamond shape with the numeral in the upper corner when viewed straight on (Fig. 3). Note that each keycap consisted of 2-pin switches (Fig. 4).

A personal computer (Acer Power F6) with Windows XP Pro and a monitor (ViewSonic VE175) were used to present experimental tasks. The size of the screen (including bezel) was 414.89 mm (width) × 229 mm (length) and the typing material was displayed with a resolution of 1024 (horizontal) × 768 (vertical) pixels. The chairs were fixed to the floor and the back of the chairs was adjusted to 115°. The seat height was adjusted to allow the participants to place their feet flat on the ground, forming a 90° or less angle between their lower legs and the ground. The sitting depth and the backs of the chairs were adjusted to make the participants feel comfortable. The angle between the screen and the horizontal view of the eyes was 15° and the distance between the centre of the screen and eyes was 60 cm. After setting up the experimental equipment, participants could slightly adjust their chairs for comfort. Once the experiment had started, the chairs could not be further adjusted. All participants used both hands to perform all tasks that required using 10 fingers. The room temperature was maintained at 26 °C.

The character keystroke system was written with LabView software to determine the actual degree to which the participants were familiar with the single keycap on the conventional keyboard, and to prevent the language ability of the participants from affecting the actual typing speed. The characters in the testing system included 26 letters, 10 numerals (0–9), and 4 symbols (semi-colon, slash mark, period and comma), totalling 40 characters. An examination question asked the user to input one character. When a participant pressed the space bar after entering the character according to the examination question, the next question appeared. Note, the system did not allow errors to be corrected. Moreover, there were two modes in this system: practice mode and test mode. In the practice mode, each character appeared randomly three times, for a total of 120 characters. In the test mode, each character appeared only once, for a total of 40 characters. Each participant had to complete entry of the 120 characters in the practice mode and the 40 characters in the test mode.

Each participant visited our laboratory for two contiguous days. We conducted the typing ability test on the first day to determine the participants' group. On the second day, the participants underwent character keystroke tests on the 4 proposed keyboards. The testing sequence for the 4 proposed keyboards was randomized for each participant to minimize order-related and confounding effects from learning. There were 3 steps for each character keystroke test: (1) Becoming familiar with the keyboard using the practice mode of the character keystroke system (it usually takes approximately 5 min for participants to become familiar with a keyboard); (2) Conducting the keystroke test using the test mode of the character keystroke system; and (3) Filling out the subjective questionnaire for self-evaluation. After completing the 3 steps of each keyboard, the participants had a 3-min break. For each keyboard, the participants went through the steps and then moved on to the next keyboard. After the 3 steps had been completed for the 4 proposed keyboards, the participants were interviewed to select the favourite keyboard among the 4 keyboards and to ascertain the reasons.

The character keystroke system recorded the typing speed and accuracy of participants in the test mode. Typing speed was calculated by dividing the total number of characters input by the total response time (in minutes), followed by the typing speed minus errors (Rempel et al., 2007), with characters per minute as the units. The accuracy was calculated by comparing the total number of correct characters input with the total number of input characters, calculated as a percentage.

The outcome measurement of the proposed keyboards included a subjective questionnaire that was examined by a visual analogue scale. The statements of the questionnaire included: (1) I like the keyboard; (2) My hands are very comfortable when I use the keyboard; and (3) For me, it is easy to learn the keyboard. These statements represented likability, comfort and learnability, respectively. Participants marked X on a 100-mm linear scale to express their degree of agreement (Wu et al., 2003). The longer the measured length, the more user agreement was assigned to the statement.

All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 13.0 (SPSS for Windows, Chicago, IL, USA). The dependent variables were: typing speed, accuracy, likability, comfort and learnability. A two-way repeated ANOVA was performed with one between-subject factor (fast and slow typists) and one within-subject factor (linear, separated linear, edge and corner keyboards) for all dependent variables. The sphericity was examined by Mauchly's test. If the assumption of sphericity was violated, the degrees of freedom were corrected by the Huynh-Feldt correction.

In addition, given the number of analyses conducted, the alpha level for significant main effects and interactions was set at p < 0.05. When a significant interaction between a typing group and a keyboard was observed, Bonferroni post hoc tests were conducted and the p values from the post hoc were multiplied by the number of comparisons, and then compared with 0.05 as the significance level for adjustment.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results of typing speed, accuracy, likability, comfort and learnability of the slower and faster typists when typing on the 4 proposed keyboards are described below.

The interaction effect (p = 0.11) and main effect of typing ability (p = 0.17) did not reach a significant level on typing speed, but the main effects of keyboard were significant (p < 0.001). Post hoc tests showed that the typing speed was significantly faster on B2 compared to the others (p = 0.004–0.030) (Fig. 5
                         left).

No significant interaction effect (p = 0.52) and typing ability main effect (p = 0.41) were found in the accuracy data; however, a significant effect of keyboard was observed (p = 0.049). The effects of different levels of B factor on accuracy were compared by the Bonferroni post hoc analysis; the four keyboard types did not differ from each other (p = 0.070–1.000) (Fig. 5 right).

Participants used the QWERTY keyboard in the character keystroke test. Their average typing speed on the QWERTY keyboard was 49.4 words per minute, and their average accuracy was 97%. Comparing the average typing speed on the QWERTY keyboard with that on each miniature keyboard, it can be observed from the dotted lines on the left side of Fig. 5 that the average typing speed on each miniature keyboard is far slower than on a standard keyboard. Moreover, the average accuracy using the QWERTY keyboard is compared with that using each miniature keyboard. From the dotted lines on the right side of Fig. 5 it can be found that there is no difference in average accuracy between using each miniature keyboard and a standard keyboard.

No significant interaction effect (p = 0.51) and main effect of typing ability (p = 0.46) were found in scores of likability, but the main effect of keyboard (p = 0.002) was significant. After post hoc paired comparisons, there were greater scores of likability on the B2 keyboard than on the B3 keyboard (p = 0.005) (Fig. 6
                        ). On the other hand, no significant interaction effect (p = 0.42) or main effect (typing ability: p = 0.22; keyboard: p = 0.15) was found in the scores of comfort.

Because the interaction effect reached significance in the scores of learnability (p = 0.018), the simple effect tests were conducted further. With respect to the simple main effect of typing ability in each keyboard, a significant difference was observed in regard to the B1 keyboard (p = 0.030) (Fig. 7
                         top). On the other hand, when the simple effect tests of 4 different keyboards were conducted within the slow and fast typists, both of them were significant (fast typists: p = 0.046; slow typists: p = 0.002). Then, the post hoc paired comparisons were used for further analyses. For the fast typists, the greater scores of learnability were observed in regard to the B1 keyboard than the B3 keyboard (p = 0.013) (Fig. 7 bottom). For the slow typists, the greater scores of learnability were observed in regard to the B2 keyboard compared with the B1 keyboard (p = 0.016) (Fig. 7 bottom).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

We found the fastest input speed on the B2 keyboard, and greater accuracy was observed in keyboards with square keycaps than those with rectangular keycaps. According to a previous study (Curran et al., 2006), if the device is designed for recreation or communication, then emphasis is placed on fast input speed. However, when information entry is a critical function of the device, the accuracy factor becomes essential. Therefore, we suggested the B2 keyboard be considered for use in devices designed for informal communication, whereas the keyboards with square keycaps might be applied for formal message entry.

The keyboard type was found to affect the typing speed, which is consistent with the previous finding of Rempel et al. (2007), who studied the effects of the locations of single-element keycaps. In contrast, the current study placed the emphasis on improving the operation of the keyboard while increasing the space available on small devices for other features, and it demonstrated different operating methods. The participants in our study moved their fingers backward and forward when using the B1 and B2 keyboards, whereas they typed on the B3 and B4 keyboards by moving fingers to the side. The operation method may have affected the typing speed, and we surmised that the method of moving fingers backward and forward might attain faster speeds than the side-to-side method. There were two potential reasons for the greater input speed on the B2 keyboard. First, this may result from the perpendicular line of finger motion with the longer key arrangement being more natural. Second, the design of the B2 keyboard (separating keycaps of numerals and letters) made it easier for the users to find the required characters. The 3-mm gap between the numeral keycap and the letter keycap was large enough for humans to sense it because the threshold of two-point discrimination on a fingertip is 3 mm for young adults (Bowden and McNulty, 2012). Note that the majority of participants thought that the B2 keyboard was suitable for use in small devices, such as PDAs, due to faster typing speed.

It is difficult to evaluate the data input efficiency of new equipment because beginners (e.g., the slow typists in the current study) need a substantial amount of time for familiarization. Moreover, the miniaturized design of mobile devices makes it difficult to produce keycaps which contain the feeling of full-sized versions (i.e., conventional QWERTY keyboards). Although the present study provided less than 30 min of practice time, the typing speed of the miniature keyboards was very close to half of the speed on conventional keyboards (49.41 characters/min, additional test). Previous researchers (c.f., van Galen et al., 2007) have evaluated the effect of a vertical keyboard design on typing efficiency, and the participants were allowed 8 practice runs in two 30-min sessions. Their input speed approached the one attained with the conventional QWERTY keyboard, although it did not surpass the efficiency of a conventional QWERTY keyboard. Thus, they surmised that the vertical keyboard may provide greater ease of learning for slow typists, who require at least one hour of practice to achieve competence.

Although there was no significant difference among the four proposed keyboards, the accuracy for the square keycaps (B3 and B4) was greater than that for the rectangular keycaps (B1 and B2). The arrangement of the square keycaps was relatively unfamiliar for the participants; the users required more time to consider the locations of the elements on the keycaps, with the possible side effect of making them more careful.

In addition, it should be noted that there were no distinguishable symbols on the surface of the keycaps of the B1 keyboard, so the participants were unable to differentiate the two middle characters; this may have caused the B1 keyboard to receive an accuracy score lower than that of the B2 keyboard. A previous study reported that a physical keyboard is better than a touch screen for older people (Wright et al., 2000), so that it is essential for typists to have sufficient sensory input when they are typing. Additionally, in the interviews after the typing tests, most participants stated that they experienced frustration in trying to sense the two adjacent characters. Participants in the current study commented that when using the B4 keyboard, they could use the relations between letters and shapes of keycaps to help them distinguish locations of the desired characters.

The higher accuracy of square keycaps compared to rectangular ones in the present study supported the concept proposed by Fischer (Bürdek, 2005) that using surfaces with either convex or concave borders increases the ability of products to suggest their functions. More specifically, when using the corner keyboard to input the characters E and R, participants relied on the feeling of the sharp-edged shape on the top corner of keycaps to recognize the different locations of the characters, without needing to rely on visual assistance. Moreover, when inputting a sequence of characters on the same keycap (such as C and D), the units located on different parts of the keycaps helped typists to gain a sense of direction for typing. This sense of direction indicates that participants were using the relationship between the layout of the QWERTY keyboard and the character arrangements on the proposed keyboards to remember the locations of each character. Thus, the desired characters were easily found based on memory. Accordingly, the arrangement of the characters on the proposed keyboards and the cue implied by the shape of square keycaps enhanced the typing accuracy.

With respect to likability, the lower scores in the B3 keyboard compared to the B2 keyboard may have resulted from the locations of characters on the keycaps. The participants stated that the B3 keyboards were not easy to remember. The arrangement of characters on the B3 keyboard required users to think a lot, unlike those of the B4 type, which had a very clear up, down, left and right arrangement of the characters. It was evident that the oblique pattern was less accurately distinguished by human fingers than were the vertical and horizontal patterns (Kops and Gardner, 1996). Therefore, the smaller scores of likability in regard to the B3 keyboard are explained because the participants had to move their fingers in an oblique direction to reach the locations of the desired characters.

The level of personal typing ability led to inconsistent evaluations given by typists concerning the learnability of the four proposed keyboards. Clearly, the users had different preferences for the keyboards with regard to learnability. The learnability of the B1 keyboard was higher for the fast typists, who prefer the conventional configuration (the B1 keyboard is very similar to the QWERTY keyboard). However, the learnability of the B2 keyboard is affirmed preferentially by the slow typists. From the learnability scores, it can be surmised that typing ability is an important factor to take into consideration when designing keyboards. Because the slow typists have higher learnability scores for the B2 keyboard, the B2 keyboard might be the most suitable keyboard for beginners, while the B1 keyboard might be an appropriate keyboard for fast typists.

There was a limitation that should be acknowledged. The participants did not do realistic typing tests on the four proposed keyboards in this study. It is possible that realistic typing tests on proposed keyboards may yield different findings. Thus, a more thorough analysis of keyboard functionality is required in a future study.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Four miniature keyboards were proposed and tested by slow and fast typists. We evaluated the input speed, accuracy, comfort, likability and learnability on four miniature keyboards. The results showed that the separated linear keyboard contained the best proficiency speed, highest comfort and greatest user acceptance among the four keyboards. Moreover, the keyboards with square-shaped keycaps had better input accuracy than that with rectangular-shaped ones. The corner keyboard had better scores of likability than the edge keyboard because people are more comfortable with moving their fingers in vertical and horizontal patterns rather than in oblique patterns. Finally, the proposed keyboards were smaller than current keyboards, reducing the need for visual confirmation of a keycaps' location and the correct finger motions.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank Yu-Hsian Huang and En-Hung Wu from the Electrical Engineering Department of National Cheng Kung University for their assistance in the maintenance of the experimental keyboards used in the study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

