@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Dutch police officers' preparation and performance of their arrest and self-defence skills: A questionnaire study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Officers are unsatisfied with the training of their arrest and self-defence skills.


                        
                        
                           
                           More experienced officers are more critical towards the taught skills.


                        
                        
                           
                           More experienced officers reported better performance but less use of taught skills.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results plead for more training, reality-based practice, and teaching other skills.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Anxiety

Deliberate practice

Perceptual-motor performance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  We investigated how Dutch police officers perceive their preparation for arrest and self-defence skills (ASDS) and their ability to manage violence on duty. Furthermore, we assessed whether additional experience (i.e., by having encountered violence on duty or by practicing martial arts) and self-perceived anxiety have an influence on these perceptions. Results of an online questionnaire (n = 922) showed that having additional experience was associated with self-perceived better performance. Officers who experience anxiety more often, on the other hand, reported more problems. Although most officers report sufficiently effective performance on duty, they, especially those with additional experience, feel that training frequency is too low and that the currently taught ASDS are only moderately usable (at least with the current amount of training). Based on the results, we suggest that increasing officers' ASDS experience, teaching officers to perform with high anxiety, or reconsidering the taught skills, may be necessary to further improve performance of police officers on duty.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Although police work is largely sedentary (Anderson and Plecas, 2000), police officers occasionally have to deal with violence. Violence with which officers are confronted ranges from verbal threat to actual shoot-outs. Armed situations, especially handgun shootings, have already received considerable attention in the literature (Morrison and Vila, 1998; Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010, 2011; Oudejans, 2008). However, officers are more frequently confronted with unarmed physical violence (Timmer, 2005). For example, officers may be confronted with suspects who threaten them, resist arrest, or punch them. In these situations, officers have to perform with appropriate force without using a handgun. Over the past decades violence against police officers has steadily increased, resulting in more work-related injuries and higher recovery and replacement costs (Timmer and Pronk, 2011). At the same time, however, there is little information about officers' ability to adequately manage violence on duty or factors that may influence this ability. Against this background – and to open up new ways for improving police effectiveness – the current study investigated Dutch police officers' perceptions of their preparation and performance of arrest and self-defence skills (ASDS).

In preparation for violent situations, police officers in the Netherlands train a fixed set of arrest and self-defence skills ranging from techniques to control a suspect to actual combat techniques such as punching and kicking. For more threatening situations, officers have the option to use a short baton or pepper spray (cf. Nieuwenhuys et al., 2009). Dutch ASDS have been developed as part of a police assessment program on competences concerning violence control (Witzier, 2006). The motivation for this program is to ensure that officers have a certain level of competence in the line of duty. Each year, they have to pass an exam to be allowed to conduct active service. The exam consists of a theoretical test, a handgun shooting test, an ASDS test and a physical fitness test. Regarding ASDS, officers operate in pairs in which they have to execute prescribed skills on one or two colleagues. Besides the exam itself, officers receive two or three practice sessions per year, adding up to about 4 to 6 h of ASDS training per year (see Timmer and Pronk, 2011 for comparable situations in other EU countries).

Training ASDS for 4 to 6 h per year seems hardly sufficient to reach a high level of expertise (cf. Ericsson et al., 1993). Indeed, it is well-known that individuals need many hours of deliberate practice (Ericsson, 1996) and hundreds of thousands of repetitions (e.g., Crossman, 1959; Kottke, 1980) to become an expert in perceptual-motor skills. For instance, Ericsson et al. (1993) found that expert musicians spent about 25 h of practice a week (over ten years), whereas amateur musicians did not spend more than 2 h a week. Because Dutch ASDS training does not even reach 2 h a week, it seems that officers are not optimally prepared to manage violence on duty. Moreover, performing in violent situations is often accompanied by increased pressure (e.g., Anderson et al., 2002) whereas typical ASDS training sessions in the Netherlands take place under low-pressure circumstances. This discrepancy between circumstances on duty and during training makes it even harder (next to the low training frequency) for officers to perform effectively in high-pressure situations on duty. Indeed, several studies have shown that officers do not perform as well under high-pressure circumstances as they do under low-pressure (training) circumstances (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010; Renden et al., 2014).

Given the limited number of training hours as well as the difficulty of performing under pressure, it is worth investigating how experience (in performing ASDS) and anxiety are related to the perceived ability to perform effectively on duty. Insight into these issues may give leads to improve police training to better prepare officers for violence during their work. As no institution in the Netherlands has a systematic and conclusive overview of the use of legal force on duty (Timmer, 2005), we aimed to perform our study on a large scale to provide data based on officers' experiences from their work. Therefore, using an online questionnaire, we investigated police officers' perceptions of how well they feel prepared and able to manage violence on duty. We further explored the effects of i) additional experience with ASDS (e.g., obtained by encountering violence on duty or by practicing martial arts), and ii) how often officers experience anxiety in the line of duty (e.g., during the arrest of an aggressive suspect).

Officers may gain more experience with ASDS (or comparable skills) in other ways than in regular police training. For instance, officers gain experience when they frequently have to apply ASDS on duty. Or they could train comparable skills in martial arts (such as kickboxing or krav maga) during their leisure time. Because additional experience
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           In the remainder of the article, ‘additional experience’ refers specifically to: (a) experience with violent situations on duty; and (b) experience with martial arts. General working experience as a police officer (in years) is not included in this factor.
                         presumably leads to a higher level of skill (cf. Ericsson, 1996), we expect perceived real-life ASDS performance of officers with additional experience (on duty or martial arts) to be better than that of officers with no additional experience. Whether this is the case and whether officers with additional experience only apply the taught ASDS or also resort to alternative skills remains to be determined. Because officers receive limited practice, additional experience (on duty or martial arts) will often be greater than ASDS experience, which makes it plausible that officers might apply alternative skills rather than the fixed set of ASDS that is taught in police training. Thus, how Dutch officers perceive their ASDS training and how the assumed shortcomings in ASDS training become manifest on duty, could depend on the degree to which officers have additional experience.

ASDS situations are often accompanied by increased pressure, possibly leading to anxiety (Anderson et al., 2002). Anxiety has often been put forward as an important influential factor regarding how well officers perform in the line of duty (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010). Several experimental studies have found that officers performed worse in high-anxiety situations compared to low-anxiety situations concerning handgun shooting (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010, 2011: Nieuwenhuys et al., 2012; Oudejans, 2008) as well as execution of ASDS (e.g., Nieuwenhuys et al., 2009; Renden et al., 2014). However, whether these effects can also be observed in officers' perception of their actual performance on duty, remains to be verified.

Concerning situations that are potentially suitable for ASDS, officers may experience anxiety, for instance, during large fights, while arresting aggressive suspects (especially because of capricious behaviour of the suspect), or when acting without a partner (Anderson et al., 2002; Blijendaal, 2006). Given the established impact of anxiety on police officers' performance, how Dutch officers perceive their ASDS training and how the assumed shortcomings in ASDS training become manifest on duty, could depend on how often officers experience anxiety in the line of duty.

Officers train their ASDS (against non-lethal violence) very little and several experiments have shown that officers perform worse in high-pressure circumstances (as on duty) than they do in training circumstances (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010, 2011; Nieuwenhuys et al., 2009; Renden et al., 2014). This study aimed to investigate how these matters relate with officers' perceived ability to perform effectively on duty, with a large sample of officers with varying levels of experience (e.g., years, situations). Our first aim was to investigate police officers' perceptions of how well they feel prepared and able to manage violence on duty. Our second aim was to explore whether and how additional experience influences these perceptions. Our third aim was to investigate whether and how anxiety influences these perceptions.

On the basis of previous research, we had the following expectations. Regarding general attitude towards preparation and performance, we expected officers to be critical towards their preparation, especially towards the number of training hours (e.g., Witzier, 2006). Nevertheless, because officers are educated to perform at a certain level and they are generally able to perform their duties, we expected that they would still perceive their overall performance to be sufficiently effective. Furthermore, we expected that officers' perceived performance effectiveness would be positively influenced by additional experience (e.g., Ericsson, 1996), and that it would be negatively influenced by anxiety (e.g., Renden et al., 2014). In addition, we expected that more experienced officers
                           2
                        
                        
                           2
                           In the remainder of the article, we refer to officers with or without additional experience with violence or martial arts as more experienced officers and less experienced officers, respectively.
                         would report applying alternative skills (instead of the taught ASDS) more often than less experienced officers.

@&#METHODS@&#

To examine a large sample of officers with many levels of experience (e.g., years, situations), we obtained data about officers' performance-related experiences on duty, using a questionnaire that was distributed online. In our search for a representative sample of officers (i.e., as representative as possible within this study), we found four departments that were willing to distribute the questionnaire among their officers. These four departments are spread throughout the country covering different areas in the Netherlands (including large as well as smaller cities with officers of different ages, working experience and ranks). Consequently, our findings could not be interpreted as area or department specific. An implication (and possible limitation) of this method could be that we cannot rule out that there may be regional differences in, for instance, self-reported performance. However, such differences are beyond the scope of the current paper. As such, we would like to argue that this method gives us a more representative sample, and thus insight into perceptions of officers in the Netherlands than selecting one single department.

The questionnaire was made available online to respondents via a program called ‘eXamine’ (eXamine 2.0, eXamine BV, Amsterdam, the Netherlands). Potential respondents (officers) received an email with a link that gave them access to the questionnaire. In total, 922 police officers (742 men, 180 women), with a mean age of 41.4 years (SD = 10.9) and a mean working experience of 17.9 years (SD = 11.7), completed the questionnaire. A total overview of the characteristics is presented in Table 1
                      in the Results section. All data were collected anonymously.

In consultation with experienced police instructors, we developed a questionnaire that measured Dutch police officers' self-perceived preparation and skill in dealing with physical violence. The questionnaire contained three sections: ‘Descriptive information’, ‘Experience and anxiety’, and ‘ASDS preparation and skill’. The section ‘Descriptive information’ contained four questions concerning gender, age, working experience, and rank.

The section ‘Experience and anxiety’ contained three questions: ‘How often, until this moment, have you experienced violence during your career’, ‘Do you have experience with martial arts’, and ‘In violent situations, I experience anxiety’. Violence is defined by the Dutch police as any compulsive force exercised on people. Martial arts are traditions of combat practices such as kickboxing, karate, krav maga. To the questions concerning experience with violence and anxiety, respondents answered on a 5 point Likert-scale (1–5), with (1) ‘never’, (2) ‘sometimes’, (3) ‘regularly’, (4) ‘often’, (5) ‘very often’. To the question concerning experience with martial arts, respondents answered whether they had (1) ‘no experience’, (2) ‘experience from the past’, (3) or ‘current experience’.

The section ‘ASDS preparation and skill’ contained seven targeted constructs with in total 25 items and one open question. Table 2
                         in the Results section provides an overview of each of the items. Officers responded to the items on a 5-point Likert scale (1–5), with (1) ‘strongly disagree’, (2) ‘disagree’, (3) ‘neutral’, (4) ‘agree’ or (5) ‘strongly agree’. A brief discussion of the targeted constructs is presented below.

This construct contained six items about whether officers are satisfied with the skills that they are taught, how ASDS training is provided to them and the frequency of ASDS training. Example items are ‘I am satisfied with the current range of taught ASDS’ and ‘The frequency of ASDS trainings is sufficient to adequately apply ASDS in violent situations’ (see Table 2 in the Results section for a complete overview of the items).

This construct contained five items about whether officers actually apply the taught ASDS on duty and whether they feel they need these skills to perform effectively. Example items are ‘During violent situations, I only apply the taught ASDS’ and ‘During violent situations, I am able to perform effectively without applying the taught ASDS’.

This construct contained two items about whether officers feel they apply legal force too early or with more force than necessary (i.e., disproportionally). An example item is ‘After a violent situation, I have the feeling that I applied more legal force than necessary’.

This construct contained two items about whether officers feel they apply legal force too late or with less force than necessary. An example item is ‘After a violent situation, I have the feeling that I applied less legal force than necessary’.

This construct contained two items about whether officers feel they apply incorrect skills or whether they execute skills incorrectly. An example item is ‘After a violent situation, I have the feeling that I applied the wrong skills’.

This construct contained four items about whether officers feel they experience problems in violent situations, avoid violence or whether they are able to perform effectively. Example items are ‘During violent situations, I know what I am doing’ and ‘During violent situations, I experience problems’.

This construct contained four items about whether officers feel they would experience less anxiety or perform more effectively in violent situations if they would receive more (reality-based) training. Example items are ‘In case of more ASDS training, I will experience less anxiety during police work’ and ‘If training sessions become more reality-based, my ASDS performance in violent situations will improve’.

The questionnaire ended with an open question that asked how, if necessary, ASDS preparation could be improved.

For analysing our data, we examined the distribution of the additional experience and anxiety questions and calculated correlations between working experience and additional experience to check how these were related. Further, we performed factor analysis to confirm our targeted constructs, descriptive statistics to give insight in officers' general attitudes, Pearson correlations to investigate relations between additional experience and anxiety and the seven constructs, and regression analysis to investigate which factors predicted anxiety and performance effectiveness.

To investigate the officers' general attitude regarding preparation and performance, mean scores
                           3
                        
                        
                           3
                           We interpreted mean scores of 2.49 and lower as “disagree”, scores between 2.50 and 3.49 as “neutral”, and scores of 3.50 and higher as “agree”.
                        , medians and modes were calculated and reported concerning the 25 items. Concerning the answers towards the open question, the suggestions were categorized by one experimenter. A second person who was not involved in this study performed a reliability check by repeating the same procedure for statements of at least 10% of the respondents.

To investigate the role of experience and the role of anxiety, we calculated construct means. For that purpose, outcomes of negatively formulated statements were recoded to match the scores of the positively formulated statements (indicated with ‘a’ in Table 2). The items of constructs ‘problems with skill execution’, ‘overuse of legal force’ and ‘underuse of legal force’ were not recoded as the construct titles were negatively formulated per definition. Pearson's correlation coefficients were calculated using the construct means per participant as well as the factors ‘experience with violence’, ‘experience with martial arts’ and ‘feelings of anxiety’ leading to a ten-by-ten correlation matrix (see Table 3
                        ). Correlation coefficients r < .30, r ≥ .30 and r ≥ .50 were considered to have small, medium and large strength, respectively (Cohen, 1988).

In addition, we performed two regression analyses. We examined whether, and if so, how ‘experience with violence’, ‘experience with martial arts’, ‘gender’ and ‘age’, predicted the outcome variable ‘anxiety’. We also examined whether, and if so, how ‘experience with violence’, ‘experience with martial arts’, ‘feelings of anxiety’, ‘gender’ and ‘age’, predicted the outcome variable ‘performance effectiveness’. We choose to perform hierarchical multiple regression analyses to examine the additional predictive value of different elements of the regression models. At Step 1 in the model examining ‘anxiety’, we entered ‘experience with violence’ and ‘experience with martial arts’. At Step 2, we entered ‘gender’ and ‘age’. At Step 1 in the model examining ‘performance effectiveness’, we entered ‘experience with violence’ and ‘experience with martial arts’. At Step 2, we entered ‘anxiety’ and at Step 3, we entered ‘gender’ and ‘age’. The alpha level for significance was set at .05. Effect sizes were calculated using Cohen's ƒ2, with 0.02 or less, about 0.15 and 0.35 or more, representing small, moderate and large effects, respectively (Cohen, 1988).

@&#RESULTS@&#

A total overview of respondents' gender, age, working experience, ranks, additional experience, and how often they experienced anxiety in total, and per department, is presented in Table 1. This overview shows that generally, characteristics of respondents are comparable across departments.

Concerning experience with violence, on average, officers reported a score of 3.10 (see Table 1). The distribution of the answers was: never: 5.4%; sometimes: 19.4%; regularly: 44.5%; often: 21.6%; very often: 9.1%. Concerning experience with martial arts, 61.4% of the officers reported to have no experience, 29.7 reported to have experience from the past, and 8.9% reported to have current experience. Concerning anxiety, on average, officers reported a score of 3.55. The distribution of the answers was: never: 1.7%; sometimes: 8.2%; regularly: 29.1%; often: 46.3%; very often: 8.7%.

Pearson correlations showed that ‘working experience’ only showed a weak positive correlation with ‘experience with violence’ and a weak negative correlation with ‘experience with martial arts’, r = .18, p < .001, r = −.09, p < .05. These figures show that general working experience does not necessarily entail experience in using self-defence skills (e.g., either on duty or in performing martial arts).

As can be seen in Table 2, factor analysis confirmed our targeted constructs as separate dimensions. On the total collection of items (25), it yielded seven constructs with eigenvalues greater than 1.0, and these accounted for 64.05% of the variance. All 25 items showed Varimax rotation factor loadings and item-total correlations of 0.30 or more. Factor analysis further showed satisfactory Alpha coefficients: ASDS preparation: 0.81; ASDS use: 0.69; Overuse of legal force: 0.67; Underuse of legal force: 0.60; Problems with skill execution: 0.70; Performance effectiveness: 0.70; More frequent and more realistic training: 0.87. In short, these data show that the questionnaire indeed captured seven separate constructs and that each item within a construct sufficiently contributed to that construct and not to another. Furthermore, the data show that the items within a construct show sufficient coherence.

Officers reported average scores varying from 2.64 to 3.30 about the usefulness of the taught skills (Table 2, Item 1–3). Altogether, with average scores around 3, and the medians and modes of 3 (and one 4), it seems that on average, officers are neither positive nor negative about the usefulness of the taught skills. Furthermore, officers' answers concerning whether they are satisfied with the current method of how the ASDS training is provided show some ambiguity (Item 4, M = 2.88, Median = 3, Mode = 4). Although the mode implies that most officers agree with this statement, the median and average score imply that officers are divided concerning their satisfaction towards the current method of ASDS training. Finally, officers reported that they are unsatisfied with the frequency of training sessions (Item 5, M = 2.13, Median = 2, Mode = 1; Item 6, M = 2.22, Median = 2, Mode = 1).

Officers were neutral about whether they are able to apply the most suitable ASDS (Item 7, M = 2.91, Median = 3, Mode = 3), and reported that their execution in the line of duty is generally different than during training (Item 8, M = 3.58, Median = 4, Mode = 4). They further reported that they frequently apply alternative skills (Item 9, M = 3.66, Median = 4, Mode = 4) instead of the taught ASDS (Item 10, M = 2.25, Median = 2, Mode = 2). In addition, most officers indicated that they are able to perform effectively without applying the taught ASDS, although on average, officers reported a score closer to 3 than 4, indicating some diversity concerning this item (Item 11, M = 3.39, Median = 3, Mode = 4).

Officers reported that after violent situations, they do not have the feeling that they applied legal force too early (Item 12, M = 1.80, Median = 2, Mode = 2) or more than necessary (Item 13, M = 1.92, Median = 2, Mode = 2).

On average, officers reported that they are neutral on the feeling that they applied legal force too late (Item 14, M = 2.66, Median = 3, Mode = 2) or more than necessary (Item 15, M = 2.61, Median = 3, Mode = 3), indicating that they have no strong tendency to apply legal force too late or less than necessary.

On average, officers scored between 2 and 3 on the feeling that they applied the wrong skills (Item 16, M = 2.08, Median = 2, Mode = 2) and that they should have executed the skills better (Item 17, M = 2.50, Median = 2, Mode = 3). Thus overall, officers indicated that they do not have many problems executing their skills.

Officers reported that they are able to perform effectively in violent situations (Item 18, M = 3.79, Median = 4, Mode = 4), and that they know what they are doing (Item 19, M = 3.89, Median = 4, Mode = 4). They further indicated that they hardly experience problems during violent situations (Item 20, M = 2.08, Median = 2, Mode = 2) and that – overall – they have no tendency to avoid violent situations (Item 21, M = 2.20, Median = 2, Mode = 2).

Most officers indicated that anxiety would decrease if they would receive more training sessions, although on average, officers reported a score closer to 3 than 4, indicating some diversity concerning this item (Item 22, M = 3.19, Median = 3, Mode = 4). They were more positive towards the suggestion that feelings of anxiety would decrease if they would receive more reality-based training sessions (Item 23, M = 3.60, Median = 4, Mode = 4). They further indicated that they expect that their performance would benefit from more frequent (Item 24, M = 3.63, Median = 4, Mode = 4) and more reality-based training (Item 25, M = 4.06, Median = 4, Mode = 5).

489 of the 922 respondents answered the question about how ASDS preparation could be improved. A total of 735 suggestions were provided. These suggestions were categorized into the following categories: (1) ‘reality-based training’, including suggestions concerning the type of training, situations, and locations; (2) ‘more training’, including suggestions concerning the frequency of training sessions; (3) ‘learning alternative techniques’, including suggestions concerning the type of skills that are taught; and (4) ‘other answers’. A reliability check by repeating the same procedure for statements of fifty respondents showed a percentage of error between two raters of only 4.5%, indicating that categorization was reliable (Hughes et al., 2004). Results showed that 40.0% of the suggestions to improve ASDS preparation were related to ‘reality-based training’, 29.5% to ‘more training’, and 18.1% to ‘learning alternative techniques’. 12.4% of the suggestions were classified into the category ‘other answers’.

There were significant negative correlations between ‘experience with violence’ and: ‘ASDS preparation’, ‘ASDS use’, and ‘problems with skill execution’ (Table 3). In addition, there was a positive correlation between ‘experience with violence’ and ‘performance effectiveness’. Thus, officers with more experience with violence reported that they are more negative towards the regular ASDS preparation, make less use of regular ASDS, experience fewer problems with skill execution and perform more effectively in violent situation (see also Fig. 1
                           : for experience with violence, scores of 1 and 2 are taken together and presented as ‘sometimes’, scores of 3 as ‘regularly’ and scores of 4 and 5 as ‘often’).

There were negative correlations between ‘experience with martial arts’ and: ‘ASDS preparation’, ‘ASDS use’ and ‘problems with skill execution’. In addition, there was a positive correlation between ‘experience with martial arts’ and ‘performance effectiveness’. Thus, officers with more experience with martial arts reported that they are more negative about the regular ASDS preparation, make less use of regular ASDS, experience fewer problems with skill execution and perform more effectively in violent situations (see also Fig. 2
                           ).

There were positive correlations between ‘anxiety’ and: ‘overuse of legal force’, ‘underuse of legal force’, ‘problems with skill execution’ and ‘more frequent and more realistic training’. In addition, there was a negative correlation between ‘anxiety’ and ‘performance effectiveness’. Thus, officers who experience anxiety more often reported that they more often have the feeling that they applied the incorrect degree of force. They also reported that they experience more problems with skill execution and perform less effectively in violent situations. Furthermore, officers who experienced anxiety more often reported that they expect to benefit more from more frequent and more realistic training (see also Fig. 3
                           : for anxiety, scores of 1 and 2 are taken together and presented as ‘sometimes’, scores of 3 as ‘regularly’ and scores of 4 and 5 as ‘often’).

There was a positive correlation between ‘ASDS preparation’ and ‘ASDS use’. Officers who are more positive towards ASDS preparation report that they apply them more often. In addition, there was a negative correlation between ‘ASDS use’ and ‘performance effectiveness’ and there were positive correlations between ‘ASDS use’ and: ‘problems with skill execution’ and ‘more frequent and more realistic training’. Thus, officers who make more use of ASDS (as opposed to alternative skills) reported that they experience more problems with skill execution, perform less effectively and expect to benefit from more frequent and more realistic training. ‘Problems with skill execution’ and ‘performance effectiveness’ were negatively correlated. Furthermore, ‘problems with skill execution’ was positively and ‘performance effectiveness’ was negatively correlated with: ‘overuse of legal force’, ‘underuse of legal force’ and ‘more frequent and more realistic training’. Finally, ‘overuse of legal force’ and ‘underuse of legal force’ were positively correlated and both variables were positively correlated with ‘more frequent and more realistic training’. Thus, officers who report to overuse or underuse force in the line of duty, reported that they expect to benefit more from more frequent and more realistic training.

The included variables ‘experience with violence’, ‘experience with martial arts’, ‘gender’ and ‘age’, did not predict any of the variance regarding ‘anxiety’, with F(5,858) = 0.65, p = .66.

The included variables, ‘experience with violence’, ‘experience with martial arts’, ‘anxiety’, ‘gender’ and ‘age’, accounted in total for 20% of the variance regarding ‘performance effectiveness’, F(6,856) = 34.83, p < .001, ƒ2 = .25 (Table 4
                           ). Experience of officers accounted for 11% of the variance, anxiety of officers for 5% and officers' characteristics (age and gender) for the remaining 4%. As illustrated in Table 4, the regression coefficient (B) of ‘experience with violence’ was .17, which indicates that for each increase of 1 on the Likert scale, the performance effectiveness score (1–5) increased by .17. In cases where officers had previous experience in martial arts, performance effectiveness score increased by .16 and by .29 if they had present experience in martial arts. The regression coefficient of ‘anxiety’ was −.17, which indicates that for each increase of 1 on the Likert scale, the performance effectiveness score decreased by .17. In comparison to their male colleagues, female officers' performance effectiveness score was .21 lower. Finally, the regression coefficient of ‘age’ was −.01, which indicates that for each increase of 1 year, the performance effectiveness score decreased by .01. Thus, officers with additional experience perceive their performance effectiveness as higher than officers with no additional experience. Anxiety and age have a negative influence on perceived performance effectiveness. Finally, female officers perceive their performance effectiveness as lower than male officers.

The current study investigated Dutch police officers' perceptions of their preparation and performance of arrest and self-defence skills. We further explored whether additional experience (on duty or martial arts) and anxiety influence these perceptions.

Our first aim was to investigate how well officers feel prepared and able to manage violence on duty. Given the limited number of training hours and the indications that officers seem critical towards their training (Witzier, 2006), we expected officers to be critical towards their preparation, especially towards the number of training hours. Still, because officers are educated to perform at a certain level, we expected them to feel able to perform sufficiently in violent situations. Our results mostly confirm these hypotheses. Officers indeed felt that the current amount of training is too low, which was also confirmed by the open answers about how ASDS preparation could be improved: 29.5% of the answers indicated a wish for more training. In addition, officers indicated that they expect that their performance would benefit from more frequent training. Officers seemed neither clearly positive nor clearly negative about the usefulness of the ASDS. Still, officers reported that they regularly apply alternative skills instead of the regular ASDS. Whether this is the case because officers simply did not train enough to master these skills or because the skills are only moderately usable is not clear. However, 17% of the answers to the open question indicated a wish for learning additional techniques which implies that the current set of ASDS is perceived as not entirely sufficient to deal with violence on duty. In addition, officers who more often use the ASDS reported lower performance effectiveness. Concerning how ASDS training is provided, officers seemed a bit more positive. Still, 40% of the answers to the open question indicated a wish for more realistic training, and officers indicated that they expect that their performance would benefit from more reality-based training. Thus it seems that officers are not dissatisfied with the current method, but that receiving more realistic training would appear more beneficial to them.

Although these results indicate that several forms of improvement are warranted, officers did indicate that they: were generally able to apply the correct degree of legal force, do not have many problems with skill execution and thus, perform sufficiently effectively in violent situations. The limited objective information that is available about actual ASDS use on duty confirm our results (Timmer, 2005). Naeyé (2005) found that in 10% of the reported cases with violence, one or more officers got injured. Concerning overuse of violence by police officers, Timmer (2005) found that, on average, Dutch Public Prosecution judges 13% of the cases of the use of police force as unjustified. Thus, although officers seem generally able to perform effectively and use force proportionally, there appears to be substantial room for improvement. In fact, longitudinal data shows that the number of injured officers in 2005 was almost four times higher than in 1975 (Timmer, 2007).

Our second aim was to explore whether and how additional experience influences how officers feel prepared and able to manage violence on duty. Based on the limited number of training hours that officers receive, we expected more experienced officers to be more positive about their performance effectiveness than less experienced officers. In addition, we expected that more experienced officers would report applying alternative skills (instead of the taught ASDS) more often than less experienced officers. Our results confirmed these hypotheses. First, more experienced officers reported better skill execution and performance effectiveness than less experienced officers. Second, more experienced officers more often applied alternative skills (other than the taught ASDS). Whether this is the case because officers with martial arts experience train their combat skills more than their ASDS skills and therefore rely more on this type of skills is not clear. Officers with more experience with violence (and not necessarily with martial arts) also reported that they apply alternative skills more often. Furthermore, more experienced officers reported that they are less satisfied with the current range of ASDS than less experienced officers. These results are another indication that the current ASDS may have moderate usefulness on duty.

Our third aim was to explore whether and how anxiety influences how officers feel prepared and able to manage violence on duty. Based on experimental studies that investigated effects of threat and anxiety on police officers' execution professional skills (i.e., arrest and self-defence, shooting; Renden et al., 2014; Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010), we expected that anxiety would negatively affect officers' perceived performance effectiveness. Our results confirm this hypothesis. Officers who more often experienced anxiety reported lower scores on applying the correct degree of legal force, on skill execution, and on performance effectiveness. Thus, findings from this questionnaire with a large and representative sample of officers confirm earlier experimental findings with smaller samples (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2010), showing that anxiety negatively affects police performance. Note that we also found that anxiety is experienced among all officers, regardless of experience, gender or age. In addition, officers who experienced anxiety more often expect to benefit from more frequent and more realistic training.

Our results indicate that improvements in police training are warranted, for instance, to decrease the number of injured officers or the number of cases that are labelled as unjustified police force. Our hierarchical multiple regression analyses showed that increasing officers' experience is the largest potential contributor in increasing performance effectiveness on duty. Further, anxiety was shown to be the largest negative contributor of performance effectiveness. Finally, it appeared that gender and age play a role in performance effectiveness. Future research is needed to investigate how the latter affects police performance. Thus, ASDS preparation could be improved by increasing experience and by creating the experience of anxiety. Our results indicate three possible variables to improve police training: (a) frequency of training (experience), (b) realistic training (anxiety), and (c) usefulness of ASDS (anxiety).

First, officers could receive more training, to increase their experience. Literature on deliberate practice makes clear that it takes many hours of practice to become an expert (e.g., Ericsson, 1996) and to learn to execute a skill automatically (cf. Bernstein, 1996; Beilock and Carr, 2001). During police work, automatic execution would enable officers to act quickly and to leave attention free to deal with situational demands such as high pressure.

Second, officers could receive more realistic training, to specifically improve performance under high levels of pressure and anxiety (Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2011). Several studies have found that how individuals train is crucial in skill acquisition (e.g., Duke et al., 2009; Van Rossum, 2000; Ward et al., 2007). Future research is needed to determine whether such training would lead to similar, positive effects for ASDS in high-pressure circumstances (see also Oudejans, 2008; Oudejans and Pijpers, 2009, 2010 for positive effects of training under pressure).

Third, officers could learn techniques that are more effective in violent situations, and easier to apply under pressure, so that skills that are practiced are also used more consistently on duty
                           4
                        
                        
                           4
                           The techniques we refer to are fight and control techniques. Handcuffing, also part of the ASDS, is a specific police skill and is mostly performed when officers have gained control over the suspect.
                        . Officers with more experience with violence, but not necessarily with martial arts, reported that they apply the taught ASDS less often and, instead, relied more on alternative skills. Therefore, it may be better to teach officers more basic reflex-like self-defence moves (see Bernstein, 1996; Beek, 2000, for a theoretical account supporting this suggestion). Whether such skills are better learned in little time and usable for police officers (under pressure) remains to be determined.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

There were several limitations to this study. First, with respect to the interpretation of our findings, it is important to note that the current study used a questionnaire asking for officers perceptions of their ASDS preparation and performance. As such, we did not determine, for example, actual ‘experience with violence’, ‘ASDS use’, ‘performance effectiveness’. Although we expect that officers truthfully answered the questions, we do not know whether police officers perceptions fully match reality. Still, our results are in line with experimental studies concerning skill acquisition (e.g., Ericsson et al., 1993) and performing and training under pressure (e.g., Nieuwenhuys and Oudejans, 2011; Renden et al., 2014).

Second, this study investigated officers' experiences concerning their general ASDS performance on duty. Consequently, it is not possible to draw conclusions on specific skills (e.g., fighting techniques, handcuffing). Further, it is not possible to discriminate between several aspects of police work such as execution of motor skills, communication, and posture. Future work is needed to provide more detailed insights into the relationships between police officers' experience, anxiety, and performance on different (aspects of) arrest- and self-defence skills.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Our results showed that having additional experience was associated with better performance. Officers who experienced anxiety more often, on the other hand, reported more problems. Although most officers report sufficiently effective performance, they, especially those with additional experience, feel that training frequency is too low and they reported that the currently taught ASDS are only moderately useful (at least with the current amount of training). As such, ASDS training may need reconsideration. First, officers' experience would increase when they receive more training sessions. Second, quality of training is likely to improve when they are more comparable to the high-pressure situations that officers face in the line of duty (including realistic scenarios with actors, threat of pain [e.g., electrical knife; Renden et al., 2014]). Third, the currently used skills seem to be only moderately useful (at least with the current amount of training) in the line of duty. We suggest to consider teaching officers more basic reflex-like skills that may be easier to learn and execute in real-life situations. These suggestions could help to further improve police performance and reduce risk of injury.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This study was funded by The Police Research Program of the Netherlands (www.politieenwetenschap.nl) (PW/OC/2010/6b). The authors would like to thank Gerard Willemsen and the directors of the police training centres in Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Enschede and Kerkrade for their help in this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

