@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Survey of Korean pedestrians' natural preference for walking directions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The majority of pedestrians preferred walking on the right side, regardless of the location.


                        
                        
                           
                           No significant differences were found in the preferred walking direction by age or gender.


                        
                        
                           
                           Significant discrepancies in the preferred walking direction depending on pedestrians'dominant hand and foot exist.


                        
                        
                           
                           Left-handed and footed pedestrians are more likely to the Left-hand Traffic rules, while right-handed and footed are on the right side.


                        
                        
                           
                           The dominant hand appears to have a greater impact on the pedestrian's preferred walking direction than the dominant foot.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Walking direction

Pedestrian

Hand dominance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The primary objective of this study was to investigate the stereotypes of Koreans regarding preferred walking directions when encountering various public walking facilities, and to provide useful information to pedestrians and traffic policy legislators. To this end, this study was conducted in two phases. In the first phase, we conducted observational research on pedestrians' walking directions in ten different situations. In the second phase, six hundred Korean male and female subjects were selected to investigate the various statistics about their preferred walking directions and their employment characteristics in diverse walking facilities. The results showed that 59.3% abided by the Left-side Traffic rule while 40.7% abided by the Right-side rule. On the contrary, 73.7% of respondents showed preferences to the Right-side Traffic rule. Moreover, right-handed people showed strong tendencies to walk on the right side of the road and vice versa, hence suggesting that the direction people naturally prefer in walking should be a crucial determinant when regulating traffic policies.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Facing Traffic, or Bidirectional Traffic, indicates the roads that allow two or more pedestrians to face each another while walking in opposite directions. The opposite of Facing Traffic is One-way Traffic. Facing Traffic encompasses two types of rules, Right-hand Traffic (RHT) and Left-hand Traffic (LHT), which depends on the traffic regulations of the sovereign country. According to Lucas (2012) and McGregor (2011), 66% of the world's population has adopted Right-hand Traffic, while 34% observes Left-hand Traffic. Of all the existing roads around the world, 72% of them have adopted the Right-hand Traffic rules, while 28% employ the Left-hand Traffic rules.

It was not until 2010 that the Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs of Korea (MLTMAK, 2011) amended walking regulations from Left- to Right-side Traffic rules in order to increase pedestrian safety and convenience and to be inline with global walking customs. Before the amendment, Article 13 Section 3 of the Korean Road Traffic Act stated that “You must operate your vehicles and horses on the right side of the center of the road (on the right side of the median line in cases where a median line is drawn on the road)” and Article 8 Section 2 stipulated that “Pedestrians shall walk on the left side of the road or along the wayside on roads where there is no separate sidewalk area.” Therefore, in the case of Korea, the regulations on traffic directions of automobiles and pedestrians were stipulated differently.

After careful consideration of information acquired through survey responses and research results conducted by experts from various fields, including the findings from the current study, the MLTMAK decided to amend the walking regulations on 1 July 2010. As 34% of the world's population resides in countries that still stipulate Left-side Traffic rules (Lucas, 2012; McGregor, 2011), the current study on walking directions prospects to serve as a landmark for other countries to take into account.

Reports have shown different transport directions of pedestrians and transportation modes regulated by different countries. Table 1
                      indicates that pedestrians in Korea and Germany abide by the Left-hand Traffic rules while the rest of the countries have adopted the Right-hand Traffic rule. Additionally, it is shown that transport directions of pedestrians and automobiles remain different in some of the listed countries. Although countries including the United States, China, Sweden and Taiwan stipulate for a unified transport direction, countries such as Korea, Great Britain, Germany, Japan and Singapore appear to encompass inconsistent transport directions. Moreover, not only do the countries that require automobiles to be driven on the right side adopt walking on the right side, such as in the United States, Sweden and China, but countries that stipulate that automobiles should use the left side of the road also have adopted pedestrians walking on the right side. Regarding revolving doors, the countries that require driving on the right side generally have doors revolving counterclockwise (access on the right side) and vice versa, although this has not been shown to be universally applied (Beadmore, 2000; Lucas, 2012).

According to Article 9 Section 1 of The United Nations Convention on Road Traffic (Geneva, 19 September 1949), “All vehicular traffic proceeding in the same direction on any road shall keep to the same side of the road, which shall be uniform in each country for all roads”, stressing the necessity for consistency in moving direction. In some countries such as the United States and Canada, where each state or province has its own legislature, different states may have different road rules, but in general they tend to not differ much. For example, no significant discrepancies across the states have been shown in the U.S. since traffic-related state rules and laws conform to the Uniform Vehicle Code (UVC) stipulated by the National Committee on Uniform Traffic Laws and Ordinances.

However, certain areas in Canada, France, Island, Italy, Portugal, Great Britain, Spain and the United States have also shown exceptional cases where such laws were not properly regulated (Kincaid, 1986; Lucas, 2012). Cases in Korea have shown to be even more complicated. While the national railroads built during the Japanese colonial period stipulate Left-hand Traffic rules, subways that have been constructed since the modernization period under the heavy influences from Western cultures, especially the United States, have adopted the Right-hand Traffic rules. The inconsistent traffic direction rules across transportation modes have caused public confusion, indicating potential problems emerging amidst the effort to construct a connecting line between the Right-hand subways and the Left-hand railroad systems.

There has been little research on the effects of pedestrians' walking directions. Reviewing the scant research on such subject, Gipps and Marksjo (1985) presented a model for the interactions between pedestrians, which was intended for the use of graphical computer simulation. Helbing (1991) simulated on computers that the movements of pedestrians are supposed to show certain regularities, which can be best described by an algorithm for the individual behavior. This behavior is assumed to be determined by an intended velocity, by several attractive and repulsive effects and by fluctuations. The movement of pedestrians is dependent on decisions, which have the purpose of optimizing their behavior and can be explicitly modeled. In other words, previous studies have focused on pedestrians' behaviors and interactions between pedestrians based on computer simulations or a mathematic model. Ergonomics studies, such as those conducted by Johansson and Rumar (1968), Owens et al. (1994), and Shinar (1984, 1985), have especially focused on the visibility. Finnis and Walton (2008) and Kretz et al. (2006) have focused on the effects of pedestrian walking speeds. Kretz et al. (2006) conducted a pedestrian counterflow experiment in a corridor. The participants were divided into two groups of varying size and walked in opposite directions through a corridor. The video footage taken during the experiment was used to evaluate the passing times, walking speeds, fluxes and lane formations, and symmetry breakings within a corridor. Their results included that the increment of counterflow percentage affected the time, speed and flux factors in various experimental situations.

Although some research has been conducted in relation to pedestrians, studies have lacked in examinations of walking directions and pedestrians' natural preferences. Lucas (2012, p. 18) states that “most people are right-handed, which leads to a natural tendency to favor one side of the road or another depending on the means of transportation being used.” As demonstrated in Table 1, the majority of the listed countries have unified the direction automobiles and pedestrians ought to observe. In fact, many countries including the United States, Canada, Sweden, Austria and Great Britain, have adopted the Right-side Traffic policies as their fundamental walking directions in consideration of the greater percentage of right-handed people. Therefore, even in Korea, where current walking rules conform to the Left-side Traffic policy, revolving doors, airport entrances and exits, moving walks, escalators and subway turnstiles move to the right, abiding by the international standards. However, people who are accustomed to the “People to the left, automobiles on the right” rule, which has been instructed since elementary traffic rule education, tend to feel perplexed when exposed to facilities that move towards the right. This is due to the inconsistencies between the left-side walking stipulations and right-side entries and exists, hence causing confusion between incoherent traffic lines. Especially, as people are accustomed to walking on the left side in subway alleys, when they approach subway turnstiles, frequent collisions occur between pedestrians walking from opposite sides. Therefore, as inconveniences caused by clashing into approaching pedestrians emerge due to the inconsistent walking rules, unifying traffic rules would not only prevent confusion between traffic lines but also are expected to increase walking speeds.

Although accidents caused by confusion resulting from the inconsistencies between walking and driving directions generally are not fatal, such problems tend to cause inconveniences in people's daily lives. Especially, in the event of urgent circumstances such as conflagration accidents in small alleys, consistent walking rules are imperative for prompt evacuation. Therefore, standardizing pedestrians' walking directions by regulation is of paramount importance, and its stipulations ought to reflect different transportation modes, human expectations and population stereotypes, hence leading to the necessities of further research on such topics.

The current study was conducted in two phases in 2009, one year prior to the amendment of walking direction regulations. The first phase included observational research of 1000 Korean pedestrians to examine walking characteristics of today's pedestrians towards public walking facilities in 10 different situations. In the second phase, survey questionnaires were distributed to six hundred Korean people sub-divided according to gender and affiliated age groups, in order to administer statistical analysis in relation to walking directions and examine pedestrians' preferred walking direction, depending on the locations and facilities. Additionally, subjective opinions and feedback were asked regarding the proposed change in walking regulations, depending on human characteristics including dominant hand and foot. Therefore, the current study attempted to examine the drawbacks of the left-side walking rules stipulated at the time of the research and to further provide recommendations on traffic law improvements in relation to walking rules by illuminating safer and more convenient alternatives, basing information on what people prefer according to their physical and psychological characteristics.

In the first phase of the study 1000 Korean pedestrians were observed in order to investigate their walking characteristics in public walking facilities. 50 people were randomly selected for observation in each of the two similar observation sites for 10 different situations, regardless of age or gender. The ten different situations were walking on pedestrian-only roads, walking on non-distinguished roadways and sidewalks, using crosswalks, walking the corridors in public buildings, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, entering buildings though entrances, exiting buildings through exits, entering elevators, and exiting elevators. In the second phase, to examine the pedestrians' natural preferences for walking directions, a total of 600 respondents participated. The respondents' ages varied from 12 to 83, and the average ages (standard deviation) are shown in Table 2
                        . Six hundred respondents were subdivided into six age groups through quota sampling (i.e., 10s, 20s, 30s, 40s, 50s and over 60 years), with 50 male and 50 female subjects in each age group. For example, age group ‘10s’ included 100 respondents of 50 males and 50 females from ages 10 to 19, ‘20s’ included 100 respondents of 50 males and 50 females from ages 20 to 29, and so on. In order to minimize research bias on population stereotype examination, locations for subject selections were not limited to any particular places. Instead, the survey was conducted at different places even for the same or similar facilities. Locations in metropolitan cities were selected for their convenient public facilities and public transportation systems which were used by a number of people.

In the first phase of the study, which was to observe pedestrians' dispositions, two similar observation sites were selected for each of the ten different situations in public walking facilities listed in the previous section. Two groups of field researchers were paired up for each observation site to fill in the checkboxes, unnoticed by the pedestrians who were being observed. The check sheet included two checkboxes, right or left walking directions. In order to establish inter-observer reliability when a pedestrian walked somewhat along the middle of the road, the observation was recorded only when the two observers agreed which side of the road the pedestrian walked on or when he or she walked to the right or left side of the road in order to avoid collision with another pedestrian who was walking in the opposite direction. A total of 1000 pedestrians were observed, 50 at each location, regardless of age or gender. The observation was conducted for ten days and the observation time was set at 10:00 a.m. to avoid any external effects such as rush hour.

In the second phase of the study, where surveys were conducted on walking direction preference, face-to-face, one-on-one surveys with the respondents were conducted to minimize response errors. In order to reduce carry-over effects, different field researchers and pedestrians from those in the first phase of the study participated in the surveys. Each individual survey began with a brief explanation to the respondents of the study objectives, the survey method and procedures involved, and the non-disclosure rule of personal information including names. Consent was obtained from each respondent prior to starting the survey questions. To conduct the survey, field researchers first filled in the gender checkboxes in the data collection sheet. Respondents were then asked about their age and their dominant hand and foot. There were three dominant hand options for the respondents to choose from: right-handed, left-handed, or ambidextrous; and two dominant foot options, right or left. Their answers were taken without further informal observations. Then, they were asked about their preferred walking direction (right/left) in using ten different public walking facilities as specified in the ‘Subject’ section. They were also asked about their preferred standing side when moving through escalators and moving walks. The field researchers filled in the checkboxes for each answer. The questionnaires also included two open-ended questions: One was ‘should there be a unified rule for walking directions, and if so, which side do you think it should be?’ and the other asked for respondents' opinions and feedback on the proposition of amendment in walking directions from left to right, proposed by the MLTMAK, local governments and civil rights movement.

In order to analyze the data for current dispositions and preferred walking directions, descriptive and inferential statistical analyses such as the Chi-squared test, the ANOVA, and the paired t-test were administered to examine the relationships between walking characteristics and age, gender, and dominant hand and foot. The level of significance was set at 5% for all statistical analyses.

@&#RESULTS@&#

As demonstrated in Table 3
                        , 59.3% of the 1000 pedestrians who were observed in the first phase of the study walked on the left side, while 40.7% walked on the right.

As shown in Table 4
                        , of the six hundred respondents in the second phase of the study, 64.9% preferred walking on the right side across different walking locations, supporting the implementation of Right-side Traffic rules (Table 4). As for the preferred walking direction in different locations by gender, no statistical significance was found from the Chi-squared test (p > .05).

Besides the statistical analysis on walking directions by gender, each age group was also analyzed to investigate any patterns or characteristics among the stratification variables. The results showed that all age groups preferred walking on the right in all locations, as shown in Table 5
                        .

As for the preferred walking direction in different locations by age group, no statistical significance was found from the Chi-squared test, same as walking characteristics by gender, except for the roads with no boundaries between roadways and sidewalks (p = .019).

Of the six hundred respondents who participated in the current research, 460 (76.7%) were right-handed, 63 (10.5%) left-handed and 77 (12.8%) ambidextrous. Analyzed by gender and age group, males were relatively more prone to be left-handed or ambidextrous, while females were more likely to be right-handed. However, no significant discrepancies were found across different age groups. The results from the ANOVA test showed no statistical significance for gender (p = .073), age (p = .487), or interaction effects (p = .416).

Of the 92 (15.3%) left-footed respondents, the number of males was 56 (9.3%), relatively higher than that of females, 36 (6.0%), similar to the tendencies found in dominant hands. The results from the Chi-squared tests also showed a significant effect (p = .023). Nonetheless, the differences of dominant foot by age group were not significant. The results from the ANOVA test did not show significant effects of age groups (p = .508) or interaction effects between gender and age group (p = .174).

In regard to pedestrians' preferences depending on their dominant hand, Table 6
                         shows that of all the survey respondents, 5.7% were left-handed and preferred walking on the left side, which was higher percentage than the 4.8% who were left-handed and preferred walking on the right side. In other words, 54.3% of the left-handed preferred walking on the left side while 45.7% of the left-handed preferred walking on the right side. As for the ambidextrous respondents, 4.3% of the respondents, or 33.6% of the ambidextrous, preferred walking on the left, significantly lower than the 8.5% of the respondents, or 66.4% of the ambidextrous, who preferred the right side. Not surprisingly, 51.6% of the respondents who were right-handed, or 67.3% of the right-handed, preferred walking on the right side, significantly higher than the 25.1%, or 32.7% of the right-handed, who preferred the left side.

Similar to the findings about the dominant hand, of all the survey respondents, 7.9% were left-footed and preferred walking on the left side, slightly higher than the 7.4% who were left-footed and preferred walking on the right side. In other words, 51.6% of the left-footed preferred walking on the left side whereas 48.3% of the left-footed preferred walking on the right side. As found in right-handed respondents, 57.5% of the respondents that were right-footed (or 32.1% of the right-footed) preferred walking on the right side, twice of the 27.2% of the respondents (or 67.9% of total right-footed) who were right-footed and preferred walking on the left side.

The results from the Chi-squared test for the effects of the dominant hand and foot in different locations are shown in Table 6. The dominant hand showed statistical significance in all selected locations, except for crossroads, whereas the dominant foot was significant in all selected locations except for crossroads, walking downstairs and exiting elevators.

Of the six hundred respondents surveyed, regardless of the walking locations, 158 (26.3%) preferred walking on the left side while 442 (73.7%) preferred the right side (Table 7
                        ).


                        Table 8
                         shows the relationships between the dominant hand and foot and their effects on walking directions. The results indicate that the combinations of the left dominant hand with the left dominant foot (7.7%), ambidextrous with the right dominant foot (10%), or the right dominant hand with the right dominant foot (72%) were higher than the other way around. Regarding the preferred walking direction, respondents preferred walking on the right side (56%) except for those with left dominant hand and foot (4.3%).

Of the six hundred respondents in the current research, 411 (68.5%) supported the shift to the Right-side Traffic policy.

Roads that do not indicate traffic directions or post signs commonly found in walking trails and riverside sidewalks are prone to cause transport inconveniences among joggers, bikers and in-line skaters. The current study surveyed different sports groups and clubs in order to examine their preferred moving direction. Results suggested that in-line skater club members preferred Right-side Traffic rules, while biking club members were riding on the right side, as stipulated by Article 2 Section 16 of the traffic law that states bicycles by definition are included in the ‘vehicle’ category, and are therefore required to abide by the Right-side Traffic policies. Joggers also advocated the Right-side Traffic rules, while climbers did not show a particular preference, as mountains drastically differ from lands in that unified left/right walking rules are not as applicable because walking directions could alternate depending on the other climbers coming from the opposite direction and the location of the ropes the climbers hold onto.

The current research observed 1000 Korean pedestrians, whose walking directions were observed. An additional six hundred respondents participated in a survey that examined their preferred walking direction at different public facilities commonly used on a daily basis. The following are a summary of the findings in this study.
                           
                              (1)
                              Before the amendment, the majority of pedestrians walked on the left side.

The majority of pedestrians preferred walking on the right side, regardless of the location.

No significant differences were found in the preferred walking direction by age or gender.

Significant discrepancies in the preferred walking direction depending on pedestrians' dominant hand and foot exist, with left-handed and footed pedestrians more inclined to the Left-hand Traffic rules, while right-handed and footed are more likely to walk on the right side. Additionally, the dominant hand appears to have a greater impact on the pedestrian's preferred walking direction than the dominant foot.

When asked for feedback on the proposed unification of walking directions, respondents expressed their preference for the Right-hand Traffic rules.

Regarding the current proposition to change walking directions from left to right, advocates outnumbered those in opposition, and younger generations (10s–20s) showed greater support towards the amendment.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Facilities, environments, devices and tools are supposed to be designed in such a way that they can be used conveniently and be easily assembled, built and installed with no confusion involved in the process of their usage. In order to accomplish this usability objective, it is imperative to thoroughly understand the frequent errors involved in using such instruments and to examine the user's expectations and preferences involved in their usages.

The main objective of this study was thus to investigate the stereotypes of Koreans regarding the preferred walking direction when encountering various public walking facilities and provide useful information to pedestrians and traffic policy legislators. The following are the discussions on the results of the study and their implications.

The greater percentage of walking on the left is inferred due to the education commonly received at school and social traffic safety policies that had stressed the Left-side Traffic rules since 1921. However, regarding the walking directions according to the location, more pedestrians walked on the right side rather than on the left in walking on crossroads, walking upstairs and entering entrance doors. Such particular preferences to walk on the right side at crossroads, in spite of the country's traffic stipulations to walk on the left side, can be explained due to what the National Police Agency of Korea (2003) had recommended since March, 1993, because pedestrians on crossroads can reduce the danger of being hit by an on-coming car on the right side of the road. Meanwhile, the results regarding walking upstairs or entering building entrances seem to indicate that as a majority of people are righthanded, they prefer walking on the right side in those locations in order to hold onto staircase railings and doorknobs with their right hand.

Subsequent to the findings examined in this paper, another survey was conducted in March 2012. An additional 1000 pedestrians were observed, approximately one and a half years after the regulation was changed in July 2010, to investigate the changes in walking directions of the pedestrians since the regulation change. Exactly the same method, procedure and observing locations were employed as in the previous observation (before the regulation change). The results revealed that 72.4% of the 1000 pedestrians observed walked on the right side, compared to 40.7% in the previous observation. Looking into the ten specific situations, the new percentages showed: pedestrian-only walking on roads (77.5%), using non-distinguished roadways and sidewalks (65.3%), using crosswalks (74.2%), walking the corridors in public buildings (71.1%), walking upstairs (77.6%), walking downstairs (65.8%), entering buildings though entrances (74.4%), exiting buildings through exits (75.2%), entering elevators (70.5%) and exiting elevators (72.5%). Compared to the previous results, these figures show that the majority pedestrians abided by the newly established rules although 1 in 4 still did not. It can be inferred that the results were due to the government's ongoing publicity and the majority of right-handed peoples' natural preference.

64.9% of the respondents preferred walking on the right side across different walking locations, supporting the implementation of Right-side Traffic rules. It appears that despite the compulsory obligation to walk on the left side at the time the study was conducted, the actual preferred walking direction for the pedestrians was on the right side.

When analyzed by gender, although slight differences between males and females were found in preference for walking direction depending on walking locations, they did not reach the statistical significance level. Therefore, the gender factor is not a major consideration in establishing rules for walking direction.

Besides the statistical analysis on walking direction by gender, each age group was also analyzed to investigate any patterns or characteristics among the stratification variables. The results indicated that all age groups preferred walking on the right in all locations.

As to the preferred walking direction in different locations by age group, no statistical significances were found from the Chi-squared test, as for walking characteristics by gender, except for the roads with no boundaries between roadways and sidewalks (p = .019). Therefore, the age group factor cannot be a major consideration in establishing rules for walking direction either.

It has been argued that human sensory and behavioral dispositions differ according to one's dominant hand, foot and eye (Augustyn and Peters, 1986; Brown and Taylor, 1988). While small differences exist across different ethnic backgrounds, approximately 90% of human population is right-handed (Barsley, 1970; Previc and Saucedo, 1991). According to the Gallup Korea (2004) research results, 4% of Koreans are left-handed, 8% are ambidextrous and the remaining 88% are right-handed, while Jung and Jung (2009) stated that 5.8% are left-handed, 7.9% ambidextrous and 86.3% right-handed. However, in this study, 76.7% of the respondents, a lower than expected portion, were shown to be right-handed.

In regard to pedestrians' preferences for walking direction depending on their dominant hand, the results suggest that dominant hands play a significant role in determining the natural preference for walking directions. Similar to the findings about the dominant hand, left-footed respondents preferred walking on the left side more than walking on the right side. This is notable in that the finding stresses how the dominant left foot can affect the pedestrian's preference for walking on the left side.

The results from the Chi-squared test for the effects of the dominant hand and foot in different locations showed the dominant hand showed statistical significance in most selected locations. These results indicate the greater impact the dominant hand plays over the dominant foot on the respondents' preferences for walking directions, which is consistent with Lucas' (2012, p. 18) assertion, in his comment on historical questions, that stated “most people are right-handed, which leads to a natural tendency to favor one side of the road or another depending on the means of transportation being used.”

As to the differences in preference when entering and exiting the same location, the results of the Chi-squared test showed statistical significance between entering and exiting elevators (p = .001) but not between walking upstairs and downstairs (p = .259) or entering and exiting buildings (p = .068). In addition, the preferred walking direction depending on locations by gender (male p = .05, female p = .018), age group (30s p = .004, over 60 years p = .040), handedness (right-handed p = .002) and footedness (right-footed p = .001) showed statistical significance for entering and leaving elevators. However, no other conditions were significant except for age groups in walking upstairs and downstairs (30s p = .004) and for footedness in entering and exiting buildings (right-footed p = .029). Frequency analysis results showed a higher percentage of compliance with Right-side Traffic rules when walking upstairs and entering buildings and elevators than their counter-actions (walking downstairs and exiting buildings and elevators). This higher preference for walking to the right side engaging a particular action despite the identical location is explained due to the higher percentage of right-handed people and respondents' natural inclination to hold staircase railings located on the right side in order to conveniently walk upstairs, while staying on the right side in elevators to push the switch located on the right side.

Additionally, in the cases of subways, escalators, or moving walks, the current custom allows pedestrians who are in a rush to pass other standing pedestrians on the left side (stand right, walk left), being interpreted as ‘passersby on the left,’ identically applied to automobile transportation norms. 402 (67%) respondents preferred the right side for the facilities that allow transporting while standing still such as escalators and moving walks. Additional Chi-squared test results on preferred standing side showed different significance by age (p = .722), gender (p = .225), dominant hand (p = .008) and dominant foot (p = .001). These results indicate that the preferred standing position is different according to the dominant hand and foot, which is similar to the results on the preferred walking direction in various walking locations. Contrary to other walking locations, not only do right-handed (69.6%), right-footed (69.9%) and ambidextrous (62%) respondents, but also the left-handed (54%) and left-footed (61.0%) respondents prefer the right side for locations with the facilities that allow mobility while standing. Nonetheless, due to concern about the higher risk of falls and potential injury when walking upstairs or downstairs on escalators or moving walks, Korea and other countries have recently been promoting an abandonment of walking behaviors while transporting through such facilities.

An additional analysis was conducted to find the correlation between the dominant hand and foot of the individuals. The results showed that of 600 respondents, 460 (82.4%) were right-handed, 63 left-handed, and 77 ambidextrous. Of 460 right-handers, 431 (82.4%) were right-footed and 29 (17.6%) were left-footed. Of 63 left-handers, 17 (27.0%) were right-footed and 46 (73.0%) were left-footed, and of 77 ambidextrous respondents, 60 (78.0%) were right-footed and 17 (22.0%) were left-footed. The results showed a high correlation between handedness and footedness. Interestingly, the ambidextrous were approximately 3.5 times more likely to be right-footed than left-footed. The results from the Chi-squared test showed a significant effect (p = .001) between the dominant hand and foot. Moreover, the results from the Chi-squared test for the effects of interaction among the dominant hand and dominant foot and all different locations also showed a significant effect (p = .001).

The results of our survey on the unification of walking direction regardless of walking locations showed 73.7% preferred the right side (Table 7). This finding indicates the slightly higher inclination than those actually walking on the right side in different locations, which was 64.9% as shown in Table 4. The overall preference regardless of different locations showed higher but when it comes to the specific situations such as walking downstairs, exiting buildings and elevators, the preferences were lower. Therefore, if the right-side traffic rule is adopted, then more careful consideration should be provided such as signs and information posts for these locations.

As demonstrated in Table 7, the preferred walking directions by age and gender did not show significant differences. The Chi-squared tests also showed no significant effects of age groups (p = .875) and gender (p = .711). However, the effects of natural preferences for walking directions depending on the dominant hand and foot appeared to be robustly significant (p < .001).

The analysis on the relationships between the dominant hand and foot and their effects on walking directions revealed that the respondents preferred walking on the right side except for those with left hand and foot dominance. Especially those who had the right dominant hand and foot showed the highest preference level. And, those who were ambidextrous preferred walking on the right regardless of their dominant foot. The results from the two-way ANOVA revealed no statistical significance (p = .241) of the effect of the dominant hand and foot on the unification of walking directions.

According to a recent survey by a newspaper on the idea of changing the walking direction from left to right in order to be in-line with the international custom and to secure walking safety, 67.3% of the respondents ‘opposed’ while 21.2% ‘supported’ the idea (Joongang Newspaper, 31 March 2007). However, this study revealed that 411 (68.5%) supported the shift to the Right-side Traffic policy, showing inconsistent results with the previous survey. The discrepancies seem to result from the different methods employed in the newspaper survey, where 700 people of 19 and over across the country were randomly surveyed over the phone. Therefore, the newspaper survey and the current research show differences in the subject population and the reliability of the research method. In addition, the survey data was collected before the official announcement and promotion on the merits of walking on the right side or the effects of changing the walking directions. Therefore, without much public discussion on walking on the right side, the respondents might have shown certain fear or general reluctance for changing long-standing customs or existing systems. Moreover, the results from the Chi-squared test regarding the amendment of the regulations of walking directions did not show statistical significance by the age groups (p = .165) or by gender (p = .930). However, discrepancies between the supporting and opposing viewpoints for different age groups appeared to be greater than for gender differences, with respondents in their 10s (70%) and 20s (79%) generally giving more positive feedback than those in their 30s to over 60 years (63–69%). The higher percentage of consent shown by the younger generation can be inferred due to their positive and open-minded attitude towards changes. The dominant hand and foot revealed significant effects on feedback (p < .005) consistent with the results from the previous studies. Nonetheless, the results from the two-way ANOVA did not show significant effects of the dominant hand and foot on the feedback on changing walking direction rules (p = .634).

The current research showed that the Right-hand Traffic rules are explained to be the majority of peoples' natural disposition. As the majority of the global population is right-handed, walking on the left side when carrying personal belongings such as bags and umbrellas in one's right hand can increase the risks of colliding into another pedestrian walking from the opposite side. Therefore, the Right-side Traffic rule can be said to be more adequate from the human anatomical perspective since it fits more with the majority of people's physical characteristics.

Consideration for minorities (Barsley, 1970; Jung and Jung, 2009) is of paramount importance for a well-functioning and sustainable society, such as regulations that stipulate manufacturing products for left-handed people. However, in order to help build a safer society and reduce public nuisances, it is more crucial to make such different and diverse approaches that can benefit the society as a whole. Different walking regulations in different facilities (co-existence of Left-side and Right-side Traffic systems) would amplify confusion for pedestrians, hence drastically increasing the risks of accidental collisions. For instance, while bicycles are enforced to be ridden on the right side as they are included in the vehicle category, the majority of walking and jogging trails do not separate the road for pedestrians and bikers. Therefore, different requirements on directions between the two would more likely cause confusion and higher risks of collisions. However, as people are more inclined to losing balance when walking upstairs or downstairs, thereby increasing the risks of falling, walking on the left side on stairs is considered to be safer. This is because ordinary stairs generally place their railings on the inner side, and holding onto the railings when walking downstairs, hence walking on the left side, helps people keep balance and avoid missteps. Therefore, as certain walking locations including staircases could cause safety problems, should all walking directions be unified to the right side, placing the railings not only on the inner side but also on the outer edge would be highly recommended.

Therefore, it is highly recommended to establish a unified rule to allow pedestrians to safely walk through any pathways, including pedestrian walks, subway allays, corridors, stairs and narrow paths, without collisions with another passenger walking from the opposite direction, particularly in emergencies should they abruptly occur. However, should left-side walks be necessary under special circumstances, walking guides or road signs must be provided in order to properly inform and lead the pedestrians.

The current study attempted to examine the issues and concerns associated with the new Right-side Traffic rules in Korea, which was a highly controversial issue at the time of the study just before its implementation and to further suggest how to improve road and traffic laws and policy making by exploring safe walking directions that most pedestrians prefer. Previous studies, both domestic and international, have left this subject of study mainly unexplored. With little reference available on pedestrians' walking characteristics, the current study could contribute to promoting safety and efficiency of pedestrians in the future by providing useful information and data for other countries in legislating traffic policies.

The pedestrians' walking behavior and preferences presented in this paper might be culturally specific to Korea, which has a strong cultural bias against left-handedness. From East to West, the reality is that right-handedness is preferred to left-handedness, and many groundless prejudices about the latter do exist (Zverev, 2006). Moreover, there is considerable social and cultural prejudice toward the left-handed as reported by Kang (1994) and Perelle and Ehrman (1994), “Korea is one of the countries in which cultural bias against use of the left hand remains strong.” For the Korean population, Jung and Jung (2009) reported 5.8% were left-handed whereas Kang (1994) reported that only 0.59% and 1.66% were non-right-handed for writing and drawing, respectively. Worldwide, most established and accepted statistics show between 8 and 12% of the population (Hardyck and Petrinovich, 1977; Perelle and Ehrman, 1994; Reiss and Reiss, 1999) as left-handed. However, wide deviations from 0.6 to 19.8% do exist in different cultural and ethnic groups (Gotestam, 1990; Porac et al., 1990). This means that the percentages of the left-handed population in different cultural and ethnic groups might affect walking behavior and preferences, which are closely related to handedness, as shown in this study. It is thus suggested that the findings of the study be carefully considered when applied to different cultural and ethnic groups. In addition, this study was limited to 10 selected facilities that were used to determine the preference for walking directions, thereby suggesting that future surveys include more comprehensive and specific facilities and situations.

More studies are called for in the future, incorporating diverse factors, including studies on: traffic safety based on statistics, e.g., the effect of walking directions on pedestrian accident rate; biophysical reactions such as heartbeat rates, muscle activities and brain wave changes; walking convenience and social efficiency based on simulation analyses of walking speed, collision frequencies and walking densities; and changes in pedestrians' perceptions and actual accident rates after an amendment to their traffic laws.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was supported by the Dongshin University research grants, attempting to contribute to the adequate transition from the Left-hand to the Right-hand Traffic rule, which was implemented by the Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs of Korea (MLTMAK) in 2010 for pedestrian safety and convenience in accordance to the global walking culture. This study was supported by research funds from Chosun University, 2010.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

