@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Did a brief nap break have positive benefits on information processing among nurses working on the first 8-h night shift?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Shift workers frequently experience acute sleep deprivation on first night shift.


                        
                        
                           
                           We investigated impact of a nap on the visual attention ability on first night shift.


                        
                        
                           
                           There were no differences between those taking and not taking a nap.


                        
                        
                           
                           The effect size was medium in the information process between groups.


                        
                        
                           
                           Need increase sample size to draw the conclusion regarding the benefits of nap.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cognitive function

Nap

Night shift

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Shift workers frequently experience acute sleep deprivation on first night shift. This study compared the efficacy of 30-min nap (between 2 and 3 a.m.) on the visual attention ability of the nurses working at first 8-h night shift at the time of maximum fatigue (between 3 and 4 a.m.). In addition, we measured cognitive function (between 9 and 10 a.m.) in nurses working on daytime shift, which we defined as baseline wakefulness. The results showed that working on the night shift groups was associated with sleep loss, leading to a decrease in visual attention performance compared to the daytime shift group. There was no statistically significant difference in the visual attention performance between those taking and not taking a nap during the night shift, however the effect size was medium in the information process. It was still needed increase sample size to draw the conclusion regarding a 30-min nap break have positive benefits on perceptual speed during the first night shift.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Shift workers frequently experience acute sleep deprivation on first night shift (Kerstedt, 1998). Some studies have reported that acute night shift work degrades the performance on monotonous tasks and increases sleepiness (Porcu et al., 1998). Other studies have indicated that in rapidly rotating systems involving two to three consecutive night shifts, the impairment in performance is greatest on the first night shift (Lamond et al., 2004). In our previous study, we also found the perceptual and motor abilities on the last day of two consecutive night shifts were worse than those on the last day of four consecutive night shifts, indicating that fast rotating night shifts may lead to medical errors (Chang et al., 2011). Therefore, adaptation strategies are needed to prevent sleep loss impacting cognitive performance during acute changes in the wake–sleep cycle.

Napping during a night shift is one strategy that can reduce sleepiness. It removes the worker from the time of maximum circadian-determined impairment in alertness and performance (Smith et al., 2007). As a nap directly addressing physiological sleep needs, it has potential advantages over alternative strategies, such as stimulant use, that predominantly mask sleepiness (Smith et al., 2007). Some studies had demonstrated that taking a nap break during a night shift resulted in fewer performance lapses, less fatigue and sleepiness (Smith-Coggins et al., 2006), reduced medical errors (Landrigan et al., 2007), and improved psychomotor performance which even persisted to the end of the night shift (Smith et al., 2007).

However, the subjects in most of these studies were select individuals in a laboratory setting which cannot address issues of on-work performance demands or uncontrolled environmental conditions, which may limit the effectiveness of napping. In addition, many studies have investigated the influence of taking a nap in two-shift systems on night performance, but little is known about the influence of a nap in a three-shift system on night performance. It is therefore of interest to investigate whether the implementation of naps into the first night shift of 8-h night shift work has positive benefits on performance.

During a night shift, the nurses are at an increased risk of falling asleep between around 3 to 5 a.m., when the core body temperature is at nadir and sleep tendency is greatest (Lilie, 2004). In this study, we investigated the differences in cognitive performance during the night shift in nurses working the first night (12 a.m.–8 a.m.) with a 30-min nap was taken between 2 and 3 a.m. and those without taken. We compared cognitive functions among the night shift groups at the time of maximum fatigue (3–4 a.m.) (Mitler et al., 1988). In addition, we measured cognitive function from 9 to 10 a.m. in nurses working on daytime shift, which we defined as baseline wakefulness.

@&#METHODS@&#

We recruited sixty-three nurses (mean age 25.7 ± 2.5 years; years of education 15.5 ± 1.1 years) from the acute ward of Kaohsiung Municipal Kai-Syuan Psychiatric Hospital, which is the largest psychiatric center in southern Taiwan. We excluded those who reported any of the following characteristics on a screening questionnaire: current use of hypnotics, regular coffee-drinking, psychiatric illness, major systemic disease or sleep disorder. The subjects were randomly assigned into three groups: nurses who worked on daytime shift (n = 21), on the first night of a night shift without taking a 30-min nap (n = 21), and with taking (n = 21), respectively. All of the nurses had worked either day shifts or been free of duty for at least 3 days before entering the study. Those in the night shift groups were asked to sleep prophylactically from 7 p.m. to 11 p.m. while working nights. We selected 3 a.m.–4 a.m. of night shift groups to assess maximum fatigue and disturbance on performance (Mitler et al., 1988), and 9 a.m.–10 a.m. of the daytime shift group which we defined as baseline wakefulness. Demographic data including age, years of education, and mean self-reported total sleep time (including daytime sleep and prophylactic sleep) for the night shift groups and the sleep time during the night before the study began for the daytime shift group were recorded. Written informed consent was obtained from all subjects prior to participation in the study, which was conducted with the approval of the Ethics Committee of Kaohsiung Municipal Kai-Syuan Psychiatric Hospital.

The subjects in the night shift groups arrived at the hospital about 7:00 p.m. The room used for the subjects to take their prophylactic nap between 7 and 11 p.m. or 30-min nap between 2 and 3 a.m. was a distance away from patient rooms and staff activity. The subjects were able to lie in a quiet, dark bedroom. Participants were awoken by an alarm when the nap ended.

Nurses were given a 30-min nap beginning at a time of their choice between 2 a.m. and 2:15 a.m. The nap was set at 30 min between 2 and 3 a.m. for the following reasons. First, there are two nurses on night shift duty in each acute psychiatric ward at our hospital. They have to perform bedside rounds for each patient every hour. The 30-min nap would therefore not affect regular bedside round duty. In addition, this duration fits within the current employee break restrictions. Second, healthy subjects are often able to achieve stage one sleep in a relatively short period of time when allowed to fall sleep in appropriate conditions (Kayumov et al., 2000). It was expected that a 30-min break would allow 10–20 min of sleep to be achieved, with time for normal sleep onset processes. In addition, available data on nap efficacy suggest benefits from naps of 10–15 min duration (Brooks and Lack, 2006). Third, the nap break began between 2 a.m. and 2:15 a.m., and the measurements were performed between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m. to prevent impairment in cognitive performance due to sleep inertia, ranges from the first 3 min of awakening (Wertz et al., 2006) to up to 10 min (Jewett et al., 1999).

We used the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) (Spielberger et al., 1983), Stanford Sleepiness Scale (SSS) (Hoddes et al., 1973), Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) (Heaton et al., 1993), Taiwan University Attention Test (TUAT) (Ko, 1977), Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST), and Symbol Searching Test (SST) (Wechsler, 1981) in this study.

The STAI is a self-reported measure for state and trait anxiety. Each inventory contains 20 self-reported items. All items are rated on a 4-point scale (range 20–80 points) with a higher score indicating a higher anxiety. The STAI has demonstrated good validity and internal consistency (Cronbach's α > 0.85 and test-retest reliability ≥0.75) (Chung and Long, 1984). The SSS is a 7-point self-rating scale developed for quantifying progressive steps in sleepiness, from 1 (alert) to 7 (no longer fighting sleep). A score above 3 was defined as being no longer alert in this study.

The computerized WCST, which is loosely considered a measure of frontal lobe ability, consists of four stimulus cards and 128 response cards that depict figures of varying forms, colors, and numbers of figures. Research subject matches each consecutive card from the deck with one of the four stimulus cards that she thinks it matches. The number of preservation errors, number of total errors, number of categories, percent of conceptual level responses, and failure to maintain set were used as dependent variables.

Both the DSST and SST are subsets of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (Wechsler, 1981) involving cognitive, perceptual and motor abilities. In the DSST, research subjects enter appropriate symbols into empty squares beneath digits. In the SST, they respond to one of two target symbols from four selective symbols. The raw scores of the DSST and SST were determined by the number of items correctly completed in 120 s, and the raw scores were then converted to a scale score according to age. The information process index which indicated perceptual speed was obtained after converting the sum of the scale scores of the SST and DSST. The TUAT involves attention processing as with the DSST and SST, which requires the examinee to cross out two target characters from a random list of 780 letters, numbers and symbols printed on an A4 sheet of paper as fast and as accurately as possible. The number of characters per second (the number of omissions subtracted from the correct number of characters divided by the time taken to complete the test), number of omissions and completion time were used as dependent variables.

Difference of continuous variables was examined by using one-way analysis of variance whereas difference of categorical variables was examined by using chi-square test. Scheffé's post hoc test was performed on variables demonstrating significant differences in group comparisons. A p-value of 0.05 was considered significant. In addition to the inferential exam, effect size was also calculated to compare the standardized differences in various neuropsychological tests among the study groups.

@&#RESULTS@&#

There were no differences in age, years of education, STAI and SSS scores among the three groups. Neuropsychological assessments revealed no significant differences among the three groups in any parameters of the WCST. However, significant differences among the three groups did emerge in mean self-reported total sleep time, completion time and number of omissions and number of characters per second on the TUAT, information process index and DSST and SST scores (Table 1
                     ). Post hoc tests showed that the subjects in the daytime shift group had a significantly longer mean self-reported total sleep time and a higher number of characters per second on the TUAT compared to those in the nap and none-nap groups (p = 0.009, p = 0.042; p = 0.002, p = 0.003, respectively). The subjects in the daytime shift group also had a shorter completion time on the TUAT compared to those in the nap and none-nap groups (p = 0.007 and p = 0.042, respectively), and fewer omissions compared to those in the none-nap group (p = 0.042). The subjects in the none-nap group had poorer performances in information processing and DSST and SSD scores compared to those in the daytime shift group (p < 0.001, p = 0.002, and p < 0.001, respectively).

The effect size were large (Cohen's d = 0.8–2.1) for all parameters of the TUAT, DSST, SST and information process index scores between those in the daytime shift and none-nap groups, and for information process index scores, completion time and number of characters per second on the TUAT between those in the daytime shift and nap groups. Although no statistical significant differences in any parameters of neuropsychological tests between the night shift groups, there was a medium effect size of information process index scores in these subjects (Cohen's d = 0.64, 95% CI = 0.01–1.25) (Table 1).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The daytime shift group had longer mean self-reported total sleep time and a better performance on the TUAT than that in the night shift groups. The performance on both the SST and DSST revealed that the none-nap group had the lowest scores among the three groups, and the differences were statistically significant compared with the daytime shift group. The results of the effect size in neuropsychological tests were comparable with the inferential results except the information process index which showed a medium effect size between those in the daytime shift and nap groups, and also had the influence of a nap to information processing performance in those taking and not taking a nap during the night shift.

In the results, we found there were no differences in the subjective sleepiness among the three groups. Purnell et al. (2002) reported that self-reported fatigue levels did not significantly differ between controls and those taking a 20-min nap, either at the start or the end of the first night shift. Similar results have been reported where subjective alertness or mood was not improved following a nap (Takeyama et al., 2004). Nevertheless, improvements in both objective and subjective measures of alertness following nap have also been reported (Smith et al., 2007). However, the night shift groups experienced an approximate 2-h reduction in sleep length compared to the daytime shift group, even there was no difference in subjective sleepiness among the groups. Performances on visual attentive tests in night shift groups also were worse than the daytime shift group. This suggests that people frequently underestimate the impact of sleep restriction on cognitive functions (Banks and Dinges, 2007; Chang et al., 2013). But the lack of differences on subjective sleepiness in this study may be according to the low sensitivity of the SSS.

Specific neurocognitive domains including psychomotor vigilance tasks, sustained attention tasks, and executive function have been shown to be particularly vulnerable to sleep loss (Torsvall et al., 1989; Babkoff et al., 1988). Opstad et al. (1978) used DSST to evaluate those exposed to prolonged sleep deprivation. Nicholson et al. (1985) assessed overnight performance with pencil and paper tasks such as the DSST and two- and six-letter cancellation tests. These tasks are important for people whose work depends on reaction time, visual acuity, motor co-ordination and speed of association.

The daytime shift group had better performances on visual attentive tests than did the night shift groups in the present study, which indicated working on the first night shift being associated with sleep loss, leading to a decrease in the accuracy of visual attentive tests. There was no difference in the capability to carry out visual attentive tests between the night shift groups; however the effect size was medium in information process index. The similar results of information process index in the study were also found in comparison between the daytime shift and nap groups. Because the statistical result of information process index in the study was consisting with the effect size neither between night shift groups nor between daytime shift and nap groups, the power of the experiment was insufficient to draw this conclusion regarding there is positive benefits on perceptual speed when implemented a 30-min nap into the first night shift and the ability cannot compatible with working in the daytime shift even after taking a nap. This was possible because of small sample size. However, we still cannot ignore the practical significant effects of implemented a brief nap into the first night shift in our results.

The results of the present study with regards the decreased performance of visual attentive tests on the first night of shift work were compatible with other studies (Kerstedt, 1998; Lamond et al., 2004; Porcu et al., 1998) but not consistent with some studies (Landrigan et al., 2007; Purnell et al., 2002; Smith et al., 2007; Smith-Coggins et al., 2006) which have reported that short periods of sleep obtained during the night shift can result in positive benefits on performance. A possible explanation for this is because a three-shift system with faster rotation is common in Taiwan hospitals, and we investigated the impact of a nap during the night shift on the performance of 8-h shift workers compared to 12-h shift workers in the other studies. It is possible that having a nap at work is more important for those working longer hours, because it address physiological sleep needs directly. Additionally, the subjects in most of the other studies were select individuals in laboratory settings or similar work environmental conditions compared to the brief nap during working conditions in the current study. The participants were not completely free of patient responsibilities during their breaks which might have been a barrier to restorative napping (Fallis et al., 2011). Besides, the time of evaluation was also different among studies in which we selected 3–4 a.m. to assess maximum fatigue and disturbance on performance (Mitler et al., 1988).

In this study, there was no difference in the ability to perform the WCST among the groups. That is, implementing a short nap break during the first night shift at our hospital did not affect the ability to shift cognitive strategies in response to changing environmental contingencies. We applied the STAI to examine hyperarousal factors. Under a state of hyperarousal, subjects are expected to underestimate the state of sleepiness and have impaired attention (Spielman, 1986). Precipitating events (e.g. sleep deprivation, work stress, personal difficulties etc.) are distinct elements for a state of hyperarousal (Chang et al., 2013; Spielman, 1986). Although the subjects working on the first night shift without taking a nap had the highest state anxiety scale scores among the three groups, there were no significant differences in the STAI scores (including state and trait anxiety) compared to either of the other two groups.

The major limitation of this study is that objective measurement such as polysomnography, was not possible due to the on-work conditions. However, Purnell et al. (2002) reported an obvious challenge of integrating napping into the workplace is the need for an appropriate sleep environment. It was adequate to achieve sleep at appropriate sleep environment, although there was only a relatively short total duration of sleep (Smith et al., 2007). However, we supplied the appropriate sleep environment in the current study. Second, the sample size was small in each group. Third, we used self-reported sleep time instead of objective measurements, which could have affected the results.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Nurses working on the first 8-h night shift were associated with sleep loss, leading to a decrease in visual attentive tests performance at the time of maximum fatigue. There was no difference in the visual attentive tests performance between those taking and not taking a nap during the night shift, however the effect size was medium in the information processing. It was still needed increase sample size to draw the conclusion regarding a 30-min nap break have positive benefits on perceptual speed during the first night shift.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by Kaohsiung Municipal Kai-Syuan Psychiatric Hospital.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

