@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Schoolbag carriage and schoolbag-related musculoskeletal discomfort among primary school children

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A novel approach was used to investigate schoolbag-related musculoskeletal discomfort.


                        
                        
                           
                           Schoolbag weight generally exceeded the 10% body weight guideline.


                        
                        
                           
                           The prevalence of baseline musculoskeletal discomfort was high.


                        
                        
                           
                           Schoolbag-related shoulder discomfort was more prevalent than back discomfort.


                        
                        
                           
                           Risk factors for site-specific schoolbag-related musculoskeletal discomfort were identified.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Schoolbag

Children

Schoolbag weight

Schoolbag-related musculoskeletal discomfort

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Schoolbag carriage is a common occurrence and has been associated with musculoskeletal discomfort in children. The current study investigated the relationship between schoolbag-related musculoskeletal discomfort and individual, physical and psychosocial risk factors in primary school children in Ireland. A cross-sectional survey and pretest–posttest quasi-experimental design was used. The site and intensity of musculoskeletal discomfort was assessed before and after schoolbag carriage to provide a dose-response assessment of schoolbag-related discomfort for the first time. Objective measurements of the children, schoolbags and other additional items were made, and a researcher assisted questionnaire was completed on arrival at school. A total of 529 children (male 55.8%: female 44.2%) with a mean age of 10.6 years ± 7.14 months were included. The majority had backpacks (93.8%) and 89.7% (n = 445) carried the backpack over 2 shoulders. The mean schoolbag weight (4.8 ± 1.47 kgs) represented a mean % body weight (%BW) of 12.6 ± 4.29%. Only 29.9% carried schoolbags that were ≤10%BW. A significantly greater proportion of normal weight children carried schoolbags that were >10%BW compared to overweight/obese children (p < 0.001). The mean %BW carried was 18.3 ± 5.03 for those who had an additional item. The majority (77.5%) carried schoolbags to school for ≤10 min. The prevalence of baseline musculoskeletal discomfort was high (63.4%). Schoolbag-related discomfort was reported more frequently in the shoulders (27.3%) than in the back (15%). The dose–response assessment indicated that both statistically and meaningfully significant increases in discomfort were observed following schoolbag carriage. Multiple logistic regression models indicated that psychosocial factors and a history of discomfort were predictors of schoolbag-related back discomfort, while gender (being female) and a history of discomfort were predictors of schoolbag-related shoulder discomfort. None of the physical factors (absolute/relative schoolbag weight, carrying an additional item, duration of carriage, method of travel to school) were associated with schoolbag-related discomfort. This study highlights the need to consider the multi-factorial nature of schoolbag-related discomfort in children, and also the need to identify background pain as its presence can inadvertently influence the reporting of 'schoolbag-related' discomfort if it is not accounted for.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Carrying a schoolbag is a common occurrence for children, and the activity and its effects have been of interest to researchers for some time. The first study of schoolbag carriage was carried out by Malhotra and Sen Gupta in 1965. Since then, many systematic reviews of the literature about schoolbag weight have been undertaken and the majority have concluded that evidence-based recommendations for load carriage, expressed as a percentage of the child's bodyweight, could not be made. Lindstrom-Hazel (2009) and Dockrell et al. (2013) concluded that schoolbag weight recommendations were not supported by the literature. Similar statements have been made by others who stated that there was ‘no scientific rationale’ for the 10% bodyweight limit guideline (Mackie et al., 2004). A systematic review by Cardon and Balague (2004) concluded that there was little scientific evidence to support a causative relationship between schoolbag weight and low back pain. Steele et al. (2003) made similar conclusions with regards to posture, and emphasised the lack of a standardised approach to investigating load-induced postural changes. In contrast, Brackley and Stevenson (2004) concluded that a guideline weight limit of 10–15%BW was justified based on physiological (oxygen consumption (VO2 max), ventilation (VE) and blood pressure) and biomechanical effects (trunk forward lean, craniovertebral angle and gait).

The association between schoolbag weight and musculoskeletal pain has been investigated. A small number of studies have focussed on schoolbag-related pain in primary school children, that is the participants were asked specifically about back pain (Negrini and Carabalona, 2002; Korovessis et al., 2004; Skaggs et al., 2006) or any musculoskeletal pain (Moore et al., 2007; Talbott et al., 2009; Kistner et al., 2013) or ache, pain, discomfort or numbness (Dianat et al., 2013) that was due to carrying a schoolbag. The terminology used in studies is varied and the terms ‘ache’, ‘pain’ and ‘discomfort’ are used interchangably in the literature (Rateau, 2004; Dianat et al., 2013). The choice of term that is used is frequently based on the language in the measurement tool e.g. the Nordic Musculoskeletal Questionnaire includes ache, pain, and discomfort (Whittfield et al., 2005; Dianat et al., 2013, 2014). The term ‘musculoskeletal symptoms’ has also been used (Whittfield et al., 2001; Dianat et al., 2013), and the term ‘soreness’ has been selected for a paediatric population following a pilot study (Coleman et al., 2009).

Overall, there were diverse findings on schoolbag-related pain. Moore et al. (2007) reported that the percentage bodyweight carried was associated with pain. Negrini and Carabalona (2002) found that carrying a backpack was associated with back pain, but the weight of the backpack was not. No correlation was found between backpack weight and back pain by Korovessis et al. (2004) and Dianat et al. (2013). Demographic risk factors for schoolbag-related pain, such as gender and BMI, have also been investigated. It has been reported consistently that girls were more likely to report schoolbag-related pain than boys (Talbott et al., 2009; Dianat et al., 2013; Korovessis et al., 2004), however a recent study reported that back pain was not associated with gender (Adeyemi et al., 2014). Dianat et al. (2013) found BMI to be negatively associated with schoolbag-related shoulder pain.

Children's perception of schoolbag weight has been explored as a psychosocial aspect of schoolbag-related pain (Pascoe et al., 1997; Gunzburg et al., 1999; Goodgold et al., 2002; van Gent et al., 2003; Talbott et al., 2009). Children have been shown to be poor judges of schoolbag weight (Pascoe et al., 1997; Goodgold et al., 2002; van Gent et al., 2003) and van Gent et al. (2003) found an association between perceived weight and musculoskeletal complaints. Children who perceived their bag to be heavy were more likely to report pain. The relationship between psychosocial factors, such as emotional wellbeing, and low back pain (LBP) in children was also reported by Watson et al. (2003). Children who reported conduct or emotional problems had a threefold increase in the reporting of pain. This had previously been found by Gunzburg et al. (1999) who stated that the lifetime prevalence of LBP was significantly higher (p < 0.05) in children who reported to be less happy, worse sleepers, and more tired without reason. There was also a strong correlation between self-reported LBP and the reporting by the children of one or both parents having LBP.

Musculoskeletal pain and discomfort in children is complex and needs to be considered in a multi-factorial manner. Furthermore, the investigation of schoolbag-related pain and discomfort is complicated by a high level of nonspecific background pain in children that has been reported (Mikkelsson et al., 1997; Roth-Isigkeit et al., 2005). Previous cross-sectional studies of schoolbag-related pain (Negrini and Carabalona, 2002; Korovessis et al., 2004; Skaggs et al., 2006; Moore et al., 2007; Talbott et al., 2009; Kistner et al., 2013) have not identified this and consequently pain may have been inappropriately attributed to schoolbag carriage. The current study therefore aimed to investigate the characteristics of schoolbag carriage and the prevalence of schoolbag-related discomfort. The level of discomfort that existed before and after schoolbag carriage was investigated, and the differential between the two was considered as schoolbag-related discomfort. The dose–response relationship between schoolbag carriage and schoolbag-related discomfort could then be determined for the first time. The study also aimed to establish the association of individual, physical and psychosocial factors with schoolbag-related discomfort.

@&#METHOD@&#

A cross-sectional survey and quasi-experimental pretest-posttest design was used. Children and their bags were weighed on one day only, and the prevalence, site and intensity of discomfort was recorded before and after the children carried their schoolbags.

A convenience sample of primary schools with different size, type (mixed/single-sex), geographical and socio-economic backgrounds was included. All children in 4th or 5th class (9–11 year olds) in the participating primary schools were eligible for inclusion. Children who were unable to stand or who were unable to carry a schoolbag were excluded.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

School principals were approached by email or telephone to enquire if they would allow the research to be conducted in their school. If the principal agreed, an information pack, the parent and child information leaflets and the consent and assent forms were sent to the principal for distribution to the potential participants. Written consent was sought from a parent/guardian, and written assent was sought from each child. Ethics approval for the study was given by the Faculty of Health Sciences Ethics Committee, Trinity College Dublin.

On the day before data collection, a brief information session was held to instruct the participating children on how to complete a Body Discomfort Chart (BDC) and Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) (Merkel and Malviya, 2000). The children were asked to complete the BDC and VAS before leaving for school the following morning. The children were given a Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) to be completed by their parent/guardian. The children were asked to bring the completed BDC, VAS and SDQ to school the following morning to give to the researcher. On arrival at school, the children completed another BDC and VAS (after). The children's height was measured and they were weighed under three conditions in a designated measuring zone: firstly without any bags, secondly while carrying their schoolbag, and finally while carrying their schoolbag and all additional items, such as sports gear and musical instruments. The children were measured in stocking feet and light indoor clothing. Following objective testing, a researcher-assisted questionnaire was completed.

A self-completed BDC (Corlett and Bishop, 1976), and VAS (Huskisson, 1982) were used as self-report methods are considered to be the most reliable methods of assessment of pain and discomfort (O'Rourke, 2004; von Baeyer and Spagrud, 2007). The BDC is a simple outline drawing of the human body showing anterior and posterior aspects. The child was instructed to ‘draw the sore area on the body chart’. It has been shown to be reliable and valid as an assessment tool for body part discomfort (Boussenna et al., 1982), and has been used with schoolchildren (Whittfield et al., 2005; Mackie and Legg, 2008). The VAS is a measure of the intensity of pain (Huskisson, 1982). It is usually a 10 cm line with anchors of ‘no pain’ and ‘worst pain possible’ with a score of zero and ten respectively. The person rates the intensity of their pain on the VAS by marking the line at the point that best describes the intensity of their pain. The VAS is a simple, widely used self-report measure that has excellent reliability and validity and responsiveness in children aged 5 years and older in acute, recurrent and chronic pain (O'Rourke, 2004). It has also demonstrated good reliability, validity and sensitivity for pain intensity in children aged 8 years and older (Champion et al., 1998; Stinson et al., 2006).

There are many different working definitions of musculoskeletal pain in children in the literature. It has been found that the term “soreness”, recently used by Coleman et al. (2009) and Kistner et al. (2013) is better understood by children than the term “discomfort”. For the before-and-after schoolbag carriage assessment where point prevalence of discomfort was being ascertained, the children were asked “Do you have any soreness or pain now?”. It has been proposed that pain intensity scores are more useful for comparisons within the same person over time than for comparisons among individuals (von Baeyer, 2009). In the current study the intensity of discomfort within the same person over time was investigated and a minimum meaningful difference in VAS score of 1 cm on a 10 cm scale was used (Powell et al., 2001; von Baeyer, 2009). Schoolbag-related discomfort was assessed by the increase in intensity of discomfort (as measured by the VAS score) from before schoolbag carriage compared to after carriage.

A ‘Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire’ (SDQ) was completed by the parent/guardian. The SDQ is a 25 item behavioural screening questionnaire that measures five dimensions of behaviour and emotional state in children aged 4–17, namely: emotional symptoms, conduct problems, hyperactivity, peer problems and pro-social behaviour (Goodman, 1997). Parents are asked to respond to the statements as ‘not true’, ‘somewhat true’, or ‘certainly true’. The SDQ has been widely used in both the clinical and field setting. A review of 48 studies (Stone et al., 2010) reported that the parent and teacher versions of the SDQ showed strong psychometric properties, with internal consistency (0.80), test-retest reliability (0.76) being satisfactory, and that the SDQ was a useful screening instrument.

The objective measurements of height (Seca 213 stadiometer), and weight (Tanita HD-352 weighing scales) were taken. Calculations of BMI were made using the ‘Child and teen BMI calculator’ on the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention website (CDC, 2013). The classification of the children as ‘healthy weight’, ‘overweight’ or ‘obese’ was based on gender and age criteria proposed by the International Obesity Task Force (IOTF) (Cole et al., 2000).

The questionnaire comprised twenty-seven closed-ended items, ten of which were objectively measured or calculated by the researcher and two of which were for identification purposes. The remaining fifteen questions were completed by each child in the presence of, and with the assistance of the researcher as required. The questionnaire sought demographic information on age and gender. It included frequently used questions from the literature related to factors such as schoolbag type and method of carriage (Pascoe et al., 1997; Whittfield et al., 2001; Watson et al., 2003; Kellis and Emmanouilidou, 2010) the duration of carriage (Grimmer and Williams, 2000; Negrini and Carabalona, 2002; Kellis and Emmanouilidou, 2010; Dianat et al., 2013, 2014) and the method of transport to/from school (Mackie and Legg, 2007; Adeyemi et al., 2014). The children were asked if they considered their schoolbag weight to be heavy, medium or light (Talbott et al., 2009). The children were asked to answer these questions as they related to the day of testing. Questions about the usual daily duration of physical activity and sedentary activities were also included (Trevelyan and Legg, 2011). Similar to Roth-Isigkeit et al. (2005) information on family history of back pain was sought.

A pilot study was conducted with ten children to assess the face validity of the researcher-assisted questionnaire. The pilot study was used to test the feasibility of the children completing the BDC and VAS before setting out for school and also the proposed testing procedures within the confines of a school day. Minor amendments were made to the questionnaire with the term ‘discomfort’ amended to ‘soreness’. It was also established that a minimum of two researchers was required for data collection.

Descriptive analysis included percentages (95% Confidence intervals, (95%CI)) and means/SD. Comparison of absolute (in kilograms) and relative (% of BW) schoolbag weight among different groups of children was made using independent samples t-tests. In terms of schoolbag weight, the guideline limit parameters of 10% body weight used in Europe (van Gent et al., 2003; Cottalorda et al., 2003; Skaggs et al., 2006) and the USA guideline limit, which varies from 10% body weight (American Occupational Therapy Association, 2014), to 10–20% body weight (Connolly et al., 2008; American Academy of Pediatrics (2014)) were used in the data analysis. A Pearson's Chi-square test was used to compare the proportion of healthy weight children to overweight/obese children that carried schoolbags that were within the different %BW limit categories. A Fisher's Exact test was used to compare those who did/did not have additional items. A paired-samples t-test was conducted to assess the effect of schoolbag carriage on the intensity of shoulder discomfort and back discomfort. Chi-square tests and logistic regression analysis were performed to examine the association between schoolbag-related discomfort (categorised as ‘discomfort’ or ‘no discomfort’) and each of the independent variables i.e. gender, BMI, previous pain, relative schoolbag weight, carrying an additional item, duration of carriage, perception of schoolbag weight, emotional wellbeing, and family history of back pain. The unadjusted odds ratio (OR) when factors were explored separately, and the adjusted OR, when multiple factors were considered, were presented with 95% CI. The statistical analysis was conducted using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS v.20). Statistical significance at p < 0.05 was assumed.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A total of 529 children from 12 different schools participated in the study. Of those who were approached (n = 978), 60% (n = 587) gave consent and 54% (n = 529) participated. The sample comprised 55.8% (n = 295) males and 44.2% females (n = 234) and consisted of 9, 10 and 11 year olds (14.6%, 55.0% and 30.4% respectively). The mean age of the children was 10.6 years ± 7.14 months. The majority were classified as having a healthy weight (75.4%; n = 399), 15.1% (n = 80) were overweight and 9.5% (n = 50) were obese, using IOTF thresholds (Cole et al., 2000). Almost all children played sport (97.9%) and watched tv/play computer games (98.7%).

The majority of children had backpacks (93.8%), and 89.7% of them (n = 445) carried their backpack over two shoulders. The mean schoolbag weight was 4.8 ± 1.47 kgs, which represented a mean % body weight (%BW) of 12.6 ± 4.29%. Less than one third of children (29.9%; 95%CI [28.1–31.6]) carried schoolbags that were within the 10%BW guideline. There was a different pattern for overweight/obese children (n = 130) and those with additional items (n = 67) as shown in Table 1
                           . A significantly greater proportion of healthy weight children carried schoolbags that were >10%BW compared to the overweight/obese children (X
                           2 = 38.642, df = 1, p < 0.001), and a significantly greater proportion of children who had an additional item carried >10%BW than those who did not (X
                           2 = 17.253, df = 1, p < 0.001).

The majority (56.1%) of children travelled to school by car, 36.9% walked to school and 7% travelled to school by other means (bus/train/cycle) as shown in Table 1. The majority of children, 77.5% on the way to school, and 70.5% on the way home from school carried their schoolbags for 10 min or less. There was no difference in the mean schoolbag weight (t = 1.74, df = 490, p = 0.082) or the relative weight (% BW) of schoolbags (t = 1.438, df = 490, p = 0.151) of children who walked to school compared to those who travelled by car. There was a significant difference (t = 2.9, df = 490, p = 0.004) in the %BW carried by children with additional items who walked to school (12.5% ± 4.46) compared to those who travelled by car (13.7% ± 4.92). The children who had an additional item were significantly more likely to travel to school by car than to walk (X
                           
                              2
                            = 17.050, n = 492, df = 1, p < 0.001).

The children were asked if they considered their schoolbag to be heavy, medium or light. Their responses were then compared with the actual schoolbag weight categorised as ‘heavy’ (>10%BW), ‘medium’ (5%-10%BW), or ‘light’ (<5%BW). Only 49.8% of children were correct in the estimation of the weight of their schoolbag, 42.8% under-estimated and 7.4% over-estimated. The poor level of accuracy was reflected in a Kappa Measure of Agreement that was 0.125. Perceiving a schoolbag to be heavy was also associated with an increased prevalence of back discomfort (p < 0.05) as shown in Table 2
                           .

The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) was completed by 455 (86%) parents/guardians. Of those completed, the majority (n = 393; 86.4%) of children had a normal SDQ score; 35 (7.7%) were borderline, and 27 (5.9%) had an abnormal score. The SDQ scores for girls tended to increase as body weight increased.

Over half (54.8%) of the children reported that a family member had back pain. This independent variable has been considered to be a factor affecting the reporting of back pain in children, but it was not associated with schoolbag-related back discomfort in this study (Table 2).

Not all of the children completed the BDC and VAS before schoolbag carriage, but of those who did (n = 487) complete it, 63.4% (n = 309) reported baseline discomfort before schoolbag carriage. The shoulders (38.1%) and the back (30.0%) were the most commonly reported areas of discomfort.

The shoulders and the back were the most frequently reported areas of schoolbag-related discomfort, therefore reporting of results focussed on these two sites. Although 487 children completed the BDC and VAS before carrying their schoolbag, only those who completed the BDC and VAS before and after schoolbag carriage could be included in the analysis for schoolbag-related back discomfort (n = 468) and shoulder discomfort (n = 466). In keeping with current knowledge (von Baeyer, 2009), VAS score comparisons were made within the same individuals over time. Children who reported an increase in discomfort were designated as experiencing schoolbag-related back discomfort (n = 70; 15%) or shoulder discomfort (n = 127; 27.3%). There was a statistically significant difference in VAS scores from before (1.6 ± 2.3) to after (4.7 ± 2.4), t = 14.873, df = 126, p < 0.001 for shoulder discomfort. There was also a statistically significant difference in VAS scores from before (2.8 ± 2.6) to after (5.8 ± 2.4) t = 10.178, df = 69, p < 0.001 for back discomfort. Furthermore, the mean increase of 3 points for back discomfort and 3.1 points for shoulder discomfort represented a meaningful difference.

None of the physical factors (absolute/relative schoolbag weight, carrying an additional item, duration of carriage, method of travel to school) were significantly associated with discomfort (Tables 2 and 3
                        ). Furthermore, the associated risk factors were different for back discomfort and shoulder discomfort. In univariate analysis, psychosocial factors (p < 0.05) and a previous history of pain (p < 0.0001) were associated with schoolbag-related back discomfort, while gender (being female; p < 0.05) and a previous history of pain (p < 0.001) were associated with schoolbag-related shoulder discomfort. Carrying an additional item was protective of shoulder discomfort (p < 0.05). When a multiple logistic regression model was constructed using the statistically significant variables identified in the univariate tests, only a previous history of back pain (p < 0.0001) and perception of schoolbag weight (p < 0.05) emerged as significant independent predictors of schoolbag-related back discomfort. Emotional wellbeing, although not significant (p = 0.085), could not be ruled out as a predictor of schoolbag-related back discomfort (Table 2). Gender (p < 0.05) and a previous history of pain (p < 0.05) emerged as significant independent predictors of schoolbag-related shoulder discomfort (Table 3).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study set out to investigate the relationship between schoolbag carriage and schoolbag-related musculoskeletal discomfort in primary school children. The sample was representative of Irish children in terms of bodyweight, with a similar proportion of children in this study being a healthy weight (75.4%) as that reported by Laythe and McCrory (2011) in a large national survey (75%). The children carried schoolbags, mostly backpacks which is a favourable finding, as the use of a backpack carried over both shoulders is generally supported in the literature (Malhotra and SenGupta, 1965; Pascoe et al., 1997; Korovessis et al., 2005). Recommendations for a double pack (front and backpack) or alternating between front and back have also been proposed by Kim et al. (2008) and Chow et al. (2010) respectively, however the practicality or acceptability of these in a ‘real-world’ situation have yet to be tested.

The schoolbags were on average 12.6% of the children's body weight (Table 1). This is similar to that reported by Moore et al. (2007) among 10 year olds (12.0%) and by Kellis and Emmanouilidou (2010) who found that 9–11 year olds carried 13% of their body weight. The majority of children in the current study carried schoolbags that were heavier than the recommended guideline of 10% body weight. Previously, Cavallo et al. (2003) reported that 56% carried >10%BW. Goodgold et al. (2002) and Adeyemi et al. (2014) found that 67% (10 year olds) and 70% (7–12 year olds) carried backpacks that were >15%BW respectively. However, in the current study, a different pattern emerged when only those who were overweight or obese were included in the analysis. In that case, less than half of the children carried schoolbags that were >10%BW. This highlights the implications for the comparison of studies where the proportion of children in the body weight categories may vary from one study to another. The anthropometric profile of children has changed significantly in recent years (WHO, 2011) and the increasing levels of obesity in children could be a relevant factor in future studies on schoolbag weight.

This study also investigated the carriage of additional items such as musical instruments and sports equipment. Children who had an additional item carried on average 18.3% body weight, and only 6% of them carried less than 10% body weight. Carrying an additional item resulted in a 50% increase in the mean % body weight that was carried. This should be considered when investigating loads that are transported by children to school or when developing guidelines for optimum loads that can be transported by children, as it may not be sufficient to weigh schoolbags only. Dianat et al. (2013) acknowledged that children carry additional items, but combined the schoolbag and additional item weight for their analysis therefore direct comparisons cannot be made with the findings of this study. Dianat et al. (2013) reported that 7–11 year olds carried combined loads that represented 10.1% body weight and that 47% carried loads that were >10%BW.

The majority of children carried their schoolbags for 10 min or less on the way to school. Again, this is in keeping with other studies who reported duration of carriage of less than 10 min (Adeyemi et al., 2014) or approximately 20 min per day (Talbott et al., 2009; Kellis and Emmanouilidou, 2010; Dianat et al., 2013). In many cases in the current study, and others (Adeyemi et al., 2014) the short duration of carriage is explained by the fact that the majority of children (56.1%) travelled to school by car. However, even among the walkers in this study the mean duration of carriage was 10.9 min. It is also of interest that children who had an additional item were more likely to travel to school by car than those who did not. However children who had a heavy schoolbag were not more likely to travel to school by car than those who had a lighter schoolbag. That is, the decision to be driven to school may not have been based on the weight of the load that had to be carried.

Although the Irish primary school children included in this study carried their schoolbags for short durations, and therefore limited their exposure to weight carriage, it is likely that secondary school children carry their schoolbags for longer periods of time. Primary school children frequently remain in the same classroom for the majority of the day and consequently do not need to carry their schoolbags during school hours. In contrast, secondary school children are more likely to move from one classroom to another between classes, according to their timetable, putting on and taking off their schoolbag as required and carrying them for longer periods of time (Mackie et al., 2004; Mackie and Legg, 2007). The duration of carriage could therefore be influenced by the educational stage of the child and also by the design of the school building in terms of the distances between classrooms.

It has been established in the literature that there is a high prevalence of nonspecific background pain in children (Mikkelsson et al., 1997). The current study sought to identify this by establishing the point prevalence of discomfort before schoolbag carriage, and using it as the baseline prevalence of discomfort. Similar to Mikkelsson et al. (1997) and Roth-Isigkeit et al. (2005) the baseline prevalence of discomfort among the children in this study was high (63.4%). Shoulder and back discomfort were most frequently reported. This finding highlights the need to be cautious when interpreting associations between pain and schoolbag load in cross-sectional studies. It may not be sufficient to simply report on the schoolbag loads that are carried and the point prevalence of pain and assume that there is a direct relationship between the two variables.

A novel aspect of this study was that the prevalence, location and intensity of discomfort were assessed before and after carrying a schoolbag in a ‘real-world’ setting. This allowed for the analysis of the effect of an intervention i.e. schoolbag carriage on reported back discomfort and shoulder discomfort. The differential in discomfort between ‘before’ and ‘after’ carriage was considered to be schoolbag-related discomfort. The current study found that, despite the coexisting high level of background discomfort, a substantial proportion of children complained of schoolbag-related back discomfort (15%) and an even greater proportion complained of schoolbag-related shoulder discomfort (27.3%). Similar findings were reported by Dianat et al. (2013) and Moore et al. (2007) who reported that shoulder pain and upper back/shoulder pain were the most frequently affected body areas respectively. A recent study did not expect schoolbag-related shoulder pain to be reported, but added it to the survey when the first participants complained of it (Kistner et al., 2013). The location of discomfort is of interest, as the findings of this study would indicate that shoulder discomfort is more likely to be associated with schoolbag carriage than back discomfort, yet much of the previous literature has focussed on schoolbag-related back pain. Macias et al. (2005) investigated the contact pressure under backpack straps and reported pain in a small number of children, but did not differentiate between the resultant shoulder pain and back pain. Mackie et al. (2005) reported that the weight, hip belt use and the shoulder strap length of a backpack had the greatest effects on tension forces and interface pressure on the shoulders of a specially constructed manikin. Perhaps future studies on schoolchildren could focus on shoulder discomfort with particular emphasis on the design features of the schoolbag, such as shoulder straps. Better schoolbag design and practical use of the bag may have as much impact on shoulder discomfort as the weight of the schoolbag or the % body weight that it represents.

The risk factors for schoolbag-related discomfort were investigated and the main finding was that the risk factors for back discomfort were not always the same as those for shoulder discomfort. This is noteworthy, because frequently the factors associated with all locations of schoolbag-related pain are investigated concurrently and therefore reliable conclusions may not be reached for individual sites of pain. This study evaluated the risk factor variables independently and together as shown in Tables 2 and 3. Psychosocial factors and a previous history of pain were associated with back discomfort, while gender and a previous history of pain were associated with shoulder discomfort. The findings for back discomfort were not unexpected as, although mechanical risk factors for schoolbag-related back pain such as postural misalignment and biomechanical loading (Korovessis et al., 2004; Kistner et al., 2013) have been explored, the contribution of psychosocial factors over physical factors in the reporting of back pain (Szpalski et al., 2002; Watson et al., 2003; Reneman et al., 2006; Trevelyan and Legg, 2011) and musculoskeletal disorders (van Gent et al., 2003) has also been identified. Studies of children aged 11–14 years that used the self-rated Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) found that low back pain was associated with psychosocial factors (Watson et al., 2003; Trevelyan and Legg, 2010, 2011). Given the age of the children in the current study, the SDQ for parents was used, and it is of interest that the psychosocial factors were also associated with schoolbag-related back discomfort in this younger age group. No other known study of primary school children has investigated this association, but the findings of this study add support to the evidence that poor emotional wellbeing contributes to the reporting of schoolbag-related back discomfort in primary school children. A further psychosocial factor that was included was the children's perception of the weight of their schoolbags. The children were asked to rate their schoolbag as heavy, medium or light. The children who perceived their schoolbag to be heavy were more likely to report schoolbag-related back discomfort than those who did not consider their schoolbag to be heavy, despite the fact that the bag weight itself was not associated with schoolbag-related discomfort. Similar findings were made by Talbott et al. (2009) and van Gent et al. (2003) in participants aged 10–18 and 12–14 years respectively.

A greater proportion of girls in this study reported schoolbag-related back discomfort than boys, but the difference was not significant. Another recent study of primary school children (Adeyemi et al., 2014) also reported a non-significant difference between girls and boys (p = 0.083). In contrast with these findings, earlier studies reported a stronger association between gender and back pain (Watson et al., 2003; Jones and Macfarlane, 2005) and schoolbag-related back pain (van Gent et al., 2003; Puckree et al., 2004) and consistently found girls were significantly more likely to report back pain than boys. The age difference of the populations studied is a possible explanation for the discrepancy. The children who participated in the earlier studies (Watson, 2003; Jones and Macfarlane, 2005; van Gent et al., 2003; Puckree et al., 2004) were older (11–14 years) than those in the present study or that of Adeyemi et al. (2014) that included participants with a mean age of 10.6 and 9.5 years respectively. A further explanation could be that the onset of puberty may play a role in the development of back pain (Lardon et al., 2014), and therefore the gender difference may be less in a pre-pubescent population. Gender was associated with schoolbag-related shoulder discomfort, with a greater proportion of girls reporting discomfort than boys. There is a dearth of studies investigating shoulder pain independent of other areas of musculoskeletal pain, therefore comparisons were limited. The only other study identified (Dianat et al., 2013) did not find a significant association between gender and shoulder pain in primary school children. Furthermore, studies of shoulder pain associated with schoolbag carriage in secondary school children are limited and have reported contrasting findings. Dianat et al. (2014) reported that girls had more shoulder pain than boys whereas Whittfield et al. (2005) did not find a significant gender difference. Further work that focuses on schoolbag-related shoulder discomfort is warranted as it has been shown to be highly prevalent in the studies that have investigated it to date.

Given the increasing levels of obesity in children there is growing concern about its effect on their health. Obese children have been found to have significantly higher reporting of musculoskeletal pain compared to normal weight children (de Sa Pinto et al., 2006). It has also been suggested that BMI could be a factor in schoolbag-related musculoskeletal pain (Lindstrom-Hazel, 2009), and it has been found to be a risk factor for shoulder pain (Dianat et al., 2013). However, the current study found no evidence to support this. Children who were overweight or obese were no more likely to report schoolbag-related back discomfort or shoulder discomfort as those who were a healthy weight. The comparisons were made based on the relative weight of the load (i.e. %BW) therefore despite the fact that the proportion of overweight children who carried >10%BW was less than that for the healthy weight children, there was still no significant difference between the groups.

None of the physical factors that were investigated in this study were associated with schoolbag-related back discomfort. Interestingly, carrying an additional item was inversely associated with shoulder discomfort. This could be explained in part by the fact that children who carried an additional item were more likely to travel to school by car than those who did not carry an additional item. Almost all of the children carried a backpack therefore comparisons could not be made between those who did and did not carry a backpack. Absolute and relative (expressed as a %BW) schoolbag weight have been reported as a risk factor for back pain (Viry et al., 1999 (14 year olds)) or not a risk factor (Watson et al., 2003; Korovessis et al., 2004; Dianat et al., 2013). However, the evidence from this study suggests that schoolbag weight (absolute or relative) is not a contributory factor to back discomfort or shoulder discomfort in primary school children. This finding suggests that the appropriate weight limit guidelines should be reviewed.

Not carrying a schoolbag could be seen to be a barrier to physical activity and may deny children the benefits of daily resistance exercise as they travel to school carrying their schoolbag. Carrying a schoolbag could be considered to be a form of regular physical activity, which has been shown to be associated with improved physiological and psychological health in children (Harsha and Berenson, 1995). This is particularly relevant in the current situation of rising levels of obesity in children (Shultz et al., 2009). In a modern day context two conflicting outcomes arise from the activity of carrying a schoolbag. On the one hand carrying a schoolbag provides a form of physical exercise and on the other it may have the potential to cause physical pain or damage to the child. At present most of the evidence points to short term changes in physical and physiological outcomes, but not to any long term effects.

This was a cross-sectional design study and therefore cause and effect analysis cannot be made for all factors. However, the quasi-experimental pretest-posttest design did allow for such analysis in terms of the risk factors that were investigated. A further limitation of the study was that the weight of the schoolbag and the additional items, if present, were measured on one day only, and the assumption that this is the same load carried on a daily basis over time cannot be made. A potential limitation to the study is the short duration of exposure in the loaded condition and the findings may have been different if the children were carrying a schoolbag for a longer period of time. However, the exposure time was a realistic one as it was the actual length of time that the children carried their schoolbags to school.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Irish children mostly carry backpacks that are greater than the recommended schoolbag weight limit of 10%BW, for short periods of time. The relative (%BW) schoolbag load carried was significantly less for overweight/obese children, than it was for healthy weight children. This is the first study of the dose–response analysis of schoolbag-related musculoskeletal discomfort, that is, discomfort was assessed before and after schoolbag carriage. A high prevalence of discomfort was reported before schoolbag carriage and this should be acknowledged and accounted for in future studies of schoolbag-related discomfort. Significant levels of schoolbag-related discomfort were reported; more frequently in the shoulders than in the back. The risk factors were different for the two anatomical sites. Psychosocial factors and a history of discomfort were predictors of back discomfort, while gender (being female) and a history of discomfort were predictors of shoulder discomfort. This implies that it would be more appropriate to investigate the sites of discomfort separately in order to accurately identify the risk factors and implement preventative strategies. This study has provided evidence that schoolbag weight was not associated with schoolbag-related discomfort. It is recommended therefore that future studies should focus on potential risk factors other than schoolbag weight and also consider the multi-factorial nature of pain in children.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We would like to thank the schools, parents and children who participated in this study. We would also like to acknowledge the research assistants who were involved in data collection and entry.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

