@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Work debate spaces: A tool for developing a participatory safety management

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Studies emphasize the importance of initiating a discussion about actual work in organizations.


                        
                        
                           
                           There are few studies that demonstrate the practical effects of this discussion.


                        
                        
                           
                           We demonstrate how a structured debate can contribute to the persons and organization.


                        
                        
                           
                           We noted improvements not only on the safety but also the health and competences of the agents.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Managed safety

Reflective practices

Work debate space

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In recent years, various studies have shown the importance of instituting work debate space within companies in order to address constraints within the organization. However, few of these studies demonstrate the implementation methods of discussion spaces and their contributions. Based on the action research developed in an electric company, this article demonstrates how work debate space (WDS) contribute to the development of an integrated safety culture. After describing the establishment methods and function of WDS within a technical group, we will present the main benefits of these spaces for the organization and its employees, and then discuss the minimal conditions for their implementation.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The evolution of sociotechnical systems in the world of work is accompanied by the creation of new rules and new technology with the goal of improving safety methods (Rasmussen, 1997). Consequently, employees see different types of changes in their work. On the one hand, local managers find themselves under an obligation of managerial performance, thus distancing them from the technical work site (Journé, 2005). On the other hand, safety procedures are multiplied in order to compensate for the absence of management and to limit the reporting of field information. This can lead to situations where compliance to the rules is difficult or impossible to achieve in the case of an unexpected event (Dekker, 2003; Amalberti et al., 2004). One of the possible effects of such situations is that operators do not want to talk about everyday problems of safety, and managers do not want to hear about them (Rocha et al., 2013).

To remedy this break of interactions within the collectives, various studies emphasize the importance of reestablishing the work group through the participation of workers (Lewin, 1951; Liker et al., 1989), by engaging reflective practices among them (Schön, 1983; Mollo and Falzon, 2004) and initiating discussions about actual work and micro-activities within organizations (Hendry and Seidl, 2003; Detchessahar and Journé, 2011).

The challenge is thus to develop spaces in which employees and managers can participate in arbitrations related to safety, in order to transform the organization (Daniellou et al., 2011). The objective of this debate is that the contradictions raised by the employees, particularly the operators which are at the crossroads of different procedures and instructions produced by the organization, be expressed, discussed and resolved (Detchessahar, 2001).

The research presented here aimed at developing a safety management based on Human and Organizational Factors. It was conducted in an electric company, and implemented work debate space (WDS) within this organization. This paper describes the real-life contributions gained from discussions about work on both the individual and organizational levels, and considers some conditions for discussion implementation.

In daily work, “there will always be situations that are either not covered by the rules or in which the rules are locally inapplicable” (Reason et al., 1998, p.297). Safety relies on the ability of workers to assess the applicability of procedures and adaptations to carry them out (Dekker, 2003). In order to progress in this field, it is necessary to consider the safety approach as adaptive, dynamic, and developmental (Nascimento et al., 2013).


                        Dekker (2003) distinguishes between two models of rule application. The first is based on a normative view: rules are the safest way to perform a job, and operators must comply with them. The second is based on an adaptive view: rules are resources for operators, but they are not sufficient to cover all work situations. Safety then relies on the ability of operators (and managers) to judge when and how they should adapt procedures to local circumstances. The same distinction is made by Morel et al. (2008) between “regulated safety”, founded on procedures and scientific knowledge that anticipate undesirable situations, and “managed safety”, that refers to real-time relevant responses made by operators for adapting procedures to the circumstances of the situation. The challenge for developing a safety culture in organizations is to find a balance between these two types of safety (Daniellou et al., 2011).

The concept of safety culture can be defined as “the assembly of characteristics and attitudes in organizations and individuals which establishes that, as an overriding priority, [nuclear plant] safety issues receive the attention warranted by their significance” (INSAG, 1991, p.4). By expanding the concept to other organizations, Simard (2000, p.59.8) talks about “integrated safety culture” and affirms that it must be based on the association between the safety mission and the commitment of actors, so that safety is “an integral part not only of the enterprise culture as an essential value, but also of the behavior of all staff, reinforcing the total commitment from the top to the bottom” (p.59, our translation). Both concepts underline the convergence of attitudes and practices in favor of safety.

Although the concepts around the development of a safety culture are already well developed in recent years, its scope needs tools and methods that enable practitioners to ensure that the system in which they work be more resilient and able to bounce back quickly to errors or other unexpected events (Hollnagel et al., 2006). One of the interesting ways to reach this objective may be the development of participatory approaches discussed in ergonomics over the last thirty years.

The foundations of participatory ergonomics derive from the organizational theories of human relations. Lewin (1951), a precursor of this topic, argues that changes disrupt the stability of social systems and the forces that promote change must be greater than their resistance. For him, participation is the best way to conduct this change because the needs of workers can be integrated into the proposed changes.


                        Wilson (1991) defines participation as the people's involvement in the planning and control of a significant part of their own work activities, with the knowledge and the sufficient power of influence to improve the process and the outcomes. Its benefits are many and varied. Patel et al. (2012) show how trust and collaboration can be enhanced when team members work remotely and communicate via technology. Haims and Carayon (1998) report that an active involvement of participants leads to changes in perception and improves learning and understanding of the work environment. Finally, Wilson (1991) argues that participatory approaches allow better understanding between colleagues, and improves the relationship between the various professional groups and the effectiveness of problem solving.

Participatory ergonomics is carried out in different areas of work, such as in manufacturing environments (Garmer et al., 1995; Liker et al., 1991), in food sectors (Imada and Stawowy, 1996; Pehkonen et al., 2009), in office sectors (Haims and Carayon, 1998) or in video display terminal workplaces (Westlander et al., 1995). However, its objectives and structures can appear in many different forms from one study to another (Haines and Wilson, 1998). Some studies seek to reduce musculoskeletal disorders (Moore and Garg, 1997), others use participative methods to design work situations (Daniellou, 2003) or to implement new technologies (Garmer et al., 1995). In all these studies, the methods used vary greatly, ranging from simple formalized tools to extremely formal methods (St-Vincent et al., 2000).

In order to develop a culture of safety, the participatory approach we advocate allows the participation of different workers in safety management, so that various types of knowledge are articulated and confronted.

To foster participatory approaches in safety it is necessary to develop means to consider the actual organization and interactions among workers. These are concepts developed by the approaches “Strategizing” (Whittington, 1996) and “Work of Organization” (de Terssac and Lompré, 1996).

On the one hand, the “Strategizing” approach considers that the strategy is not only placed in the rational decisions of experts, but it also emerges from the everyday micro-activities (Rouleau, 2005). This approach integrates the routines of some actors — meetings, discussions, or data processing — in the definition and implementation of the strategy. In this way, the strategic issues of the organization should not be decided and imposed by the leaders, but must be the results of a daily construction with all stakeholders of the organization (Whittington, 2007).

On the other hand, for the model of “Work of Organization”, the challenge is to make the daily experiences visible, so that local arbitrations are the starting point of organizational changes. The “Work of Organization” approach describes a living organization: occupational rules are developed by the employees in order to mitigate the defects of the formal organization, and to develop safety. In this theory, we consider the organization in these two aspects, the formal one and the living one. The objective is to structure them and to create the conditions for reflecting the living organization (de Terssac and Lompré, 1996).

Both approaches consider an organization defined simultaneously by the leaders and by local and temporary regulations constructed by field operators. The question they raise is the need to feed the managerial and strategic levels of the organization by local micro-organizations. To do this, participatory approaches may play a key role. But how to develop participatory approaches that articulate the formal and the living organization? A possible way is the discussion and confrontation of points of view between different stakeholders of the organization around elements of the real work.


                        Daniellou et al. (2011) argue that articulating safety challenges with other operator constraints is only possible with a working group involving the concerned parties, in order to identify the situations that are particularly difficult to manage, to discuss them within the organizations and to propose changes. Hendry and Seidl (2003) talk about “a strategic episode” meaning “a sequence of communications structured in terms of its beginning and ending” in which organizations must be able to “routinely suspend their normal routine structures of discourse, communication and hierarchy, and so create the opportunity for reflexive strategic practice” (p.176). Detchessahar (2001) uses this concept and develops the theory of spaces of discussion, advocating the discussion of work on a regular and protected basis, coordinated by a manager who does not belong to the direct hierarchy. This method acts as a “medium that deals with all the arrangements, compromises and adaptations that suppose the lacks of the prescription incomplete instructions and the implacably erratic nature of concrete activity” (Detchessahar, 2013, p.59).

Managers are key actors to promote participation and debate among the workers. However, the evolution of their work takes them away from the field (Detchessahar and Journé, 2011) and makes it difficult to articulate between “top-down” information – from the top management to the field – and “bottom-up” information – feedbacks from field workers (Daniellou, 2012). The development of means enabling the managers to do this work is an essential condition for promoting participatory approaches.

To conclude, the development of work debate spaces appears as a concrete methodology to illustrate participatory approaches and can be very effective in recognizing the “Work of Organization” at the management level. However, one of the conditions of implementation of this approach seems to be the commitment of the top management in the content of local discussions. Conjard and Journoud (2013) stress the importance of integrating other levels of the organization in the local discussion, especially when it is about factors that cannot be resolved at the team level. This way top managers became responsible for the topics discussed (Detchessahar, 2013).

The present study is a part of a 3-year research project conducted in an electric company that wished to implement a new approach of safety management aimed at better articulating regulated and managed safety, at all levels of the company.

The project consisted at working with managers and operators to co-construct a system capable of anticipating risky conditions from the sharing of experiences and the collective discussion of daily situations. The objectives were twofold. From a theoretical point of view, it dealt with deepening the models of safety through a constructive vision. From a methodological point of view, the objective was to contribute to building a device of discussion and anticipation of anomalies in field. This article presents the contributions gained by this method, both for the workers and for the organization.

Four technical sites were investigated, ending in four types of WDS. For clarity reasons, we will present the results obtained in an operational site composed of seven Technicians (TC1, TC2, TC3, TC4, TC5, TC6 and TC7), one Local Manager (LM) and one Local Senior Manager (LSM).
                           3
                        
                        
                           3
                           The WDS were different from one site to another, because of local circumstances (number of actors, meeting times …) and the topics chosen by local actors for discussion, which led to diversity in terms of the methods used and transformations implemented. The site presented in this paper is the most representative of the contributions of WDS insofar as WDS involve few members, who were the same at each meeting. Moreover, WDS were regular and led to lasting transformations.
                         All accepted to participate to this study, which was divided into three successive phases:
                           
                              -
                              Phase of understanding the context: a 6 months phase, aimed at understanding the context of work. It was based on real work observations and interviews with workers. The results showed a weak group dynamic, and an absence of dialog between electrical technicians and local managers regarding field situations.

An experimental phase: to further to the results of the previous phase, we experimented with a WDS to talk about field anomalies (situations considered “risky” by the technicians, which could threaten their physical integrity or that of the system). To guarantee a collective reflection on real work situations, WDS was based on photos collected by the researcher during the first phase. The discussions were facilitated by the researcher and the prevention expert (PE) of the company. This phase lasted two months, including four meetings of one hour and a half each, every two weeks. It also led to co-construct a local WDS between technicians and the local manager.

An implementation phase: the objective of this phase was to perpetuate the method defined by the agents themselves in the experimental phase. The agents collected anomalies on a daily basis and discussed them together about 25 min every week. The researcher followed the process for two months, during four meetings, in order to understand the benefits and the appropriation of WDS by the actors. Usually only one situation was discussed during each meeting, allowing participants to go deeper into the case.

During the experimentation and implementation phases, the meetings were recorded, transcribed and then analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively. The qualitative analysis consisted in a thematic analysis of the collective debate. After a first general reading dedicated to the identification of the main themes of the discussion, a second coding defined sub-variables.

Three main variables emerged (Table 1
                        ):
                           
                              -
                              The dynamic of the discussion, which can be oriented towards the analysis of a specific problem or a class of problems (“Analysis”), or towards the treatment or redevelopment of collective solutions (“Treatment”).

The subjects discussed. The debate may concern a general problem (“GP”), i.e. a class of problem situations, specific field situations (“FS”), or the engineering of discussion spaces (“EDS”), when discussions focused on the constitution of these spaces.

The participation of the spokesperson in the discussion. The spokesperson can be the debate facilitator (“Researcher”, “PE” or “LM”) or the participants (“LM”, “TC1”, “TC2”, “TC3”, “TC4”, “TC5”, “TC6”, “TC7” and “LSM”).

Field situations include the primer situations (“Ps”) and the similar situations (“Ss”), as represented in Table 2
                        . Primer situations are the situations that initiate the debate; they can be reported by the facilitator (“Fac”) or by the technicians (“Techn”). Similar situations are field situations that are reported by participants to illustrate the debate and that resemble the primer situation.

The quantitative analysis consisted in identifying the duration of each variable in relation to the total time of the meeting, both in experimental (EXP) and implementation (IMP) phases. To do that, we used Actogram Kronos (Kerguelen, 2003), a chronologically-observed data processing software.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results of this study are presented in two parts. In the first section we describe the local method of debate co-constructed with the agents during the experimentation phase. Then, we present the contributions brought on by this method, which is the central theme of this article.

The results obtained during the experimentation phase permitted us to co-construct a local method to collectively report, analyze and treat anomalies encountered in real work situations. This method, called WDS, was founded on two basic principles. Firstly, it should not be a separate method, added to others, but should be integrated into the structure of the site. Secondly, the discussion should be based on actual on-site experiences. In order to facilitate the debate on real work, photos, videos, or personal accounts of situations may be used.

The WDS constructed includes four steps, represented in Fig. 1
                        :
                           
                              -
                              Technicians take photos of anomalies;

The photos are passed to the managers during the debriefing (which takes place at the end of everyday, when the technician sends the set of interventions made during the day to the local manager);

The debate facilitator selects the situations that seem the most important to discuss. The selection is based on the frequency and gravity of the reported situations;

In the weekly group meeting, the facilitator uses the photos to initiate a group debate and reflect on the decisions made during the last meeting.

There are two very important points in this process. Firstly, this local cycle can and must gain a systemic dimension. Some situations are handled locally through discussion. Others need the help of other levels of the organization. Thus, the PE sorts out those situations to contribute to their management. If the PE is unable to manage the situations, he could request that the members of the steering committee (within existing reunions) assist in this process of field situation management. Secondly, this method is conceived in this way taking into account the needs of the workers and the local organization. The WDS is anchored in existing resources, including the photo debriefing, and part of the weekly group meeting in order to debate the photos from the previous week. This “co-construction” is essential to the process since it allows participants to appropriate the method and the debate process effectively.

The analysis of the meetings during the implementation phase highlighted a number of contributions of the work debate space. Some data from the experimental phase complements the results, especially to describe the changing dynamics of the debate time.

Gradually, we observed an increase in time for discussion of individual situations as illustrated in Figs. 2 and 3
                           
                            below.
                              4
                           
                           
                              4
                              The % corresponds to the time period of the code in the complete section.
                            In the experimental phase, the majority of incidents reported involved situations not experienced by the technicians who attended the meeting (“Ss-Third”). From the third experimental session and in all the phases of implementation, technicians reported field situations in order to initiate the debate (“Ps-Tech”), as expected by the method, but they also began to report more and more individual examples (“Ss-Ind”).

Another striking result concerned the anticipation of risky situations (“Ss-Ant”). If in the first phase the anticipation seemed very small (0.9% in the first meeting), it is present in all the meetings of the second phase. It shows that the participants not only reported more field situations, but also anticipated others in function of the variability of the discussed situation.

This increase in the number of reported and anticipated situations in the WDS created a shared treatment, which is more and more significant. If in the first experimentation sessions the participants were primarily engaged in an analytical perspective to the detriment of their treatment, from the beginning of the third experimental meeting we note a balance between analysis and treatment of situations (Figs. 4 and 5
                           
                           ). This can be explained by the fact that at the beginning, the participants took advantage of the WDS to exchange about things that they did not share until then, because of a poor group dynamic. As the meetings continued, the participants appropriated the method and entered into the action phase.

Whereas in the beginning report and management of situations were two distinct processes, with no feedback, now the group debates the situations, anticipates possible risks and defines some solutions. The work debate space thus was able to improve the report and treatment of situations by the institution of a group reflection on the risks and reality of work.

The development of the meetings between the phases reveals a progressive appropriation of the process by the participants, which can be explained by at least three phenomena.

Firstly, the analysis of meetings shows an increase of technician participation to the debate (Table 3
                           ).
                              5
                           
                           
                              5
                              The empty compartments mean that the participant is absent in the meeting: TC2 was on sick leave, TC3 and LSM retired, and TC6 was present in an irregular way. We decided to include the agents who participated in at least 50% of the sessions (i.e. TC1, TC3, TC4, TC5 and LM) in the results of this study.
                            This is particularly notable for TC3, TC4, and TC5 who do not intervene much in initial meetings, but who often speak during the implementation phase.

Secondly, we observe an increased tendency in the exchange between technicians. During the first meetings, the majority intervenes in response to the discussion facilitator. Now, they also raise questions, take part in explanations from colleagues, and take much more initiatives to change or introduce new discussion topics.

Thirdly, similar situations (“Ss-Ind”, “Ss-Ant”, and “Ss-Third”) increase gradually in the meetings. This means that from the presented situation, the participants look to the past to share prior experiences and to the future to anticipate situations that may occur. This exchange of experience gives rise to mutual learning, as illustrated by participants' statements: “we discuss things here that I never saw in my training”; “now I understand”; “I never knew.”

The analysis of the dynamics of the meetings demonstrates that the initial objective is to develop hypotheses about what may have led to the discussed situation, and about the possible consequences. Then the agents share their opinions on the riskiness of the situation. Risk assessment differs depending on the participant and leads each to argue his point of view. This confrontation process does not inevitably end in a consensus (and it is not the expected objective), but it allows the various logics to be shared and discussed. The perception of different points of view leads each agent to analyze with respect to personal viewpoints, thus broadening, completing, or altering it. On a collective level, it allows the development of shared knowledge and know-how. In so doing the WDS contributes to the transfer of skills between the more experienced and the younger, and the development of the work group through the sharing and the construction of the occupational rules.
                              “We all react differently on things that we see, and that is very good. We share and that could make someone see things differently. In every meeting we have a discussion about a situation that was not dangerous for a colleague, but that was dangerous for me. Then I might change my opinion or he might change his opinion after a meeting and we’ll pay better attention next time”. Operating technician
                           
                        

This space develops a collective experience that allows each to be “armed” to respond to a number of increasing situations. It plays a direct role in the development of operators' expertise, thereby making them able to achieve performance goals.

Finally, all these elements give important evidence of the greater involvement of technicians, and of the appropriation of this method by participants. The analysis of the dialogs shows that there is more and more freedom in technicians' speech, as they understand they are not in danger of punishment, but in an environment open to sharing. At the same time, the discussion facilitator moves from a directive position to a participatory position, centering the debate on the questions of work.

The process of mutual learning generated by the WDS also constitutes an individual and social support. Indeed, the sharing of daily situations reassures not only those who report them to the collective, seeing that they are not alone in their experiences, but also their colleagues, who will be prepared to face similar situations in the future.
                              
                                 There are situations that pose smaller risks, more daily, but I think that we still need to discuss them. A silly thing happened to me yesterday. I was working at a middle school and I parked my car on the hill, where there were some shrubs. I opened my door and I got out. Except that there were a bunch of leaves and I thought it was the ground. I went down 50 cm into the leaves. Because this pile of leaves had accumulated, you could twist your ankle. It was interesting to share and say, ‘Hey, this could happen to you.’ Operating technician.
                           
                        

The fact of expressing oneself and being supported by colleagues contribute to reinforce the power to debate and the social support. It thus contributes to the work collective. It allows the local manager to stay connected with the fieldwork, and to the technicians to rely on the manager to regulate the problems that they encounter in the field.

The local manager still has a very important role in the implementation process, not only as the guarantor of the WDS, in systematically integrating it into the group meeting agenda, but also as discussion leader. As guarantor, the manager participates in all meetings and discussions, and acts as discussion facilitator. The manager gives advice, takes part in the discussion and guarantees that all points of view are heard. Furthermore, the manager pays attention that everyone participates in the discussions and if necessary asks follow-up questions such as, “could you tell us a bit more about the situation?” or “how did you react to the situation?” In doing so, the local manager learns more about the reality of technicians' work, the various assessments of risk, the applied adaptations, and by different methods of treatment to the discussed situations. In other words, the WDS enables the local manager to approach a reality that was not as clear before.

The results presented highlighted that the contributions of the WDS concern both the individuals and the organization. The WDS allows operators to develop their competences and construct a collective experience. In doing so, it develops their capacity to come up with pertinent answers in real time, and allows them to increase the reporting of and treatment of risky situations. The results equally show that progressively, agents move from the analysis to the treatment situations, then continue into a proactive vision, which they project in future situations from the anticipation of field situations. The WDS goes beyond a retrospective analysis because it triggers a discussion about others situations (in Table 1, code “similar situations”), including the potential risk in a similar situation or the anticipated future situations (in Table 2, code “Anticipation”). It means that the agents can go beyond the simple analysis of photo processing. They are able to anticipate and work towards an approach that prevents risks. The WDS offers the organization a reflective support group, open to the innovation capacities of individuals.

This study also shows that the WDS permits us not only to improve the management of safety, but also to develop the competences of the agents, develop the collective and to connect managers with the reality of field situations. From this point of view, the WDS does not constitute a safety tool in and of itself, but rather a tool that improves work (and thus safety). This approach allows us to move beyond the traditional perimeter of safety, founded on the retrospective analysis of dysfunctions, in order to enter in learning dynamic (Hollnagel et al., 2006), starting with field situations. In other words, it allows the development of safety by different actors in the company, and progresses the organization beginning with experiences within the organization itself. This permits the development of an enabling environment for safety (Falzon, 2008).

Accompanying the changing world of work presupposes the reinstatement of confrontation spaces via the discussion of work between different actors in the organization, the management of conflicts from the perspective of the safety of workers and the performance of the company. Nevertheless, the work debate is not intuitive, it must be learned. In order that the WDS is developed and sustained, several conditions prove necessary both for the guidance of the approach and for the implementation of the WDS. Concerning the guidance, it is necessary that the executive committee be engaged in the process by supplying the technical, organizational, and human means so that the WDS can be instigated. As for the conditions for the implementation of WDS, a preliminary phase proves necessary, based on observations and interviews with workers, to engage the elements for the development of the WDS. Within these spaces, some conditions are defined by Mollo and Nascimento (2013) so that people can experience the improvement proposals: a discussion based on real work activity, a joint elaboration and evaluation of solutions based on a dynamics of confrontation. Moreover, WDS must be integrated in the existing managerial meetings in order to avoid additional meetings.

We worked with one particular site. The generalization of this method in other company sites is underway and should be adapted and evaluated. Moreover, if WDS enables the managers to have a closer contact with the fieldwork, it is necessary to pay attention on what is reported by technicians, who tend to privilege the situations involving a material risk rather than violations or mistakes. We need to continue researches on the contributions and conditions of WDS in organizations to better understand the developmental dynamic for individuals, collectives and organizations.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

