@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Driver behavior in use of guide and logo signs under distraction and complex roadway conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Visual processing times for logo signs are slightly higher than for guide signs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Increased visual processing times for logo signs do not result in any vehicle control degradation.


                        
                        
                           
                           There are no attention allocation or driving performance differences between the use of six- and nine-panel logo signs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Drivers exhibit high levels of lane and speed control in navigating a work zone as compared to driving on an open freeway.


                        
                        
                           
                           Driving performance did not degrade during driver use of an in-car navigation aid.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Roadway logo signs

Driver performance

Driver distraction

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  White-on-blue logo signs on the sides of highways are typically used to notify drivers of food, gas, and lodging at an upcoming interchange. The current research assessed driver performance and attention allocation in a simulated freeway driving task when exposed to six-panel logo signs, nine-panel logo signs, mileage guide signs, and roadway work zones both with and without an in-car navigation device. The objective was to identify the impact of signage types on driver behavior under realistic driving conditions. Results revealed glance durations and fixation frequencies to guide signs to be significantly lower than with six-panel and nine-panel logo signs, but no differences were found between six-panel and nine-panel logo signs. There were also statistical differences among the independent variables for speed deviation and lane deviation, but magnitudes were not large enough to be considered practically significant in terms of driving safety. Overall, there were minor differences in sign processing time between logo signs and mileage guide signs, but such differences did not translate to degradations in vehicle control.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Highway agencies in the United States use white-on-blue logo signs to notify drivers of food, gas, and lodging businesses at highway interchanges. In some cases, the number of businesses at an interchange that seek to advertise exceeds the typical maximum of six available panels per logo sign as specified by the Federal Highway Administration. Logo signs with nine panels have been permitted for evaluation at a limited number of locations to assess safety implications (North Carolina Department of Transportation, 2006), but these are not otherwise permitted by the 2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD; FHWA, 2009). The 2009 MUTCD does not provide a justification for the maximum of six panels per logo sign.

A concern with the use of nine-panel logo signs is that the addition of more information on signs may increase driver visual distraction from the highway. Driver distraction is a diversion of attention, away from activities critical for safe driving, toward a competing activity (Lee et al., 2005). Carter and Wang (2007) conducted an observational study of motorist behavior near logo signs in which they recorded instances of unusual driving behaviors (e.g., braking, drifting and/or dashed/edge lane line encroachment) for six-panel, nine-panel, and overflow combination signs, on which panels from one type of business that do not fit on one logo sign are placed on a second logo sign. Among the different signs, there were no significantly different rates of unusual behaviors. Furthermore, Simpson (2007) studied the before-and-after crash history at 19 nine-panel and 11 overflow combination signs and found no significant differences between crash rates at those sites compared to sites with six-panel signs.

Recently, Hummer and Maripali (2008) showed slides of six-panel and nine-panel signs for 1.0 or 2.5 s to subjects scanning for a particular brand. Subjects made more errors with nine-panel signs, but the difference was not large (in terms of absolute sign count). In a driving simulator experiment, Zhang et al. (2013) found that the nine-panel signs drew greater visual attention than six-panel signs, but this actually translated to more conservative or safer driver behavior. None of the differences in visual behavior translated to driving performance decrements or safety implications in terms of vehicle control.

One difficulty in interpreting the results from both of the above experiments has been in obtaining perspective or identifying a point of reference. It is possible that nine-panel signs are more distracting than six-panel signs, but we do not know how the level of distraction caused by both types of logo signs compares to, for example, distraction imposed by standard green guide signs, which are considered to be safe by highway design standards.

Beyond this issue, it is possible that driver distraction due to roadway displays may be compounded by the use of in-vehicle navigation aids and exposure to hazardous roadway conditions. Distraction has become a roadway safety concern recently as a result of the proliferation of cell phones and in-vehicle technologies such as navigation aids (Ma and Kaber, 2005). Research has shown that driver use of navigation aids in a simulator led to an increased number of crashes due to drivers changing lanes into traffic (Green, 1997). Medenica et al. (2011) conducted an experiment demonstrating that the proportion of visual dwell time spent focusing on the roadway, as well as lane deviations and steering wheel error, was worse when using standard visual navigation aids. Kaber et al. (2012a) recently found that the complexity of the roadway environment compounded driver performance problems caused by hazard exposure, such as a construction zone. With these findings in mind, it was also considered instructive to examine driver use of traffic control devices, such as logo and guide signs, when posed with in-vehicle distractions and under a variety of roadway conditions from normal to unusual.

Based on the literature reviewed above, the objectives of this research were to compare visual attentional demands of six-panel vs. nine-panel logo signs and then to add perspective by comparing both of these logo sign types to standard guide signs. Furthermore, this research sought to evaluate driver use of logo and standard guide signs in combination with in-vehicle distraction conditions as well as unusual on-road conditions. Achieving these objectives was expected to support highway agencies and researchers in gauging the extent of distraction resulting from nine-panel logo signs and whether such distraction should be a focus of concern, given current day driver activities and roadway situations.

Seven research hypotheses were formulated based on the literature review. The first three concerned driver visual behavior when exposed to various types of signs:
                           
                              H1.
                              Driver detection of a target business panel on a logo sign was expected to be accurate and consistent among 6-panel and 9-panel signs as well as consistent with detection of destination and distance targets in guide signs.

Driver visual attention to 6-panel and 9-panel logo signs was expected to be comparable.

Driver visual attention to guide signs was expected to be greater than for logo signs due to information content (e.g., destination and mileage text).

The remaining hypotheses concerned driver performance when using different types of signs and when exposed to different roadway conditions:
                           
                              H4.
                              Driver performance (operationalized below) was expected to be comparable when using 6-panel or 9-panel logo signs.

Driver performance was expected to degrade when using guide signs as compared to logo signs (due to increased distraction of information content).

In general, driver performance was expected to degrade when using any roadway signs compared to no-sign conditions.

Driver performance was, however, expected to improve when exposed to hazardous roadway conditions as compared to no hazard and no sign conditions.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

To achieve the project objectives, a driving simulation experiment was conducted in which the desired distractors were systematically presented to participants. Driver visual behavior and performance responses were recorded with high resolution (described below).

Forty (40) participants (21 male and 19 female) with an average age of 38.25 years (range: 25–59) completed the experiment. Chen et al. (2007) previously reported that the number of traffic accidents decreased for drivers 25–60 years of age and increased for persons outside this range. On this basis, participant age in the present study was required to be within 25–60 years. This inclusion criterion promoted a relatively uniform sample in terms of driving ability. All participants had a valid North Carolina Driver's License and 20/20 vision; glasses or contact lenses were permitted in this study (and did not influence eye tracking system data collection).

All response measures were recorded over distances in which participants attempted to detect sign targets. The “detection phase” started 650 ft (198.12 m) from a sign, when drivers could see the sign in foveal vision, and ended 112 ft (34.14 m) from the sign, where vehicle fixtures, such as the rear-view mirror, obstructed viewing of the sign (a total distance of 538 ft (163.98 m)).

Sign detection performance was evaluated in terms of driver accuracy in correctly identifying food business logos on pre-interchange logo signs as well as destinations and mileages on post-interchange distance guide signs. Signal detection responses were recorded as follows: “Hit” if a participant correctly identified a sign target, “Correct Rejection” if the participant correctly dismissed a sign without a target, “Miss” if the participant did not respond at all to a sign including a target, or “False Alarm” if the participant identified a target that was not present on a sign.

Eye tracking measures were determined for an area of interest (AOI) in which guide and logo signs appeared during simulator trials. The AOI extended horizontally from the left edge of a sign when first visible in foveal vision, to the right edge of the simulated vehicle windshield. The AOI extended vertically from the lower edge of a sign when first visible, to the lower edge of the simulated vehicle rear view mirror (which obstructed the view of signage at a distance of 112 ft (34.14 m) or less). There were two eye tracking response measures derived from the eye movement data, including: (1) the maximum glance duration to the AOI; and (2) the AOI fixation frequency. The maximum glance duration was defined as the longest interval of any set of consecutive fixations to the AOI for each sign type, with a minimum duration of 100 ms. The fixation frequency was defined as the number of consecutive fixations to the AOI divided by the total number of fixations during the target detection phase, with a minimum threshold for fixation of 100 ms. Previous research on visual attention to logo signs (Zhang et al., 2013) has used the same measures with the same threshold durations for glances and fixations.

Driver performance was measured in terms of lane maintenance and speed control. For lane maintenance, the average absolute deviation of the center of the vehicle from the center of the lane during the target detection phase was computed. For speed control, the average absolute deviation of actual vehicle speed from the posted speed limit was computed. We have previously used such measures for effectively assessing driver performance in several other simulator studies (Zhang and Kaber, 2013; Kaber et al., 2012a,b).

A STiSIM Drive M400 fixed-base driving simulator (Systems Technology, Inc.) was used in this study (see Fig. 1
                           ). Our specific setup integrates three 38-inch HDTV monitors for presentation of a 135-degree field of view of the driving environment. The simulator configuration includes a realistic vehicle cab, integrated speakers, and standard driver controls that provide real-time feedback on steering and speed control. Similar driving simulator systems have been used in prior studies with user performance results validated against real driving behavior (Wang et al., 2010).

The simulation software allowed for creation of a highly realistic roadway model representative of daytime driving on a four-lane highway. Roadway features included a 46-foot (14.02 m) grassy median separating two 12-foot (3.66 m) wide lanes in each direction. Standard pavement markings were used to delineate lanes. The highway exits (interchanges) were spaced between 1 and 2 miles apart in the simulation. All highway signage, including logo signs, guide signs, speed limit signs and route signs, were designed and positioned in accordance with state and Federal requirements (FHWA, 2009; NCDOT, 2006). Related to this, the simulation was inspected by NC Department of Transportation staff for accuracy prior to use in any data collection. The simulation scenario also included construction zones and a moderate volume of intelligent simulated vehicles as traffic at Level of Service A conditions, which is approximately 3–4 vehicles per lane per minute. The Highway Capacity Manual (Ryus, 2012) defines this level as traffic flow at or above the posted speed limit with motorists having complete mobility between lanes. The average spacing between vehicles is about 550 ft (167 m) or 27 car lengths. Motorists also have a high level of physical and psychological comfort under this condition. The effects of incidents or point breakdowns are easily absorbed. Level of Service A conditions typically occur later in the evening in urban areas and frequently in rural areas. A 7-inch tablet was used to simulate an in-vehicle navigation aid (also see Fig. 1) and was positioned to the right of the simulator steering wheel. A custom navigation application was developed using a points-of-interest system for destination selection. The application interface was modeled after a current Garmin navigation aid model.

In this study, we used a FaceLAB 5 eye tracking system (Seeing Machines). The system included an infrared pod which emitted light to the driver's eyes and two cameras that captured reflections. The combination of this reflection (or “glint”) and the outline of either the iris or pupil were used to track eye movements during the simulation scenario. The system recorded eye movements against a world model that mirrored the actual simulator setup. That is, the AOI in the world model was based on the AOI at the simulator screens.

The study followed a balanced 2 × 2 × 2 (signage × roadway condition × navigation aid) factorial design. The levels of signage included 6-panel and 9-panel logo (with guide signs appearing in all simulation trials). The roadway conditions were normal or unusual (i.e., the construction zone) and the navigation was either off or on for driver use. Although this design was used for structuring test trials, and each trial contained some combination of the identified conditions, during the course of any trial, guide and logo signs did not necessarily appear at exactly the same location (or time) as construction zones. Consequently, a multi-way analysis of variance, corresponding to the experiment design used for structuring the trials, could not be applied. (Instead, other appropriate statistical analyses were applied, which are described below.) The general driving scenario for participants was that they were spending the day with friends, including lunch and a visit to a science museum in a distant town. During travel, drivers were informed that one friend learned the science museum was closed and that they needed to reroute to a history museum.

Each driving simulation trial presented either 6-panel or 9-panel logo signs. Participants were instructed to identify whether a specific food business panel (Hardee's, in this study) appeared on a logo sign. The target panel was randomly positioned among the other panels on both the 6-panel and 9-panel signs in order to reduce the potential for any effect of target position on results. Each trial included a food logo sign at each of the four interchanges. Food logo signs were selected for the detection task based on the finding by Hummer and Maripali (2008) that drivers often scan food logo signs for specific restaurants. The driving simulation also included lodging and gas logo signs at each interchange to be consistent with typical highway signage; however, participants were not required to identify business panels on those signs. Fig. 2
                            presents the two types of logo signs examined in the study.

At the beginning of each trial, participants were instructed to look for a particular destination town on post-interchange guide signs. Each time they passed a distance guide sign (see Fig. 3
                            for example) they were to state whether or not the destination town was listed on the sign, and how many miles it was to the town. Each simulation trial included four of these guide signs, one following each interchange.

Each simulation trial included one construction zone representing an unusual driving situation. The purpose of the zone was to increase the difficulty of driving compared to normal conditions and examine the impact of driver use of signage in advance of and following the zone. The construction zone occurred either early or late in each trial in order to prevent participant anticipation. In a construction zone, participants were required to lower their speed to the 45-mph (72.4 kph) limit, change to the left lane, as construction activities closed the right lane of the simulated roadway, pass the construction zone, then return to the right lane and increase their speed to a normal 65 mph (104.6 kph) limit. Complete work zone signage was presented in advance of the actual construction area. There were no logo or guide signs present in any construction zone.

Half of the simulation trials required participants to use an in-vehicle navigation aid. In trials requiring use of the navigation aid, participants were instructed to enter a request for directions to a science museum, located at the second exit, prior to driving. After passing the first post-interchange distance sign, participants were instructed to change their destination to a history museum, located at the fourth exit, prompting them to utilize the navigation aid while driving. (Despite automobile manufacturer warnings on use of navigation aids while driving, anecdotally, many drivers make us of such technology while driving.) In trials with no navigation aid use, participants were given the history museum as their only destination for the simulation trial.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants first completed an informed consent form, a demographic survey, and a preliminary simulator sickness questionnaire (SSQ; Kennedy et al., 1993). They were then led to the driving simulator and provided with an overview of all equipment. Participants completed three training sessions to familiarize them with vehicle controls, roadway appearance, relevant signs, and use of the navigation aid. Following the training sessions, participants were once again required to complete an SSQ and the eye tracking system was calibrated for each participant. If there were no indications of simulator sickness for a participant, the main experiment session began.

Eight experiment trials were presented in a randomized order. During the simulation, drivers drove a stretch of highway in which they were exposed to guide signs, logo signs, and any other signage found on interstate highways (e.g., exit markers and speed limit signs). When approaching a guide sign or logo sign, drivers verbally indicated whether the target was on the sign while concurrently controlling the vehicle. Drivers were instructed to maintain their vehicle in the center of any occupied lane as well as posted speed limits at all times. Between each trial, participants were asked to exit the simulator cab and were allowed up to a 5-min break to prevent stiffness and mitigate sickness symptoms. SSQs were required after every three trials and at the end of the eighth trial to monitor sickness symptoms. If a participant's responses indicated that he or she was experiencing simulator sickness, the participant was given a longer break to recover from the symptoms. If the participant was unable to recover, he or she was dismissed from the experiment without penalty. Each experiment session lasted approximately 4 h and participants were compensated for their time.

ANOVA models were constructed for testing the eye tracking and driving performance response measures. Since all trials contained combinations of the IV settings defined by the 23 factorial design but without condition occurrence at the same time (and location), the statistical models differed from a basic three-way ANOVA with interactions. With respect to the eye tracking measures, the model included main effects of sign type (six-panel logo sign vs. nine-panel logo sign vs. guide sign) and navigation aid (on vs. off), and an interaction term. The ANOVA model for testing the performance measures included main effects for traffic control measure (six-panel logo sign vs. nine-panel logo sign vs. guide sign vs. no sign vs. construction zone) and navigation aid (on vs. off), and an interaction effect.

Diagnostics performed on all response measures revealed non-normality and/or non-constant variance. For this reason, the two eye tracking responses (maximum glance duration and fixation frequency) were ranked to perform the equivalent of a nonparametric analysis using the ANOVA procedure. Furthermore, a log transformation was applied to the lane deviation response and deviations of speed from limits.

In general, all ANOVA models included participant and trial number as blocking variables. A significance level of p ≤ 0.05 was set as a criterion for the study. Due to the lack of a significant effect, trial number was removed from all models except for those used to test deviation of speed from limits. Post-hoc analyses were conducted with Duncan's Multiple Range (MR) tests to identify differences among the specific levels of any significant effects, as revealed by the ANOVA.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In all figures presented in this section, values shown over bars in charts are un-transformed response values. The standard error bars in the plots of Figs. 5–9 represent one standard deviation in the positive direction. The letters overlaid at the base of the bars in Figs. 5–9 represent the Duncan's MR post-hoc groupings of condition means.

Aggregate results for signal detection performance are presented in Fig. 4
                        . Percentages are reported for the four responses, including hit, correct rejection, miss, and false alarm. The hit and correct rejection responses were grouped as both indicated that a participant made correct identification of information on a sign. No further statistical analyses were conducted as histograms indicated uniformity of the responses across the three sign types.

A nonparametric ANOVA on the rank-transformed maximum glance durations revealed a significant main effect for sign type (F(2,1815) = 59.99, p < 0.01) but no significant main effect for navigation (F(1,1815) = 0.49, p = 0.48) and no significant interaction effect (F(2,1815) = 0.72, p = 0.49). As shown in Fig. 5
                           , Duncan's MR tests revealed the mean maximum off-road glance to 6- and 9-panel logo signs to be significantly greater than the mean maximum glance to the guide signs. However, there was no significant difference in longest glance between the 6- and 9-panel logo signs.

A nonparametric ANOVA on the ranked fixation frequency data revealed a significant main effect for sign type (F(2,1783) = 46.76, p < 0.01), but no significant main effect for navigation aid (F(1,1783) = 0.28, p = 0.60) or significant interaction effect (F(2,1783) = 2.18, p = 0.11). As shown in Fig. 6
                           , Duncan's MR tests revealed the mean fixation frequency to be greater for 6- and 9-panel logo signs than for guide signs, but there was no significant fixation frequency difference between the 6- and 9-panel logo signs.

An ANOVA was conducted on the log-transform of lane deviation. Results revealed a significant main effect for traffic control (F(4,2933) = 14.21, p < 0.01) but no significant main effect for navigation aid status (F(1,2933) = 1.19, p = 0.28) or significant interaction between the traffic control measure and the navigation aid (F(4,2933) = 0.76, p = 0.55). As shown in Fig. 7
                           , Duncan's MR tests on the traffic control measure revealed lane deviation to be significantly lower in the presence of a 6- or 9-panel logo sign than for any of the other types of traffic control. Lane deviation was significantly greater in the presence of a guide sign than in the presence of either of the logo signs. Furthermore, lane deviation was greatest when no sign was within a drivers' view.

An ANOVA on the log-transformation of the deviation of speed from limits revealed a significant main effect for traffic control (F(4,2943) = 3.56, p = 0.01) and a significant interaction effect of control type by navigation aid status (F(4,2943) = 2.69, p = 0.03), but no significant effect of the navigation aid (F(1,2943) = 0.92, p = 0.34). As shown in Fig. 8
                           , Duncan's MR tests on the settings of traffic control revealed that the deviation of speed from limits was greater in the construction zone than when drivers were exposed to the guide or no sign conditions. Unlike the results on lane deviation analysis, there was no significant difference between the guide sign, 6-panel logo sign, and 9-panel logo sign. Finally, deviation of speed from limits was greatest in construction zones and lowest when no sign was presented to a driver.

With respect to the significant interaction between the traffic control measure and navigation aid, as can be seen in Fig. 9
                           , speed deviation was greater when the navigation aid was on as compared to when it was off within each type of traffic control. However, this difference was only statistically significant when drivers were in the construction zone. The plot shows that the deviation of speed from limits was greatest when drivers were exposed to the construction zone and the navigation aid was on. This situation represents a high-stress and attentional loading condition. Deviations were smallest when the navigation aid was off and there was no sign or construction zone exposure for drivers.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The inferences presented in this section apply to rural highway driving under daytime roadway conditions with moderate traffic volumes. The inferences also apply to driver exposure to work zones under similar daylight and traffic conditions.

Hypothesis 1, which stated that the signal detection responses would be accurate and consistent for all sign types, was supported by the data. The low false alarm and miss rates indicated that the signs presented were visible, easy to read, and clear. These results were largely expected due to participants being frequent highway drivers. The results support the notion that guide, 6-panel and 9-panel logo signs are all accessible and require minimal effort for drivers to gain desired information.

Hypothesis 2 stated that there would be no significant difference in visual attention to 6-panel vs. 9-panel logo signs. This expectation was based largely on the results of Hummer and Maripali (2008), which showed that attentional demands of 9-panel signs were not greater than those of 6-panel signs. Our results indicated no significant difference between 6- and 9-panel logo signs in terms of both maximum off-road glance duration and off-road fixation frequency. Thus, Hypothesis 2 was also supported by the data.

Despite the greater number of panels present on the 9-panel food logo sign, participants did not take significantly greater time to identify a target panel. Furthermore, there was no increase in the number of fixations necessary for reading the sign. It is possible that drivers used ambient vision (peripheral and parafoveal) for processing some sign information. When fixating on a single panel, other panels in a logo sign are perceptible through ambient vision, which prior research has found to require limited attentional resources (Wickens and Hollands, 2000). Participants might have used strategies such as color identification of adjacent panels to determine whether a target was present. Such a strategy would be effective for both 6- and 9-panel signs.

Hypothesis 3, which stated that guide signs were expected to require greater visual attention than logo signs, was not supported by the data. Results revealed a significant difference in eye tracking measures between logo and guide signs; however, logo signs proved more visually demanding than guide signs. Guide signs produced statistically significantly lower maximum off-road glance durations and fixation frequencies. It is worth noting, however, that the differences in glance duration were extremely small. The mean maximum off-road glance duration was only 0.264 s greater for 6-panel logo signs vs. guide signs and 0.293 s greater when comparing 9-panel logo signs with guide signs. Furthermore, all mean maximum off-road glance durations determined in this study were far less than the vehicle control uncertainty threshold of ∼1.8 s, as previously identified by Wierwille (1993), or the 2.0 s threshold suggested by NHTSA for a single off-road glance to an in-vehicle distraction (NHTSA, 2012). With respect to fixation frequency, results revealed logo signs to draw about 8% more off-road fixations than guide signs. This finding corresponds to the slightly higher maximum off-road glance duration observed for the logo signs.

With respect to human information processing, Wickens (1984) identifies strategies for reducing processing time, including chunking, or mentally organizing displays into small, unit pieces of information. In this study, all town names presented on guide signs were five characters in length, representative of a single chunk of information. By this convention, each guide sign contained six chunks; similar to the logo signs presenting six or nine chunks (panels) of information. However, the format of the information, presented textually for the guide signs, as opposed to symbolically for the logo signs, did not influence visual behavior as expected. One possible explanation is that guide signs present an equal or lesser number of chunks in a smaller area. Logo signs are much larger, requiring greater visual attention to scan the entire area of the sign. Furthermore, text displays dictate that drivers use a consistent scan pattern (i.e., reading from left to right); whereas, scanning of logo signs may not be structured and may be less efficient. Drivers can also develop expectations for guide sign content (e.g., the name of a town precedes its distance); however, the content of logo signs from one exit to the next may be completely different. Such patterns in signage and driver expectations can serve to reduce maximum off-road glance duration and fixation frequency for guide signs.

Hypothesis 4 stated that there would be no difference in driver performance when exposed to 6-panel vs. 9-panel logo signs. Results supported this expectation and are likely related to the fact that the 9-panel logo signs did not require significantly more attentional resources than the 6-panel logo signs; thus, drivers were able to devote the requisite resources to the driving task (see Dingus et al., 1988).

Hypothesis 5 stated that driver performance in the presence of guide signs would be degraded compared to driver performance in the presence of logo signs. While mean lane deviation in the presence of guide signs was statistically greater than the mean lane deviation in the presence of logo signs, the average difference was approximately 0.16 ft (or 1.9 in (4.88 cm)). This degree of difference suggests no functional change in vehicle control when comparing guide vs. logo sign exposure. This result, combined with the absence of a significant difference among sign types in terms of deviation of speed from limits, provided evidence refuting Hypothesis 5. It was apparent from the performance results that any differences in driver (visual/attentional) behavior among the types of traffic control presented did not translate to practically important performance decrements during guide or logo sign exposure.

Hypothesis 6 stated that the use of roadway signage would degrade driver performance when compared to no-sign conditions. Results refuted this expectation. While there were statistically significant differences, there was no functional variation in vehicle control among the sign vs. no sign conditions. The greatest lane deviation differences were 0.32 ft (3.8 in (9.75 cm)) and the greatest difference in deviation of speed from limits amounted to 0.31 mph (0.50 kph). This is likely a product of drivers being experienced in the real-world sign perception task. Furthermore, the eye tracking results revealed that a vast majority of the off-road glances were lower than the 1.8-s vehicle control threshold identified by Wierwille (1993), indicating that there were very few off-road glances that would have resulted in substantial loss of vehicle control.

Hypothesis 7 stated that driver performance would improve in the presence of a hazard condition (i.e., a construction zone) compared to no-sign conditions. Results did not support the hypothesis. In fact, driver exposure to construction zones led to the greatest degradation in speed control (∼1.25 mph (2.01 kph) deviation of speed from limits) as well as the second greatest degradation in lane maintenance (∼5–6 in (∼12.7–15.2 cm)), as compared to the no signage condition. These observations may be due to on-road distractions when negotiating work zones. The absolute differences in lane and speed deviation do not suggest functional variations in vehicle control among the construction and normal roadway conditions. Participant reports of high frequency highway driving suggest that they had ample experience in changing lanes, merging from two lanes into one lane, and decreasing speed in advance of a work zone. Related to this, even in the work zones, tapers were generous, lane widths were standard, visibility was good, there was no dust or noise associated with the work, and traffic volumes were moderate.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The objective of this research was to assess driver visual behavior and performance when exposed to different types of highway signage and distractions while negotiating normal and unusual highway conditions. Results of the experiment revealed minor differences in driver visual behavior among sign types with logo signs drawing slightly more visual attention than guide signs but with no difference between 6- and 9-panel logo signs. There were also minor differences in sign visual processing time with logo signs taking about one saccadic movement (∼200 ms) more to process than guide signs.

The most important outcome from this experiment was that any differences in driver visual behavior did not appear to translate to functional/operational variation in vehicle control when exposed to signs or in the absence of signage. In fact, driver lane maintenance and speed control were statistically worse when exposed to guide signs as compared with logo signs and worse still in the absence of signage or when confronted with a construction zone. It should be reiterated that these findings apply specifically to drivers between the ages of 25 and 60 years of age and may or may not be generalizable to younger or older drivers.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

This study was conducted using a fixed-base driving simulator; that is, no motion or kinesthetic cues were conveyed to drivers during the simulation trials. Drivers did not experience g-forces on their bodies with vehicle acceleration/deceleration or turns. In addition, the simulation presented a rural highway with standard geometry and signing. The roadway was simulated under daylight conditions and there were few other driver distractions. Beyond this, a moderate traffic density was used for each trial (∼3–4 vehicles per lane per minute or Level of Service A conditions). Results may have differed with differing roadway conditions or higher simulated traffic densities.

@&#FUTURE WORK@&#

It is possible that the Hardee's logo used in the search task was more salient than the some of the other logos and therefore easier to search for. Future work will investigate the role of salience in logo search performance during highway driving. Future research should also investigate longer test trials, test trials under more congested roadway conditions, or test trials with young and old drivers using similar signage conditions. Another interesting follow-up study would be to examine the effects of billboards, which are often the alternatives to logo signs on the roadway, and may have great potential for distraction. Also, a field study of driver visual behavior could be included in future research. Finally, a future study could examine logo sign designs with greater numbers of panels in order to identify the maximum number of panels that can be included on a single logo sign without degrading driver performance.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

Funding for this project was provided by the Transportation Mobility and Safety Branch of the NCDOT (2012-1556). The authors would like to thank Ron King, Signing Program Engineer, and Kevin Lacy, State Traffic Engineer, for their contributions in formulating the research questions, planning the experiment and reviewing the driving simulation scenario. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NCDOT.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

