@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Keep the driver in control: Automating automobiles of the future

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Driver-initiated automation leads to increased workload and decreased trust.


                        
                        
                           
                           Driver protocols and behavioural observations highlight systems design issues.


                        
                        
                           
                           Recommendations for future systems development discussed.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Automation

Driver trust

Driver workload

Thematic analysis

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Automated automobiles will be on our roads within the next decade but the role of the driver has not yet been formerly recognised or designed. Rather, the driver is often left in a passive monitoring role until they are required to reclaim control from the vehicle. This research aimed to test the idea of driver-initiated automation, in which the automation offers decision support that can be either accepted or ignored. The test case examined a combination of lateral and longitudinal control in addition to an auto-overtake system. Despite putting the driver in control of the automated systems by enabling them to accept or ignore behavioural suggestions (e.g. overtake), there were still issues associated with increased workload and decreased trust. These issues are likely to have arisen due to the way in which the automated system has been designed. Recommendations for improvements in systems design have been made which are likely to improve trust and make the role of the driver more transparent concerning their authority over the automated system.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Whilst it is technically feasible to achieve full vehicle automation (Brookhuis et al., 2008), there is growing concern within the Ergonomics and Human Factors community that the role of the driver is not being fully recognised or designed (Norman, 1990; Stanton et al., 2007). Whilst systems designers focus on the tasks that can be automated within the driving system, the driver is left to complete all of the leftover tasks (see Bainbridge, 1983 for a discussion on the ironies of automation). Indeed, ‘hands and feet free’ driving has viable since the early 1990's (for a comprehensive review see Dickmanns, 2002) with each facet of technology being a stepping stone to an increased level of autonomy. Even if the vehicle is capable of controlling all of the physical and cognitive tasks associated with driving, it is unlikely that drivers will willingly become disengaged completely from the task (Banks and Stanton, 2014). This is because in their new supervisory role, they must remain aware of the status of multiple vehicle systems at the same time and respond accordingly in situations where malfunction or failure occurs (Cuevas et al., 2007; Dehais et al., 2012; Stanton et al., 2006; Walker et al., 2009a, 2009b).

The automation of longitudinal and lateral control is not an entirely new concept (e.g. Young and Stanton, 2007). However, market-ready technologies have typically aimed at supporting the driver in different driving tasks ranging from navigation support to supporting the driver to stay in lane or maintain speed. This is known as function specific assistance (NHTSA, 2013). However, over recent years, combined function assistance (NHTSA, 2013) has sought to assist the driver in both longitudinal and lateral control. A number of vehicle manufacturers have introduced their own versions of highly automated system architectures to this specification (e.g. General Motor's Super Cruise, Fleming, 2012; Mercedes Distronic Plus with Steering Assist, Daimler, 2013). For safety reasons all of these systems require the driver to permanently monitor the road ahead as well as monitor vehicle systems (Stanton et al., 2011) despite delegating much of the physical workload to the automated system. Although the concept of driver support has often been associated with bypassing human control inputs in an effort to eliminate driver error (Brookhuis et al., 2001), some systems require drivers to intermittently place their hands back on the steering wheel as measured through torque sensor measurements (Pohl and Ekmark, 2003) in an effort to keep the driver in control. However, a proposed driver-initiated system of automation goes further than this and would consider the driver as the key social agent within the system network who is still responsible for overall system safety (Parasuraman and Wickens, 2008) despite much of the physical workload being delegated to the automation. A driver-initiated command and control system, in its most basic form, can be described as a form of management infrastructure (Harris and White, 1987) requiring the driver and automated system to communicate and coordinate their behaviour in order to achieve a common goal (Hoc et al., 2009). The term ‘driver-initiated’ infers that the driver is able to exercise their control and authority over the automated system, keeping them in control of the planning, directing and control of when the resources available from the automation will be used (e.g. Builder et al., 1999). Although command and control socio-technical systems are typically associated with Air Traffic Control (Shorrock and Straeter, 2006; Walker et al., 2010) and military teams (Walker et al., 2009a, 2009b), this paper provides a novel application to the driving domain.

The primary purpose of this study was to conduct an initial assessment of a prototype driver-initiated automated control system that combined longitudinal, lateral and auto-overtake capabilities. Driver-initiated design of the overtake manoeuvre meant that an automatic overtake could be performed by the system on the proviso that permission was granted by the driver as signalled by indicator initiation. The main purpose of which was to assess the systems design effects on subjective reports of driver mental workload and trust using direct observational methods as well as some insight into the design of the Human–Machine Interface (HMI). Trust and workload are important concepts to consider in the future implementation of higher level autonomy because inappropriate levels of trust may lead to disuse (i.e. drivers reject the potential benefits of the system) or misuse (i.e. drivers become complacent) (Parasuraman et al., 1993). In addition, a ‘negative’ first time experience in using the system could lead drivers to reject the system completely (i.e. not use it even when it becomes available) (Sheridan, 1988). Systems developers may be underestimating the power of ‘trust’ in determining the success of human-automation performance (Sheridan and Ferrell, 1974). This means that in order for drivers to experience the full benefit afforded by the automation of longitudinal and lateral control, they must have appropriate levels of trust in system operation (Lee and See, 2004). Any violation of a driver's expectation of system functionality is likely to have an effect on subjective ratings of trust. For example, Dzindolet et al. (2002) propose that naive operators are more likely to expect automated assistance to be capable of outperforming them. If the automation fails to perform in the way expected, ratings of trust begin to decline (Wiegmann et al., 2001). The purpose of the latter assessment was so that any potential design weaknesses within the prototype HMI architecture could be highlighted as well as provide recommendations for suitable revision that would make the automated system limits more transparent. The transparency of system feedback is important because it protects against the occurrence of mode error and a misunderstanding of system state (Sarter and Woods, 1995).

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

A total of 32 participants (mean age = 38, SD = 10.8) were recruited to take part in this on-road trial. All participants held a full UK driving licence for a minimum of one year and were between the ages of 18 and 65. This was to ensure that the performance decrements often demonstrated by older drivers (i.e. over 65 s) and novice drivers (i.e. drivers with less than 12 months driving experience) did not affect the results of the study.

Upon providing informed consent, participants were given an introduction to the functionality of the system within the vehicle. However, due to commercial sensitivities, a discussion of the mechanisms underlying the prototype system of automation were not included in this introduction. Instead given the study objectives to include an assessment of the current HMI architecture, drivers were presented with a series of icons (see Fig. 1
                        ) that they would see on the Human–Machine Interface (HMI) which was represented on a Head-Up display above the traditional dashboard. Attention was drawn to the red warning icon that was coupled with an auditory tone. This form of visual-auditory feedback is widely employed in warning systems (Noujoks et al., 2014) and drivers were told that they may see this icon if the system was unable to cope with its environment. Importantly drivers were told that this did not constitute an ‘automation failure’ but a situation whereby the system was struggling to maintain full functionality – for example, a weakened Global Positioning System (GPS) signal that would right itself. At no point were drivers exposed to a full automation failure. Drivers were told that following a system warning, they would be expected to regain full control of the vehicle until the feedback on the HMI resumed to ‘green’. Following this introduction, drivers were invited to familiarise themselves with the controls and ask any questions.

In total, drivers were expected to complete two driving conditions within a 20.4 mile circular test route along the M40, a three-lane highway located in the Midlands. The Manual condition required participants to complete all of the physical and cognitive tasks associated with driving whilst an Automated condition automated some of the physical (i.e. maintaining longitudinal and lateral control) and cognitive tasks (i.e. deciding when it was safe to perform a lane change and suggesting an overtake manoeuvre to the driver). The presentation of these conditions to drivers was counterbalanced to eliminate order effects. Regardless of driving condition, drivers were instructed to maintain a speed of 110 km per hour (70 miles per hour) and abide by UK driving law at all times. Drivers were not directly invited to drive ‘hands free’ at any time.

In the Automated condition, drivers were invited to engage the automated system upon joining the carriageway through use of a control stork located underneath the traditional directional indicator controls on the left hand side. Throughout each experimental condition, consisting of 10.2 miles, drivers were invited to perform three basic driving manoeuvres; maintain speed and distance to a Target Vehicle (identified by the Safety Driver in an opportunistic fashion upon joining the carriageway in Lane 1), perform an overtake (i.e. pull out and pass) manoeuvre and finally perform a lane change without use of directional indicators when safe to do so (directional indicators simply refer to the stalk controls that are used by drivers to alert other road users of their intent to pull out into the adjacent lane). Drivers were prompted to perform these manoeuvres by a Safety Driver who sat in the front passenger seat and upon completion of each individual manoeuvre, were asked a series of structured questions by an Experimenter who was sat in the back of the vehicle. These questions were specifically designed to reveal information about how well drivers understood the meaning of the content shown on the Human–Machine Interface and their understanding of system mode and operation. This was in an effort to highlight design weaknesses within the current system architecture. Drivers were encouraged to elaborate on their verbal responses, thus generating a richer dataset. Responses were recorded through use of video and audio equipment as well as written observational notes relating to driver behaviour (e.g. driver response to warnings).

Halfway through the experiment, drivers were instructed to leave the northbound carriageway at a designated junction and invited to take a short break whilst video data and recordings were saved. During this time, they were invited to complete the NASA-TLX (Hart and Staveland, 1988) and Checklist for Trust between People and Automation (Jian et al., 2000) to measure subjective ratings of workload and trust. When drivers felt ready continue, they were invited to re-join the southbound carriageway where the manoeuvres were repeated as outlined above. After 10.2 miles, drivers were instructed to leave the carriageway and these questionnaires were repeated.

The test vehicle was a left hand drive, medium sized family saloon car equipped with a prototype system of longitudinal and lateral control that allowed for the automation of driver-initiated overtake (i.e. pull out and pass) manoeuvres. Although participants were UK licence holders, they were all familiar with driving left hand drive vehicles on UK roads which was an essential demographic to ensure that task complexity was not inadvertently increased by a lack of experience in driving left hand vehicles.

A Safety Vehicle was used to monitor traffic ahead of the Test Vehicle and communicate any hazardous situations, such as harsh braking, to the Safety Driver via radio. If necessary, the Safety Driver could inform participants to take extra care.

A comprehensive risk assessment was conducted to ensure that the above experimental procedure was ethically acceptable. The role of the Safety Driver was not only to monitor the roadway environment to ensure that manoeuvres could be performed safely but also ensured that if for any reason the driver failed to regain control of the vehicle following an audible and visual system warning, they could provide verbal instruction. Importantly, all participants were told that whilst systems warnings may occur in the Automated driving condition, a total loss or failure of automation would be unlikely to occur. Even so, the Safety Driver could override the Automation completely (i.e. switch back to Manual) by pressing a button if needed.

The content of the interview was subjected to interrogation through use of Thematic Analysis as has been previously demonstrated by Banks et al. (2014a). An initial coding scheme was developed using a data-driven approach. The aim of the coding scheme was to reveal information relating to system usability and driver behaviour. A small focus group consisting of two design engineers and two human factors researchers read through all of the driver responses to the structured questionnaire and began to highlight key themes. Following repeated iterations, the focus group agreed on a final coding scheme consisting of five key themes (see Table 1
                     ). Four verbal transcripts (representing approximately 10% of the sample) were selected at random to be subjected to further analysis by a secondary coder to calculate inter-rater reliability. This analysis resulted in 97.88% agreement (Cohen's κ = 1).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Results of the thematic analysis are shown in Table 1 and provides a useful, albeit, exploratory insight into driver perception of system usability and possible design deficiencies within the current prototype architecture. Results of individual Key Themes are discussed in turn.
                           
                              •
                              Knowledge of System Engagement

Results indicate that the primary information used by drivers to ascertain if the system was engaged or not was the HMI display for both Manual and Automated driving. This suggests that the interaction or link that exists between the driver and HMI agent is extremely important. The emphasis that drivers placed upon each sub-theme appears to be affected by the level of assistance that they received. For example, drivers were more likely to reference being in control and using information from their environment to aid their understanding of system engagement in Manual driving, whilst more emphasis was placed upon physical feedback from the vehicle in Automated driving.
                           
                              •
                              Expectation Management

The management of driver expectations relating to their subjective perception of ‘how’ the system would behave was on the whole very good. However, verbal protocols suggest that expectations were most likely to be unmet in the Manual driving condition. Reasons for the mismanagement of driver expectation may be found in an analysis of codes relating to System Usability.
                           
                              •
                              System Usability & System Mode

Whilst it is encouraging to note a high number of positive references to understanding the HMI were observed for both Manual and Automated driving, drivers were more likely to misunderstand the meaning of HMI in Manual driving. A common mistake was for drivers to think the system was actively assisting the driver when it was not, representing a form of mode error (Sarter and Woods, 1995). In many instances, this represented that driver expectation of system functionality went beyond the original design parameters hence the increased frequency of driver expectations being unmet signalling an issue within the feedback presented to the driver via the HMI. Even so, the increased number of positive statements elicited by drivers in the automated condition signal that the current HMI display is likely to be acceptably transparent for first time users to understand. This is further confirmed by the frequency of code occurrence for the subthemes relating to System Mode.

In addition, code frequencies for the remaining subthemes of System Usability highlight a number of other important considerations that may affect the way in which drivers choose to use the automated system in the future. For example, unexpected lane changes and the perception of unsafe lane offerings, although experienced by only a small number of participants, indicate that the driver-initiated system in its current state requires some modification. The implications of these ‘negative’ experiences are likely to be reflected in subjective trust and workload ratings.
                           
                              •
                              Behavioural Observations

Out of a possible 96 instances where the driver could become ‘hands and feet free’ whilst driving in automated mode, 41 observational references were made to being ‘hands free’. This means that almost half of the overtake manoeuvres in the Automated driving condition saw the driver adopt a more ‘supervisory’ role, allowing the vehicle to perform the manoeuvre autonomously.

However, it should be of greater concern that roughly 22% of drivers were observed failing to regain control following a system warning. This suggests that the presentation of the warning to drivers via the HMI did not appropriately trigger the drivers to regain control of the vehicle. Instead, drivers required prompts from the Safety Driver to place their hands back on the steering wheel and actively engage in the driving task again. This highlights a severe deficiency in the current design of the warning system.

Results of the 7-point Checklist for Trust between People and Automation (ranging from 1 ‘Not at all’ to 7 ‘extremely’) indicate that driver responses to negatively framed questions are consistently rated less favourably for automated driving in comparison to manual driving (Fig. 2
                        ); deceptive (z = 2.532, p < 0.05, r = 0.45), underhanded (z = 2.076, p < 0.05, r = 0.37), suspicious (z = 3.749, p < 0.01, r = 0.66), wary (z = 3.306, p < 0.01, r = 0.58) and harmful (z = 2.864, p < 0.01, r = 0.51). This may be attributed to drivers not having yet learnt the competence limits of the technology (Fitzhugh et al., 2011) or having experienced some of the issues highlighted above (e.g. unsafe lane offering). However, it may also signal underlying issues such as a refusal to transfer control to an automated system despite driver-initiated design that is used to maintain a command–control relationship between the driver and automation.

The opposite trend was revealed for positively framed questions; manual driving was rated more favourably than automated driving (Fig. 3
                        ); confident (z = −3.546, p < 0.05, r = −0.63), security (z = −2.170, p < 0.05, r = −0.38), dependable (z = −2.999, p < 0.05, r = −0.53), reliable (z = −2.974, p < 0.05, r = −0.53) and trust (z = −3.469, p < 0.005, r = −0.61). The greater range in driver responses to automated driving is likely to be a reflection of the consequence of first time system use in addition to the discussion of negatively framed questions. In order to encourage driver trust in automation, drivers need a clear understanding of what the system is capable of and its purpose (Rasmussen et al., 1994). Future research should seek to expose drivers to longer periods of highly automated driving to see if subjective ratings of trust change over time.

A ‘negative’ first time experience of using a new automated system is also likely to affect subjective ratings of driver workload as internal mental models are continually challenged as the driver attempts to build a picture of how the automated system works. Any sudden or unexpected system behaviour is likely to induce stress and increase workload (Young and Stanton, 2002). For example, an unexpected lane change could lead to an automation surprise (Sarter et al., 1997) that could result in a sudden increase in driver workload as they attempt to understand ‘why’ the system is behaving in this way as well as inducing driver stress. Analysis of the NASA-TLX revealed that median Overall Workload scores were significantly higher in automated driving (Mdn = 42) in comparison to the Manual drive (Mdn = v26.5), z = 3.107, p < 0.005, r = −0.55 (Fig. 4
                        ).

Further analysis of the individual subscales of the NASA-TLX revealed significant differences between mental demand (z = 3.327, p < 0.005, r = −0.59), temporal demand (z = 3.134, p < 0.005, r = −0.55), effort (z = 2.409, p = 0.05, r = −0.43) and frustration (z = 2.843, p < 0.005, r = −0.50) with automated assistance consistently resulting in increased scores. This on the one hand may be a simple reflection of the fact that these ratings were collected during first time use of the automated system. However, it may also signal more important issues that require consideration. For example, increased workload could be a reflection of the additional requirement for drivers to monitor system behaviour and ensure the vehicle was responding effectively, in addition to traditional driver monitoring of other traffic on the road (Merat et al., 2012) as they develop their internal working models. This means that although the driver was not in direct control of vehicle outputs, they had to remain aware of changes in their environment (Parasuraman and Wickens, 2008) suggesting that far from reducing workload, automation may simply shift driver attention to other tasks such as system monitoring (Reinartz and Gruppe, 1993). This additional responsibility could be enough to increase subjective workload scores. However, over time, subjective workload ratings of driving may begin to decrease as additional attentional resources are released to complete other tasks (Liu and Wickens, 1994; Rudin-Brown and Parker, 2004; Stanton et al., 2001). de Winter et al. (2014) argue that automation of longitudinal and lateral control is distinctly different from traditional adaptive cruise control because it has the potential to divert driver attention to secondary tasks. In addition, Carsten et al. (2012) report that drivers are more likely to engage in other tasks when they receive lateral support. Future research should expose drivers to increased duration of automated driving to see how comfort levels and ratings of workload change over time. This would be especially useful to see how levels of driver engagement are affected by increased durations of automated control.

In order for the implementation of the automation of longitudinal and lateral control to be a success, the driver must be comfortable with the degree of control transfer given to the system. The benefit of adopting a driver-initiated systems design is that an element of command and control remains within the drivers grasp (Banks and Stanton, 2014). This means that rather than becoming a passive monitor of the system (e.g. Byrne and Parasuraman, 1996), the driver remains an active supervisor. This means that although the status of the driver within the control-feedback loop has changed, a driver initiated design could prevent against the disintegration of driver-vehicle links within the control-feedback loops (Banks et al., 2014b). Based upon the results presented in this paper, it is clear that the prototype system of driver-initiated automation used in this study requires continued development in order to improve ratings of driver trust and workload. Although it was hypothesised that a driver-initiated automated control system could protect against the occurrence of out-of-the-loop performance problems often cited within the wider literature (e.g. Billings, 1988; Endsley and Kaber, 1997), it is not clear whether or not a command–control relationship between the driver and automation will be successful. However, the authors propose that such a system may be successful if appropriate design modifications are made. These are based upon both improving the transparency of systems design through HMI feedback and setting more appropriate system limits that eliminate the likelihood of the automation behaving in an inconsistent manner (e.g. remove the potential for unsafe lane offerings and unexpected lane changes). The authors propose the following systems design modifications based upon the evidence presented in the driver protocols and observations made by the research team within this study;
                        
                           1.
                           Remove the capability of the automated system to offer an automatic overtake. Although the occurrence of unsafe lane offerings was low (only two participants raised concerns – Table 1), it highlights an important facet in the development and maintenance of driver trust (Lee and See, 2004). Removing the overtake offering will mean that drivers will need to continue to rely upon their own judgement in initiating complex driving manoeuvres with the knowledge that a background system of automation is capable of overriding the driver (i.e. it will not change lanes if a fast moving vehicle occupies the intended lane) if the manoeuvre cannot be completed safely. In its current state, the prototype used in this study does not reach an acceptable standard of combining human decision-making with automated decision-making (Madhaven and Wiegmann, 2007) resulting in the perception of unsafe lane offerings for some drivers. According to Moiser and Skitka (1996), human-machine decision-making should result in a high-performing control system that enhances the quality of joint performance. However, the conflict that existed between the driver and automation highlighted that a thorough appraisal of driver decision-making processes relating to the execution of an overtake manoeuvre had not been completed. Madhaven and Wiegmann (2007) argue that it is essential that such an analysis be completed if automated support systems like this are to be a success. The authors recommend removing the offer of performing an automatic overtake manoeuvre because it remains driver-initiated regardless of the presence of a system offering. In other words, the offering is meaningless given that as soon as the driver expresses their intent to change lane, as signalled by manipulation of the directional indicators, the automated system takes over.

In order to address issues surrounding Unexpected Lane Changes, referenced three times in Table 1, it may be necessary to remove the capability of the automated system to change more than one lane at a time. This would mean that in order to travel from Lane 1 to Lane 3 of a highway, two driver initiated lane changes would be needed. Although only 9% of all overtake manoeuvres resulted in an unexpected lane change, it highlights the potential for such system behaviour to occur in the first place. System behaviour that is unwanted is not only likely to affect ratings of driver trust and workload (Lee and See, 2004), but also have the potential to affect the safety of other road users. For instance, an automated manoeuvre could indirectly lead to a road traffic accident if any other vehicles on the network take evasive action to avoid the host vehicle.

Presently, the symbology relating to system availability leads to driver confusion over system state, especially in the Manual driving condition. Although the occurrence of this form of mode error (Sarter and Woods, 1995) is likely to reduce as drivers become more familiar with the system (Larsson, 2012), more transparent HMI content could reduce the frequency of occurrence further. Based upon the data presented in this paper, improvements to HMI feedback during manual driving would greatly improve system transparency.

With nearly one quarter of the sample used in this study failing to regain complete control of the vehicle following a system warning, the current warning system fails to efficiently capture the driver's attention. Whilst Noujoks et al. (2014) support the use of visual-auditory takeover requests as featured on the prototype used in the current study, more explicit warning seems to be needed. It has been suggested that screen-mounted LED's may capture attention more quickly (Noujoks et al., 2014). This may be one avenue of many for future exploration.

Within the Automated driving condition, system initiation problems were fairly common (see Table 1). Analysis of the interview data revealed that all of the issues relating to system initiation were due to inappropriate control location. For the current prototype, the control stork is located out of the driver's main field of view meaning that in some instances, drivers were actively trying to look for the control which is located on a steering wheel stork underneath the traditional indicator mechanism. These initiation problems could be resolved by moving the location of the automated controls, within easy reach and sight of the driver. For example, many vehicle manufacturers already use steering wheel mounted controls to engage Adaptive Cruise Control (e.g. BMW, 2014; Jaguar Land Rover, 2014).

The data presented in this paper serves as an exploratory insight into the possible functionality issues that may be introduced through the adoption of driver-initiated automation. These assertions are based upon driver protocols and behavioural observations collected during the study. In order to assess whether the above modifications to systems design are beneficial, future research should compare and contrast different design approaches. In addition, there are still concerns that after prolonged exposure to highly automated driving, driver desensitisation may occur resulting in a lack of task engagement. Questions remain over what the driver will actually do with this increased attentional capacity. It seems reasonable to suggest that drivers may be more inclined to engage in secondary tasks and if this happens, manual override in unanticipated and unexpected events will be difficult to manage, increase workload and stress as well as create surprise or startle effects (Sarter et al., 1997). For example, Merat and Jamson (2009) and Young and Stanton (2007) have shown that driver response times to unexpected hazards increase by 1.0–1.5 s when driving with adaptive cruise control in comparison to manual driving. This has previously been attributed to cognitive underload (Vollrath et al., 2011; Young and Stanton, 2002), reduced responsibility (Farrell and Lewandowsky, 2000) and the cost of control transfer between automated and manual control (Funke et al., 2007). These are issues that may become more prevalent as drivers become more familiar with the mode of system operation and remain important areas of future research.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research is supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) and Jaguar Land Rover Ltd.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

