@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Development of a frequency-separated knob with variable change rates by rotation speed

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We applied the principle of frequency separation to the design of knobs and related it to the study of control-display gain.


                        
                        
                           
                           We developed a prototype of a speed frequency-separated knob that shows change rates varying depending on its rotation speed.


                        
                        
                           
                           We conducted two experiments to examine whether the newly developed knob enhances users' task performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results showed that the newly designed speed frequency-separated knob was effective in enhancing task performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results can offer useful information when developing guidelines for designing a knob.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Frequency separation principle

Speed frequency

Control-display gain

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The principle of frequency separation is a design method to display different information or feedback in accordance with the frequency of interaction between users and systems. This principle can be usefully applied to the design of knobs. Particularly, their rotation speed can be a meaningful criterion for applying the principle. Hence a knob can be developed, which shows change rates varying depending on its rotation speed. Such a knob would be more efficient than conventional knobs with constant change rate. We developed a prototype of frequency-separated knobs that has different combinations of the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate. With this prototype, we conducted an experiment to examine whether a speed frequency-separated knob enhances users' task performance. The results showed that the newly designed knob was effective in enhancing task performance, and that task efficiency was the best when its change rate increases exponentially and its rotation speed has three steps. We conducted another experiment to investigate how a more rapid exponential increase of change rate and a more number of steps of rotation speed influence users' task performance. The results showed that merely increasing both the size of the variation of change rates and the number of speed steps did not result in better task performance. Although two experimental results cannot easily be generalized to other contexts, they still offer practical information useful for designing a speed frequency-separated knob in various consumer electronics and control panels of industrial systems.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The principle of frequency separation is a design method to display different information or feedback on the basis of the frequency of interaction between users and systems (Denney et al., 1970). This principle stipulates that the frequency of interaction implies users' particular contexts or intentions and they should be properly reflected into user interfaces; thus it can be a useful approach to designing adaptive user interfaces. It should be noted that the frequency of interaction can be classified by other criteria, such as speed, time and force, as well as usage. The principle originated from the frequency-separated attitude directional indicator (ADI) of airplanes that was introduced to resolve the dilemma between the static and dynamic aspects of ADI (Roscoe and Williges, 1975; Wickens and Hollands, 2000). Several empirical studies have shown that displays adopting the concept of frequency separation are more effective than conventional displays in terms of control accuracy and errors (Beringer et al., 1975; Wickens et al., 2002).

Moreover, many of the design features of a product can be improved by using the principle. The navigation display of recent cars is a good example of benefiting from the principle. Depending on the driving speed of a car, its navigation display changes the scale of a map automatically. When the driving speed is slow, the scale becomes larger, and the display presents the detailed information of things near to a car. However, if a car moves fast, the scale becomes smaller, and the display hides the detailed information and instead presents distant parts of a car.

This study is concerned with the application of the principle to the design of knobs that are widely used for users' control actions. For example, many of cars have human–machine interfaces (HMI) where knobs are used for multiple purposes (e.g. locating the frequency of a particular radio station or setting the temperature of air conditioner). The value of information controlled by a knob is changed in proportion to the degree of its rotation (Chan and Chan, 2003; Mackinlay et al., 1990). However, conventional knobs have a constant change rate; thus the range of the value that is increased or decreased by a unit of rotation is constant without regard to rotation speed (Jacob, 1996). If we apply the principle to this design feature and use rotation speed as a criterion of frequency separation, we can develop a knob that shows change rates varying in accordance with its rotation speed. In this study, we call such a knob ‘frequency-separated knob’. A frequency-separated knob is expected to help users perform their control actions more efficiently. A plausible assumption is that the rotation speed of a knob reflects users' intentions when they use it. When the range of the value to be adjusted is large, users are inclined to rotate a knob quickly to reach a goal state in a short time. In contrast, when it is small, they are likely to rotate it slowly to reach a goal state more accurately. For this reason, if the change rate of a frequency-separated knob varies adaptively according to its rotation speed, its usability would be enhanced. The design of a frequency-separated knob is highly related to the study of control-display (CD) gain, which is an important design feature of input control devices such as a knob.

A prototype of a frequency-separated knob was developed in this study. The purpose of this study is to examine two research issues through two experiments. The first is to investigate whether a frequency-separated knob is more effective than a conventional knob in terms of users' task performance. The task performance was evaluated by several measures, which include users' subjective satisfaction, the time to reach a goal state, the number of rotations, and the number of errors made before reaching a goal state. Although it is not a main research objective, the usefulness of display format combining digital and analogue displays was also examined in the first experiment. The second purpose is to investigate more systematically the problem of how users' task performance is influenced by the size of the variation of change rates and the number of rotation speed steps (the number of frequency separations) and to obtain some insight for determining the optimal combination of the two design factors.

This paper is organized as follows. We firstly review studies relevant to the principle of frequency separation, frequency-separated knobs, and CD gain. Next two experimental studies are described. From the experimental results, we summarize some implications of this study that can be effectively used for designing a frequency-separated knob. Lastly we conclude by mentioning some limitations of this study and suggesting future research problems.

As described previously, the principle of frequency separation is a design concept that provides different information or feedback adaptively according to the frequency of interaction of users and products. Fogel (1959) firstly proposed this design concept to satisfy two contradictory design principles (the principle of pictorial realism and the principle of moving part) at the same time in the design of attitude directional indicator (ADI) of airplanes (Wickens and Hollands, 2000). A conventional ADI display has two types: inside-out and outside-in. An inside-out display follows the principle of pictorial realism in that the view from the cockpit is similar to what is shown on the display. However, this display violates the principle of moving part since the rotation direction of an airplane is the opposite to that of the moving element on the display (e.g. if a pilot rolls an airplane to the left, then the airplane moves counterclockwise, whereas the moving element of the display (an artificial horizontal bar) moves clockwise. An outside-in display keeps the principle of moving part, thereby giving a bird's eye view. An inside-out display is more effective in low frequency situations when airplane attitude is relatively static; however, an outside-in display is more effective in high frequency situations when control movement and motion perception is dominant (Wickens and Hollands, 2000). Thus, a challenging design problem is how to integrate the two types of displays. It adaptively changes the display type according to the frequency of situations (Roscoe, 1985).

The two key ideas underlying the principle of frequency separation are the principle of separation and the concept of frequency. The principle of separation, as its name indicates, states that a part of properties or features of a product, which are only needed for particular contexts, are separately provided to users (Benyon, 2010). As shown in the design of a frequency-separated ADI, this separation principle is particularly useful to resolve a design dilemma with what appeared to be irresolvable contradictory requirements. Thus it is regarded as an important strategy in design innovation methods. For example, a well-known innovation method TRIZ offers four separation principles: separation in time, separation in space, separation upon condition, and separation between parts and whole (Rantanen and Domb, 2008). Here it can be interpreted that TRIZ characterizes contexts by four criteria and offers the separation principle in relation to each criteria for contexts (Savransky, 2000).

From the description above, it can be understood that the principle of frequency separation characterizes contexts by the frequency of interaction between users and products. In this regard, the principle of frequency separation is a useful way to realize the concept of adaptive or context-sensitive user interfaces that provide different information or functions to users according to their task contexts (Dix et al., 1998; Colineau et al., 2004) (Fig. 1
                        ). The concept of frequency needs to be understood more clearly. In this study, the frequency is related to the property of signal transmitted to input devices, such as a mouse, scroll-wheel, and joystick. In general, the frequency is classified by four properties of the input signal: speed, time, force, and usage (Benyon, 2010; Igarashi and Hinckley, 2000; Roscoe and Williges, 1975).

The main benefits of applying the principle of frequency separation to the design of user interfaces can be summarized as follows. First, as mentioned earlier, users' intention or their specific task context can be reasonably inferred from the frequency of the interaction. Thus users' task can be supported more effectively by providing them with information or feedbacks that are appropriate to their intention or context. For example, if users rotate a knob or scrolling a mouse wheel more quickly, then it implies that the difference between the goal state and the current state is more likely to be large than they do slowly. Second, it is possible to reduce the amount of information that users should process by hiding information unnecessary to their task context. For example, when users need to find certain information on the list by scrolling a mouse wheel fast, too much unnecessary information is presented to them. In this case, displaying only information that can be a critical cue for their search task would reduce their information overload (e.g. presenting only the first one or two characters of name in the search of a contact or enlarging only the date in the search of an event of schedules in mobile phones). Third, users' visual tiredness can be reduced when a visual flow rate is high because of too many changes in a display screen. For example, scrolling a mouse too fast can cause intolerable blurring in a display (Wallace et al., 2004). In this case, a visual flow rate can be reduced while enabling rapid scrolling without motion blur by automatically zooming the display (Cockburn et al., 2005).

The principle of frequency separation has not been widely used as a design term. In addition, it was rare to find design examples of applying the principle in other domains or products than aircrafts. However, recently we can easily find some design examples of adopting the design concept, particularly in the user interfaces of automobiles and mobile devices, though they did not explicitly mention the use of the principle. Considering that adaptive interface is increasingly regarded as a key to enhancing user experience, it is expected that the principle will be more and more widely used in various products.

Speed-Dependent Automatic Zooming (SDAZ) is a good example of applying the principle based on the speed frequency of the interaction (Igarashi and Hinckley, 2000). It is a new navigation technique that unifies rate-based scrolling and zooming, in which documents are automatically zoomed-out as the scroll rate increases (Cockburn et al., 2005). It helps to overcome the restrictions in a screen space for browsing large images and long texts. When it is used, users can smoothly find a distant target in a large document without having to manually interweave zooming and scrolling (Eslambolchilar and Murray-Smith, 2008). Igarashi and Hinckley (2000) implemented five prototype systems using SDAZ, which are a web browser, a map viewer, an image viewer, a dictionary, and a sound editor. Their informal usability study showed the usefulness of SDAZ in the task of document browsing. Cockburn et al. (2005) also showed through experimental studies that scrolling performance in visual search tasks could be improved by using SDAZ. The concept of SDAZ has been widely used across several domains (Patel et al., 2006; Cho et al., 2007; Kratz et al., 2010). Fig. 2
                         shows some examples of systems utilizing SDAZ.


                        Tan et al. (2001) presented another new navigation technique called Speed-coupled Flying, which is similar to SDAZ. It couples speed control to height (position) and tilt (viewpoint) in order to give users the ability to transition seamlessly between local and global views of the world and to navigate within them; thus it is particularly useful for exploring 3D space. Their experimental studies revealed that it helped users navigate more efficiently in certain environments.

The principle of frequency separation based on the speed frequency is also being applied to the navigation display of recent automobiles. Depending on users' driving speed, the map on the display automatically zooms in and out and then presents only information suited to their context (e.g. SK ennavi (http://www.ennavi.co.kr)). When users drive a car slowly, the map automatically zooms in, and the display presents detailed information of things, such as buildings, near to the car. When the driving speed becomes higher, the map automatically zooms out, and the display shows more map areas including distant parts of the car. When users drive a car very fast on motorways, only some of road junctions and services are briefly presented on the display. Such an adaptive change of the presented information can help drivers keep a long or short distance view and switch between them more efficiently.

There are other design cases of applying this speed-based frequency separation principle. Some of recent automobiles (e.g. Genesis in Hyundai and Kia motors (http://www.hyundaigenesis.com)) automatically turn the volume up and down on the radio according to their moving speed. Similarly, some of recent MP3 players automatically adjust the volume of sound depending on users' walking or running speed. A speed-sensitive power steering of automobiles is another good example of making use of this principle, where the steering is heavily assisted at low driving speed and lightly assisted at high speed. A car with speed-sensitive power steering reduces the mechanical or electrical assistance as its moving speed increases, giving a more direct feeling (Duffy, 1984).

As an input device, knobs are widely used across various industrial domains and consumer products (Hunt and Craig, 1954; Swindells and MacLean, 2007). Typical examples of their use are: searching the frequency of a radio station or adjusting the volume size of audio sound in a car, controlling the temperature of gas ovens, editing audio/video contents, and controlling the system variables of nuclear power plants (Swindells et al., 2007; Gohlke et al., 2010). Knobs are generally categorized into three types (Hunt and Craig, 1954): (1) Knobs of which location does not have any meaning and that can be continuously rotated without rotation limitation (e.g. a tuner dial of a radio that continuously rotates), (2) Knobs of which location does not have any meaning and of which rotation range is between 1° and 360°. Thus the maximum number of rotation is only one (e.g. a knob for adjusting the volume of audio sound), and (3) Knobs of which location has some meaning and of which rotation range is between 1° and 360° (e.g. on/off dial).

Of those types, the first type will best benefit from the principle of frequency separation. One of the most likely situations where the first type of knobs can be effectively used is when drivers adjust the frequency of a radio station in a car. However, as far as we know, any car did not apply the principle of frequency separation to the design of knobs. This study is mainly concerned with the first type of knobs and the frequency separation principle based on the speed frequency.

The value of variables controlled by a knob is changed in proportion to the degree of its rotation. However, current knobs have a constant change rate, so that the range of the value that is increased or decreased by a unit of rotation is constant. If we apply the principle to this design feature and use the rotation speed of a knob as a criterion of frequency separation, we can develop a knob that has change rates varying depending on its rotation speed. We call such a knob ‘frequency-separated knob’ in this study. For example, when a frequency-separated knob is used, the change rate resulting from a quick rotation of the knob can be 10 times as large as that coming from a slow rotation (Fig. 3
                        ).

A frequency-separated knob would help users perform their control actions more efficiently. It is reasonably assumed that the rotation speed of a knob reflects users' intentions and their context. When the range of the value to be adjusted is large, users are inclined to rotate a knob quickly to reach a goal state in a short time. In contrast, when it is small, they are likely to rotate it slowly to reach a goal state more accurately. Thus a frequency-separated knob can be effectively used for obtaining better task efficiency without compromising task accuracy.

As stated above, this study is concerned with the application of the principle of frequency separation to the design of a knob and uses its rotation speed as a criterion of frequency separation. Then this design issue is closely related to the study of control-display (CD) gain, which is a standard component of several input devices, such as a knob. CD gain is a unit free coefficient that maps the movement of a pointing input device to the movement of a display pointer (Gibbs, 1962; Casiez et al., 2008). If CD gain is 1, it means that a display pointer moves at exactly the same distance and speed as an input control device. When it is over 1 (high CD gain), a display pointer moves farther and faster than an input control device; when it is less than 1 (low CD gain), its movement becomes slower. Considering the meaning of CD gain, we can say that the ratio of the range of the value controlled by a knob to a unit of rotation of a knob is the same concept as CD gain.

Two methods can be used to modify CD gain: constant gain (CG) and dynamic gain (DG) (Casiez et al., 2008). CG means that CD gain is uniformly adjusted by a constant multiplier, and DG means that CD gain is adjusted based on nonuniform function depending on the movement of an input control device, which are generally characterized by speed, force, and oscillatory gestures. Several studies examined the effectiveness of the two methods on users' control task performance in several input devices. Casiez et al. (2008) offer a comprehensive review on the effectiveness of CD gain on users' task performance. They also studied the impact of the two methods implemented in a mouse on the performance of pointing tasks. As another example, Hinkley and his colleagues studied the impact of DG, which was implemented by the use of an acceleration algorithm, on the performance of a scroll-wheeling in data navigation context (Hinckley et al., 2002; Hinckley and Bathiche, 2004). Malacria et al. (2010) developed an interesting technique called CycloStar that employs oscillatory gestures to modify CD gain in touch-sensitive surfaces.

Considering the meaning of the two modification methods, we can think that a conventional knob is regarded as a knob with non-adjustable CG and a speed frequency-separated knob is regarded as a knob with adjustable CG or DG.

However, it is necessary to examine two issues to design a more effective frequency-separated knob: (1) the problem of whether it is actually more effective than a conventional knob in terms of users' task performance and (2) the problem of how users' task performance is impacted by the two design factors that are the size of the variation of change rates and the number of rotation speed steps (the number of frequency separations). These two issues were studied through two laboratory-based experiments, which are described in the next sections.

The main purpose of this experiment was to examine whether a frequency-separated knob is more effective than a conventional knob in terms of users' task performance. Additionally, this experiment was designed to provide some insight on the issue of how many speed frequency separations (the number of rotation speed steps) and how much variation in the change rate are most effective in terms of users' task performance and their preference.

When users manipulate a knob, their action effect (the change of the value of a variable to be adjusted) can be displayed in two types: digital and analogue. Considering the nature of the displays, they would have different influences on task performance. This experiment was particularly concerned with the role of an analogue display that increases task accuracy in the use of a frequency-separated display.

The change rate of a frequency-separated knob varies proportionately as the step of rotation speed increases. It enables users to reach a target goal state of a variable, which is a number much different from the initial state (number), with less number of rotations and time. However, it can negatively affect task accuracy. This loss of task accuracy can be compensated for by using an analogue display because it shows the change process of the variable in relation to the target state. Thus two hypotheses were tested in this experiment. The first was that a frequency-separated knob would be more effective than a conventional one in terms of task efficiency in the situation where users should reach a distant goal state. The second was that an analogue display would be useful for reducing the number of task errors in the situation where users should reach a distant goal state.

In this study, we developed a prototype of a frequency-separated knob, which is controlled by a LabVIEW-based program (Fig. 4
                        ). As shown in Fig. 4, the developed knob is composed of two main parts: encoder (Ø50 mm, pulse interval: 100 pulse/rev) emulating the features of a knob (a knob itself in Fig. 4) and converter transforming users' analogue input signals to the digital signals transferred to a computer. Users' control action effects are displayed in a monitor screen. The value of a variable ranges between 1 and 1000, and the minimal change rate is ±0.5. The monitor screen presents the following information: the analogue and digital representation for the current value adjusted by users, digital representation for the target value that is a goal state users should reach, stopwatch representing the elapsed time, and input fields where the number of rotation speed steps and the size of change rate can be manipulated. An experimental task begins and ends when an experimenter presses the Start and Stop button respectively by clicking a mouse (the two buttons are toggled). The Finish lamp is turned on when users reach a target state successfully.


                        Table 1
                         shows the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate that were used in this experiment. It can be said that a combination of these two factors form a function determining the value of CD gain; Casiez and Roussel (2011) called this function ‘transfer function’. They stated that the levels of factors of a transfer function should be discretionally chosen for a more scientific study of transfer functions. However, in this study, we did not determine them on a theoretically sound basis. We thought that the experimental conditions shown in Table 1 were reasonable to test our hypothesis, from the results of a pilot test conducted before the experiment.

Three conditions of rotation speed steps were used, each of which has one, two, and three steps respectively. The maximum number of rotation speed steps can be regarded as operating range in the studies of CD gain. In the condition where three steps are used, the change rate varies accordingly in three types; the same rule holds for the other conditions. The condition with only one speed step represents a conventional knob that has a constant change rate. There are three different ways to determine the size of variation of change rate: 0.5, 1.0 and y = 0.5x
                        2 (y = the size of variation, x = the step of rotation speed). If the number of speed steps is three and the size of variation is 0.5 (‘3–0.5’ condition in Table 1), then the change rate increases linearly by 0.5 as the speed step increases. Thus, the change rates of this condition are 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 for the first, second, and third speed step respectively. If the number of speed steps is three and the size of variation is y = 0.5x
                        2 (‘3–0.5x
                        2’ condition in Table 1), then the change rate varies exponentially by the size of 0.5x
                        2. Thus, the change rates of this condition are 0.5, 2.0, and 4.5 for the first, second, and third speed step respectively (Fig. 5
                        ). The numbers in parentheses in Table 1 represent the change rates of each experimental condition. If the size of variation of change rate is constant, it can be regarded as CG. However, if it is determined by a nonuniform function, such as y = 0.5x
                        2 in this experiment, it can be regarded as DG. Thus it can be said from Table 1 that this experiment deals with five adjustable CG conditions and one DG condition.

A total of twenty-four undergraduate students at Seoul National University of Science and Technology volunteered and participated. Of those, twelve were male and twelve were female. Their age ranged from 21 to 29 years old.

A mixed design was employed in this experiment, where there were two between-subjects factors (independent measures) and two within subject factors (repeated measures). As shown in Table 1, there were six experimental groups that were characterized by the combination of the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate. The condition of these groups served as a between-subjects factor. Gender was regarded as the other between-subjects factor. Four participants, who comprise two males and two females, were randomly allocated to each of the six groups. It would be thought that four participants for each group are somewhat small sample size. However, we conducted a pilot test before the experiment and found that this sample size was sufficient to identify the significant difference between experimental groups. Additionally, each participant conducted a task two times (two replications) in each experimental condition, thereby making more observations for each experimental group. This helped test our experimental hypotheses more rigidly. Although we assigned participants to each experimental group in a random way, the experimental data revealed that the difference among the participants was not statistically significant. The two within-subjects factors were the type of distance to a target state and the type of display. There were two types of distance: short and long distance, and there were two types of display: digital and digilogue (combination of digital and analogue).

Before the main experimental session, the participants had experience of using all the features of the experimental system and exercised one or two problems. Through this, they could be accustomed to the experimental system and the experimental task. In the main experiment, as described previously, there were two replications; thus the participants conducted an experimental condition two times.

The experimental task was to reach a target state from an initial state given. There were four target states that were categorized into each of two types of distance: 150 and 250 (short distance) and 750 and 850 (long distance). This means that participants' task consisted of four experimental problems. The experimental problems were presented to participants in the following order: 150–850–250–750 (short and long distances in turn). The initial state of an experimental problem is always ‘0’. Thus, when a target state is displayed, the participants should attempt to reach the state as quickly as possible by rotating the knob. Their successful achievement of a task was indicated by the lighting of the Finish lamp.

There is no sound theoretical justification about this. However, through a pilot test before the main experiment, we considered that multiple levels of each type of distance would be better than a single level to examine the effectiveness of a speed frequency-separated knob. And we also thought that the two levels of each type of distance were reasonable for the purpose of the experiment through the pilot test and opinions coming from the participants of the pilot test.

To measure the participants' task performance, three objective measures and one subjective measure were used. The objective measures include the task time that means the time to reach a goal state, the number of rotations that measures how many times a participant rotated the knob to reach a goal state, and the number of errors that is defined by the number of actions to return to a goal state after deviating from it (overshooting or undershooting). Their satisfaction score, which employed a 9-point Likert scale (1 = most unsatisfactory to 9 = most satisfactory), was used as the subjective measure.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS@&#

A total of 192 data (4 experimental problems × 24 participants × 2 replications) were collected for both the three objective measures and the subjective measure. Of those 192 data, 10 data were regarded as outliers, which cannot be used for statistical analysis and thus were eliminated. The criterion for identifying outliers was average plus and minus 3 sigma of each objective measure. As the data of the three objective measures can be regarded as ratio data, a mixed ANOVA test can be used for them. However, as the assumptions of ANOVA (normality, independence, and equality of variance) were significantly violated in the case of the number of errors, non-parametric tests were instead used for the analysis of the number of errors. As a post-hoc analysis, Duncan test was used to conduct a pairwise comparison between two levels of an experimental factor.

The difference between the six experimental groups in the task time was statistically significant (F(5,12) = 39.211, p < 0.01). The difference between the types of distance was also statistically significant (F(1,151) = 252.490, p < 0.01). As shown in Fig. 6
                        , two groups (‘3–1.0’ and ‘3–0.5x
                        2’) showed the best performance in the task time. As expected, all the six groups conducted the tasks more quickly in the type of short distance than in the type of long distance (averaged task time: 6.9s (short) vs. 14.2 (long)) (Fig. 7
                        ). Fig. 7 also points out that the difference in task time between the two types of distance becomes smaller in two groups (‘3–1.0’ and ‘3–0.5x
                        2’). The interaction effect between the group and the type of distance was statistically significant (F(5,151) = 4.153, p < 0.01). Particularly, it is worth noting the difference between the task time of the group ‘3–0.5x
                        2’ and that of the group ‘3–1.0’. Whereas there was a decrease in the task time in the type of long distance, there was an increase in the task time in the type of short distance. As regards the difference between male and female, the male participants conducted the tasks in a less time significantly (averaged task time: 9.4s (male) vs. 11.9s (female); F(1,12) = 33.781, p < 0.01). There was a significant interaction effect between the group and the gender (F(5,12) = 6.704, p < 0.01). However, there was no significant difference between the types of display (averaged task time: 10.7 (digital) vs. 10.6s (digilogue); F(1,151) = 0.957, p = 0.330). To summarize, it can be said that task performance in terms of the task time was the best when the number of rotation speed steps is three, and when the variation of change rate changes by 1.0 or exponentially.

As shown in Fig. 8
                        , the group ‘3–0.5x
                        2’ showed the best performance in the number of rotations (F(5,17) = 65.693, p < 0.01). The interaction effect between the group and the gender in the number of rotations was not significant. Thus this insignificant interaction effect was pooled into the error term (participant (group*gender)) for the two main factors (group and gender). In the same way as the task time, the number of rotations was significantly less in the type of short distance than the type of long distance (F(1,151) = 375.719, p < 0.01). Additionally, there was a significant interaction effect between the group and the type of distance (F(5,151) = 28.359, p < 0.01). Fig. 9
                         indicates that the difference between the types of distance in the number of rotations becomes significantly smaller in the group ‘3–0.5x
                        2’. This means that the experimental condition of the group ‘3–0.5x
                        2’ helped to complete long-distance tasks with less number of rotations. However, in contrast to the task time, there was no statistically significant difference between male and female (F(1,17) = 0.026, p = 0.874). This means that the male participants used the higher level of rotation speed steps, which resulted in greater change rate, more than the female participants did. The difference between the types of display was also not significant (F(1,151) = 0.713, p = 0.400). To summarize, as the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate increase, the participants could conduct the tasks with less number of rotations.

To examine the difference between the groups in the number of errors, the Kruskal–Wallis test was used, which is a nonparametric test for k unrelated samples (Montgomery and Runger, 2003). The test results indicated that the difference was statistically significant (H(5) = 26.733, p < 0.01). Fig. 10
                         shows that three groups ‘1–0.5’, ‘3–1.0’, and ‘3–0.5x
                        2’ resulted in more errors. This points out that the participants made more errors when the size of the variation of change rate was too small or too large. The Mann–Whitney U test, which is a nonparametric test for two unrelated samples, was used to investigate whether there was a significant difference between genders, the types of display, and the types of distance. There was no significant difference between genders (U = 4,512, p = 0.236). The types of distance also showed no difference (U = 4,214, p = 0.806). However, there is a significant difference between the types of display; there were less errors in the type of digilogue than the type of digital (U = 5,014, p < 0.01). From this, it can be said that an analogue display helped reduce the number of errors, though it did not help reduce the task time and the number of rotations.

As the data for the subjective score violated the normality assumption, the non-parametric tests used for the number of errors were also employed for the analysis of the subjective score data. The tests indicated that there was no significant difference between groups (H(5) = 5.965, p = 0.310), the types of display (U = 3781.5, p = 0.305), and the types of distance (U = 4297.5, p = 0.644). However, males showed more satisfaction than females (U = 3424.5, p = 0.042).

The results supported two experimental hypotheses. Table 2
                         summarizes the main results of this experiment. There were positive effects of the frequency separation principle on task efficiency. Although those effects were found in all the experimental groups using the principle, they were most effective in the group ‘3–0.5x
                        2’. In addition, it was effective without regard to the type of distance, though its effectiveness was greater in the type of long distance. As expected, it negatively affects task performance in terms of task accuracy as the size of variation of change rate increases. However, the use of an analogue display helped to compensate for the loss of task accuracy.

It was found in the experiment 1 that the effectiveness of the frequency-separation principle based on the speed frequency was the greatest in terms of task efficiency in the group ‘3–0.5x
                        2’. This implied that its effectiveness on task efficiency would increase in proportion to the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change. As found in the experiment 1, however, task accuracy would decrease as those two factors increase. Thus the two factors can be regarded as critical design factors for optimizing the effectiveness of the principle. Here, an interesting research question arises, which is whether task efficiency is actually improved and more errors are made if the number of rotation steps is more than three and if the variation of change rate increases more rapidly. The purpose of the experiment 2 was to examine this issue. For this, this experiment considered the additional experimental conditions where the number of rotation speed steps is four and the sizes of the variation of change rate are y = 0.5x
                        3 and y = 0.5x
                        4 (y = the size of variation, x = the step of rotation speed).

Two hypotheses were tested in this experiment. The first was that when the number of rotation speed steps increases from three to four or when the size of the variation of change rate increases from y = 0.5x
                        2 to y = 0.5x
                        3 to y = 0.5x
                        4, the participants would finish the tasks more quickly. The second was that the number of errors would be more in those experimental conditions.

The experimental system was the same as in the experiment 1. However, as stated above, there was a change in the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate. As shown in Table 3
                        , this experiment has tested two conditions of rotation speed steps, each of which has three and four steps respectively. With regard to the size of the variation of change rate, three conditions were tested, which include y = 0.5x
                        2, y = 0.5x
                        3, and y = 0.5x
                        4 (y = the size of variation, x = the step of rotation speed). In the same way as in the experiment 1, if the number of rotation speed steps is four and the size of the variation of change rate is y = 0.5x
                        3 (‘4–0.5x
                        3’ condition in Table 3), then the change rate increases exponentially by the size of 0.5x
                        3. Thus, the change rates become 0.5, 4.0, 13.5, and 32.0 for the first, second, third, and four speed step respectively (Fig. 11
                        ). The numbers in parentheses in Table 3 represent the change rates of each experimental condition. From Table 3, we can say that all of the experimental conditions in this experiment are regarded as a type of DG.

A total of thirty-six undergraduate students at Seoul National University of Science and Technology volunteered and participated. All of them were different from the participants in the experiment 1. Of those, eighteen were male and eighteen were female. Their age ranged from 21 to 29 years old.

A between-subjects design was employed in this experiment, which involves two between-subjects factors. As shown in Table 3, there were six experimental groups that were characterized by the combination of the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate. The condition of these groups served as a between-subjects factor. The effect of gender was studied as a between-subjects factor as well. Six participants, who consist of three males and three females, were randomly allocated to each of the six groups.

In the same way as in the experiment 1, before the main experimental session, the participants had experience of using all the features of the experimental system and exercised one or two problems. The order in which a participant conduct the experimental task was randomly determined.

The experimental task was the same as that of the experiment 1, which was to reach a target state. However, there was a change in the way that a participant finishes the problems. In the experiment 1, a participant completed one problem by reaching one target state and then conducted another problem by reaching another target state. Between two problems, there was a pause during which the initial state for each problem was adjusted to ‘0’. Thus, participants rotated the knob only in the direction of increasing the value of a variable. Through observations in the experiment 1, it was found that many participants had a tendency to rotate the knob promptly to the right as an experimental problem begins because they got to know that they always had to rotate the knob only in the direction of increasing. Thus we changed the way that participants conduct a task in order to avoid the tendency of participants found in the experiment 1. In this experiment, participants had to reach four target states continuously. The four target states were 150, 250, 850, and 950; they should be reached in the order of 150–850–250–950. Thus, a target state in the order becomes the initial state for reaching its next target state. Under this condition, participants rotated the knob in the direction of both increasing and decreasing the value of a variable, which better reflects the actual uses of a knob.

Excepting the number of rotations, the other three measures used in the experiment 1 were also used for this experiment. After participants reached the last target state ‘950’ in the problem, two objective measures were measured, which are the task time and the number of errors. Also, their satisfaction scores were measured as a subjective measure. In the experiment 1, it was found that the task time was highly correlated with the number of rotations, particularly in the groups that have three steps of rotation speed (r = 0.590). According the guidance by Cohen (1988), when the Pearson's r is greater than 0.5, it means a strong correlation. Thus it seemed sufficient to measure only the task time for evaluating task efficiency in the groups that have more than three steps of rotation speed.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS@&#

A total of 36 data (1 problem × 36 participants × 1 replicate) were collected for the two objective measures, and a total of 36 subjective scores were also collected for the subjective measure. The same statistical tests used in the experiment 1 were used for this experiment.

There was no significant difference between the groups (F(5,24) = 1.783, p = 0.155). As shown in Fig. 12
                        , the task time of the groups that has the four steps of rotation speed was little less than the groups with the three steps. However, as shown in the ANOVA test results, the difference was not statistically significant. The difference between males and females in the task time was also found to be insignificant (F(1,24) = 0.030, p = 0.865). The interaction effect between the group and gender was not significant as well (F(5,24) = 1.794, p = 0.152).

As shown in Fig. 12, there was no noticeable difference between the groups in terms of the number of errors. The ANOVA test results confirmed that there was no significant difference between the groups (F(5,24) = 0.874, p = 0.513). There was also no significant effect of gender in the number of errors (F(1,24) = 1.854, p = 0.186).

In this experiment, as the data for the subjective score violated the normality assumption, non-parametric tests were used. There was no significant difference between the groups (H(5) = 4.812, p = 0.439). The effect of gender also showed no significance (U = 181.5, p = 0.331).

To recapitulate the results of this experiment, none of the two hypotheses of this experiment was supported by the experimental results. Increasing the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate did not result in any significant improvement of task efficiency and reduction of task accuracy.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION@&#

This study developed a prototype of a frequency-separated knob on the basis of the principle of frequency separation. It uses the speed frequency to categorize the context of the interaction between users and products. A conventional knob has a constant change rate, so that a unit degree of rotation always results in the same amount of change in the value of a variable to be controlled, without regard to its rotation speed. However, a frequency-separated knob varies the amount of change in the value (change rate) adaptively depending on its rotation speed. A frequency-separated knob is expected to help improve task efficiency by enabling users to reach a goal state more quickly with less number of rotations; but it may have negative effects on task accuracy if the change rate is too much. To design a more effective frequency-separated knob, the optimal levels of two design factors should be examined in relation to their effects on task performance, which are the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate. With this research issue in mind, we conducted two experiments by using the prototype.

The first experiment studied the problem of whether a frequency-separated knob has positive effects on task efficiency and negative effects on task accuracy. The second experiment examined the issue of how a more rapid exponential variation of change rate and a more number of steps of rotation speed influence users' task performance. The main findings of those experiments are as follows. First, a frequency-separated knob was effective in enhancing task efficiency in the task of reaching a goal state. Second, more than three steps of rotation speed and drastically exponential variation of change rate did not much improved task performance. Third, considering a trade-off between task efficiency and task accuracy, the experimental group that has three steps of rotation speed and the change rate varying with quadratic exponential function of a rotation speed step was most effective on task performance. Fourth, there was a significant difference between males and females in terms of task efficiency; the males showed better performance than the females. Thus it would be better to study some characteristics when females use a knob and reflect them into the design of a knob. Fifth, an analogue display helped to compensate for the loss of task accuracy that may occur in the use of a frequency-separated knob.

As explained in Section 2.2, the design of a speed frequency-separated knob is closely related to the study of control-display (CD) gain, particularly the two modification methods of CD gain-constant gain (CG) and dynamic gain (DG). Thus it is meaningful to relate the terminologies and concepts of this study with those of the study of CD gain. A conventional knob is regarded as a knob with non-adjustable CG, whereas a speed frequency-separated knob is regarded as a knob with adjustable CG or DG. Of those six experimental conditions in the first experiment, five conditions are a type of CG and only one is a type of DG. However, all the six experimental conditions in the second experiment are a type of DG. Particularly, the exponential function of a rotation speed step in the two experiments can be regarded as an instance that implements an acceleration algorithm in the studies of CD gain (Hinckley et al., 2002; Casiez et al., 2008). Lastly, the two design factors examined in this study, which are the maximum number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate, can be regarded as the operating range of a knob and the size of the change of CD gain respectively.

The purposes of the two experiments can be interpreted as follows from the point of view of CD gain. The purpose of the first experiment was to examine the impact of a knob with either adjustable CG or DG on users' task performance. The purpose of the second experiment was to study how the operating range of a knob and the rapid increase of a gain factor based on DG influence users' task performance.

As the study of CD gain has been much studied and a frequency-separated knob proposed in this study is related to the concept of CD gain, one may wonder why the term ‘frequency separation’ should be used. For this, it is necessary to go back to the concept of frequency explained in the research background part. It refers to the property of signal transmitted to input devices. The frequency is generally classified by four properties of the input signal: speed, time, force, and usage. Although this study dealt with a knob designed with a speed frequency, other types of input control devices based on the other three criteria of frequency separation can be designed. However, CD gain is not much related to the frequency-separation based on the other three criteria, excepting speed. For this reason, we used the term ‘frequency separation’ to reflect the wider meaning of frequency.

The experimental results can offer useful information when developing guidelines for designing a knob as follows: (1) It is recommended to use a speed frequency-separated concept in design of a knob of which the operating range is large (e.g. manipulating the radio frequency in a car and editing a movie file), (2) A speed frequency-separation would be good when its change rate increases exponentially and its rotation speed has three steps, and (3) Visual cues like an analogue display can be helpful in a quick movement of a knob.

Although the experimental results in this study offer useful information for designing a frequency-separated knob based on the speed frequency, some limitations of this study should be considered as well. The experimental task of this study was to reach a target state of a numeric value, which was displayed in a monitor screen. However, the effects of a frequency-separated knob could be different in other task situations. Kratz et al. (2010) stated that SDAZ, which is a good example of applying the principle of frequency separation based on the speed frequency, has different effects depending on the assigned task types, visual perception, and the size and resolution of the device's display. Thus, the effects of a frequency-separated display would be different in other types of tasks (e.g. scrolling and selection tasks) and other display environments (e.g. mobile displays with the small size screen). In a study of CD gain, Casiez and Roussel (2011) also pointed out that the effects of CD gain need to be studied in relation to task types.

To address this issue in another study, we examined the usefulness of a speed frequency-separated knob in the task of selecting a target item in the long list of items. More specifically, the task was to find a specified song in the list of 300 songs displayed in the emulated MP3 player. In this task, a speed frequency-separated knob also helped find an item in the list more quickly and efficiently. Additionally, subjects made more cursor movements when the size of the variation of change rate was large and thus missed the target item and returned more frequently. However, a visual cue effectively helped reduce the cursor movements.

Next, we need to remember that a target state ranges from 0 to 1000 in the experimental problems. As stated above, under this condition, three steps of rotation speed and the change rate varying with quadratic exponential function of a rotation speed step was most effective on task performance. If a target state had been higher than 1000, it would have been possible that four steps of rotation speed and the changing rates varying with cubic or quartic exponential function of a rotation speed step resulted in better task performance. Two critical design factors, which are the number of rotation speed steps and the size of the variation of change rate, would have different effects on task performance depending on task situations. Thus, it is advisable to conduct empirical studies as the prerequisite for making the design decision determining the optimal combination of the two factors.

The last limitation to consider is about the type of feedback provided to the participants. When they operated the newly designed knob, their action effects were informed by only visual feedback. However, according to the study of Eslambolchilar and Murray-Smith (2008), audio/haptic feedback supports intermittent interaction that occurs while users are not looking at the visual display. Regarding this issue, it is necessary to examine two problems: the effectiveness of the different types of feedbacks on task performance and the way that they are provided to users.

For the limitations described above, the research results of this study cannot easily be generalized into other contexts. They should be examined more thoroughly in the future. However, the design approach we used for developing the prototype of a frequency-separated knob and the experimental results will be useful design guidance. They will be effectively used for designing a speed frequency-separated knob in several consumer electronics and control panels in industrial systems. They can also be of benefit to the design of a mouse wheel for the use of computers. Additionally, this study will be a basis for applying the principle of frequency separation based on other types of frequencies, such as force, time, and usage, as well as speed.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (Grant Code: NRF-2012R1A1A2042146).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

