@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Determining optimum flash patterns for emergency service vehicles: An experimental investigation using high definition film

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The 4 Hz flash rate was perceived to convey greater urgency than 1 Hz rate.


                        
                        
                           
                           The 1 Hz single pulse pattern was ranked least urgent of all the combinations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Estimates of minimum space acceptable for ‘pulling out’ reflected urgency measures.


                        
                        
                           
                           Less risky gap acceptance judgements were evident for the 4 Hz single pulse combination.


                        
                        
                           
                           HD film was found to be a low-risk, valid method for assessing EVL efficacy.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Emergency service vehicle lighting

Flash pattern

Urgency perception

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  An investigation of how emergency vehicle lighting (EVL) can be improved is reported with reference to an analysis of police vehicle road traffic accidents (Study 1). In Study 2, 37 regular drivers were shown film clips of a marked police vehicle, in which flash rate (1 Hz, 4 Hz) and pattern (single, triple pulse) were varied on the blue Light Emitting Diode (LED) roofbar. Results indicate a 4 Hz flash rate conveys greater urgency than a 1 Hz rate, while a 1 Hz, single flash combination was ranked the least urgent of all combinations. Participants claimed they would leave significantly more space before pulling out in front of an approaching police car (gap acceptance) in the 4 Hz single pulse condition in comparison to other EVL combinations. The preliminary implications for which flash characteristics could prove most optimal for emergency service use are discussed with regard to effects on driver perception and expected driving behaviour.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The work of emergency service vehicles is inherently hazardous. A report by the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) states that there were between 11,000 and 19,000 police pursuits in England and Wales during 2005/06 and estimates between one and eleven pursuits out of every 1000 lead to a death (Docking et al., 2007). Statistics gathered by the Police Roll of Honour Trust (2010) indicate that between April 2000 and March 2010, there were 143 reported cases of Police Officers who died in the line of duty in the UK, the majority in road traffic accidents. Emergency medical services personnel also have a risk of occupational death that is disproportionally high, due largely to transportation-related fatalities (Slattery and Silver, 2009). Additionally traffic collisions are the second most common cause of death for fire fighters (Vrachnou, 2003). These findings are not simply due to the amount of driving undertaken by emergency services personnel. For ambulances, emergency driving carries a risk that is far greater than non-emergency ambulance driving (Kahn et al., 2001; Frøyland, 1982).

Research also indicates that emergency driving by the emergency services presents a risk to the general public. A recent report by the IPCC indicates that during the year 2008/2009, 40 members of the public died in England and Wales following road traffic accidents arising from police pursuits and other police traffic-related activity (IPCC, 2009). In terms of connotations for public spending, three Yorkshire Police forces in combination have reportedly spent £4.3 million on repairs, legal fees and compensation over a three year period, as a result of crashes involving 1965 police vehicles (Preece, 2010). There is a particular necessity for emergency vehicle lighting (EVL) to alert the public to the vehicle's presence and thereby reduce the potential for accidents. This is demonstrated by the finding that for accidents at intersections, ambulances are far more likely to be struck rather than strike another vehicle (Geis and Madsen, 2001). The importance of EVL as a warning system, together with the propensity of accidents involving emergency service vehicles indicates there is a justified requirement to improve its effectiveness.

EVL has two primary functions in protecting the public and emergency service personnel: (1) to draw attention of nearby pedestrians and drivers; (2) to provide basic information about the situation to enable those drivers and pedestrians to take appropriate action (Cook et al., 1999). Research on both of these functions shall be reported in the next sections. Although the colour, number and location of flashing lights on a vehicle can affect the ease with which it can be detected, in addition to whether it is viewed in peripheral or foveal vision, during daylight hours or particular weather conditions (Cook et al., 1999; DeLorenzo and Eilers, 1991; Kahn et al., 2001; Vrachnou, 2003; Wells, 2004; Ullman et al., 1998), the key focus of this research is flash pattern and flash speed.

A key factor determining the efficacy of EVL, is whether it affords greater conspicuity of the emergency vehicle. Conspicuity refers to the target's size, luminance, contrast and colour in relation to its background (e.g. Cole and Hughes, 1984; MacDonald and Cole, 1988). EVL tends to pulse and there is support for the supposition that a flashing light affords greater conspicuity than a steady burning light of equivalent intensity (Schmidt-Clausen, 1999). Indeed the peripheral detection of motorbikes is doubled with the use of a flashing rather than steady headlamp (Donne and Fulton, 1988). This conspicuity improvement has also been observed with industrial machinery, the detection time of a moving mining machine was reduced by 75% when a warning system employing flashing lights was used (Sammarco et al., 2012). There is evidence to suggest the human visual system is hard-wired to pay special attention to flashing rather than steady lights, as exemplified by gaze patterns of infants (Teller, 1979; Teller and Movshon, 1986; Jouen, 1990). The greater conspicuity afforded by a pulsing rather than steady light would therefore appear to be an innate rather than learned response. However research attests to the situational nature of conspicuity, i.e. a flashing light will only stand out from its background if this does not contain an excess of flashing lights and it is dependent on the complexity of the road environment in general (Berkhout et al., 1999; Cook et al., 1999; Treisman, 1986; review in Enns, 1990). Accepting these situational variables, preliminary research suggests the characteristics of the flash rate and pattern of EVL affect its conspicuity or ease of detection, as discussed below. However there is a marked lack of research in this area and some findings conflict.
                              
                                 1)
                                 
                                    
                                       Detection according to flash rate
                                    : The effect of flash rate on detection is complicated by its dual effect on apparent brightness, therefore flashing lights require additional intensity to be detected as quickly as a steady light (Paine and Fisher, 1996; Sagawa, 1999). Although their research only involved the testing of yellow and amber lights, Hanscom and Pain (1990) found that altering flash rates (60–100 cycles per minute) and light intensities did not have a measurable effect on observer responses. In contrast, Cook et al. (1999) found beacons with higher flash rates were more detectable in laboratory trials (from 1 Hz to 4 Hz). More recent research by an unnamed author reported in Wells' review (2004) also indicates that lights are detected more quickly when a faster flash rate is employed. There is a limit to the speed of flash rate that is advisable however. At 20 Hz the light will appear to be constant (thereby cancelling out the conspicuity gain), flash rates between 10 and 20 Hz are most likely to trigger an epileptogenic response in a person with epilepsy and rates above 5 Hz are associated with reports of increased eye-strain and headaches (Ice Ergonomics, 2002; Jeavons and Harding, 1975; Wells, 2004). In addition increasing flash rates are associated with increasing levels of glare and annoyance (Cook et al., 1999).


                                    
                                       Detection according to flash pattern
                                    : Multiple flashes rather than equally spaced single flashes tend to be used in aviation because they are perceived to be more conspicuous, which may be because the initial flash gains attention and the following flash directs gaze (King, 1999; Schmidt-Clausen, 1999). There is evidence to indicate that double pulse flash patterns are more conspicuous than single pulse, while sequential patterns (rather than concurrent) are detected more quickly and are rated as more attention-grabbing (Cook et al., 1999). However there is also the view that concurrent light flashes are more optimal for detection because they have the effect of outlining the vehicle (Lamm, 1983). Again the issue with enhancing conspicuity by altering flash characteristics is an increased risk of discomfort and disability glare (Cook et al.; Lamm).

At present statistics suggest that EVL does not help to clear the path for emergency services on the public roads to the desired extent. For example ambulances observed in the U.S. completed their routes 43.5 s faster in one study, and 1 min, 46 s faster in another with the use of warning lights and sirens (Brown et al., 2000; Hunt et al., 1995). The larger difference in journey time was statistically significant but not considered to be of practical benefit (Brown et al., 2000). This research might indicate that drivers do not understand the urgency implied by lights and sirens, or it may indicate that some motorists do not make avoidance manoeuvres effectively. A natural reaction for some motorists is confusion and panic according to the claims data of NRMA insurance (Drive, 2008). Additionally if the emergency service vehicle does not allow the driver time to observe the warnings and make the manoeuvre, delays may occur. By way of illustration Green (2000) found it took approximately 1.5 s to move the foot from accelerator to brake pedal in response to surprise events.

There is evidence to suggest that flashing, non-emergency vehicle lights could facilitate safe avoidance action. In a video-based driving simulation, Isler and Starkey (2010) used flashing hazard lights to warn that the vehicle in front was braking: a 19% improvement in speed of response to the braking manoeuvre was observed in comparison to the standard warning of illuminated brake lights. Of course the improvement observed in Isler & Starkey's study may be primarily due to the additional illumination of hazard lights rather than their flash characteristics, however this does imply that vehicle lighting can be utilised to positively impact driver behaviour. In order to prevent accidents it would be preferable if emergency lighting discouraged driving behaviours that could be risky with a fast-moving vehicle, such as pulling out in front of it. This particular behaviour has been measured by asking participants when they would pull out in front of another vehicle at the last possible moment, a judgment termed ‘gap acceptance’ (Pietras, et al., 2006). This study found that this measure differentiated between attention-impaired and unimpaired older drivers, finding that time to contact values were shorter (i.e. gap acceptance values were riskier) amongst attention-impaired drivers.

Although there is a lack of research in this area, EVL could provide numerous benefits if it could convey more complex information such as the urgency of the situation, i.e. urgency perception (Cook et al., 1999, 2000). Research indicates that light colour affects perceived hazard and lighting technology affects perceived urgency (Chan and Ng, 2009; Ullman et al., 1998). There is evidence that flash rate and pattern of emergency lighting also affects perceptions of urgency. Cook and colleagues (1999) established that a blue light with a higher flash rate enhances perceived urgency in comparison to lower flash rates. More recent research also shows that hazard perception (i.e. how hazardous a situation appears to be) increases with increasing flash rates, with a particular impression of urgency achieved at 4 Hz (Chan and Ng, 2009).

Flash pattern research has suggested single pulse patterns between 4 Hz and 5 Hz enhance urgency perception (Van Cott and Kinkade, 1972). While more recent research found that a double pulse pattern increased hazard perception to a greater degree than a single pulse pattern (Chan and Ng, 2009). It would be expected that hazard and urgency perception would be related to some degree, therefore this discrepancy is surprising. Chan and Ng's finding that a flash rate of 1 Hz is ineffective at enhancing hazard perception, may suggest that there is scope to develop a low urgency flash mode and a high urgency mode to provide the public with more information. Urgency mapping with the use of flash rates has been recommended by prominent researchers in this field (Cook et al., 1999; Sanders and McCormick, 1993).

Broadly speaking the research reviewed implies that detection time, and perceptions of hazard and urgency could be altered with the use of flash rates and patterns. However it is not clear exactly which combination of flash pattern and flash rate is optimal, because some study findings conflict and other studies have not necessarily examined the joint effect of flash rate and pattern. The advantages of particular flash characteristics could be cancelled out or enhanced when EVL variables are examined in conjunction. This study sought to clarify this issue by investigating the effect of EVL flash rate and pattern combinations on measures which have featured in previous research. However to the author's knowledge, there are no published studies on the effect of EVL characteristics on gap acceptance, which may be more indicative of a driver's likely behaviour in a given situation rather than just his/her perception of it. This study attempted to address this shortfall in the literature by exploring the question of whether flash combinations which produced greater perceptions of hazard and/or urgency would also promote less risky gap acceptance judgements.

Recent developments in high definition (HD) technology allow stimulus materials to be displayed with greater clarity (and thereby with potentially greater realism) than has been possible previously. A secondary aim of this study was to investigate whether the exposure of participants to HD film clips could produce meaningful results without the use of more resource-intensive methods like scale models and simulators. For example the observational research design by Ullman et al. (1998) does not allow for participants to be questioned directly and the resources necessary to develop an ecologically valid model environment (like that reported in Cook et al.'s (1999) study) were unavailable in the present context. Other researchers have used video as a stimulus material, for example Chapman and Underwood (1998) used video to determine eye movement patterns from the perspective of a driver. It was reasoned that stimulus materials consisting of HD film could provide the most realistic environmental depiction of EVL characteristics, while also being reliable, minimising risk to participants but still allowing insight into their decision-making. To support this method, a statistical review was undertaken to determine the most common characteristics of accidents involving police vehicles, enabling stimulus materials to depict those conditions more commonly associated with these accidents.

An analysis of road traffic accidents involving police vehicles in the UK was undertaken by Andrew Morrow (2010) of the Home Office Centre for Applied Science and Technology (CAST). This utilised STATS 19 data, the data collection system used by the Police to record all road traffic incidents resulting in personal injury. The STATS 19 data for 2005 to 2008 were selected for all incidents flagged as ‘emergency vehicle on a call’ and where a police officer attended the scene (3049 incidents).

A detailed description of the results can be obtained from the authors of this article. Key findings were that the majority of incidents took place:
                           
                              ○
                              In 30 mph zones (72%)

On single carriageways (71%)

At T or staggered junctions (30%) or crossroads, (25%)

During daylight (60%)

In fine, dry conditions with no high winds (55%).

Of the 5197 casualty reports, car occupants were more likely to be killed or seriously injured (78%) than any other road user. There were more male (63%) than female casualties (37%). Of the fatal and seriously injured casualties, 84% of them fell into the age range of 16–55 years.

These results were used to determine the scenario and participant pool for the main study, so that the most hazardous conditions for accidents involving emergency vehicles on call featured as part of the experiment.

@&#METHOD@&#

This was a scoping study designed to explore whether a large-scale research project utilising this method for determining optimal EVL characteristics is feasible and valid. The experimental conditions featured film clips of a livered police vehicle, in which the lightbar was set to a combination of two key variables: flash rate (two levels: 1 Hz and 4 Hz) and flash pattern (single or triple pulse) in a repeated-measures design. There were therefore four ‘EVL conditions’. Also included was a ‘No Lights’ condition, in which the police car featured no EVL at all in the clip. This condition was included to provide a baseline to ensure participants were not solely reacting to the police vehicle's livery. The following variables were measured to understand whether particular combinations have a conspicuity/interpretation advantage:
                              
                                 1)
                                 Reaction time: defined as the time taken for the participant to detect a road-user and pause the clip (by pressing the mouse wheel).

Gap acceptance: the last possible moment participants perceived they would be comfortable pulling out in front of the approaching vehicle (signalled by the timecode at which the clip was paused). A greater number signals a smaller gap acceptance (therefore a more risky driving manoeuvre); a similar method was employed by Pietras et al. (2006).

Hazard perception: perceived hazard of the general situation, on a scale of 1 (no hazard) to 5 (extremely hazardous).

Urgency perception: perceived urgency of the road-user displayed in the clip, on a scale of 1 (no urgency) to 5 (very urgent).

Urgency ranking: perceived urgency of the four EVL conditions in comparison to one another, in ranks (where necessary ranks were shared).

40 participants were recruited from employees of the Sussex Innovation Centre and resident businesses. Recruitment advertisements called for regular drivers between the ages of 18–55, to tally with the accident analysis reported previously. Participants were screened for photosensitive epilepsy and recent experience (within one year) of a serious road traffic accident in a pre-test questionnaire. These criteria were designed to exclude participants for ethical reasons, although no potential participants met these criteria. Participants were paid £10 for undertaking the 30 min experiment (paid prior to testing to reduce demand characteristics). All participants were confirmed to have normal to corrected vision prior to commencing the study. A final sample of 37 participants was attained (3 did not participate). Of the sample 56.8% (n = 21) were male and the average age was 33.8 years (SD = 9.39), ranging from 22 to 53 years. Participants had held their driving licence on average for 14 years (SD = 8.50), and were predominantly regular drivers 91.9% (driving ‘a few times a week or more’). All participants passed the basic visual acuity test administered prior to participation.

Materials consisted of film clips of different EVL combinations displayed by an LED (911 Emergency Products Galaxy) lightbar, which was mounted on a 1996 Vauxhall Omega saloon police vehicle. Only the front central sections (rather than end sections) were used during filming. The emergency vehicle is shown in Fig. 1
                           
                            below. Fig. 2 shows the emergency vehicle in a frame of a final film clip. Further information on the police vehicle and filming procedure is available from the authors. Filler materials featured either no vehicles at all, or a ‘non-emergency’ vehicle: a blue Reliant Robin, black Jaguar XK8 convertible, blue Citroen Berlingo, and silver Vauxhall Zafira.

Materials were filmed from the perspective of the driver, as if they were waiting at a junction and looking through their right window (to tally with the findings from Study 1). All vehicles were travelling at 30 mph (apart from one non-emergency vehicle), to ensure consistency in the film clips. The location, filming conditions and filming procedure were all selected in order to reduce variability and artefacts of the filming process. Footage was edited into a final set of HD video clips, which varied between 5 and 13.8 s and featured a time code. The clips were trimmed so that each vehicle would appear in the same location at the start of each clip. Two playlists were compiled so that the clips could be run in two orders, enabling them to be counterbalanced between participants, to reduce the problem of order and practice effects.

The stimulus material constituted 24 clips of HD video feed, with a ‘countdown clip’ interspersed between, which lasted ten seconds. These featured two repetitions of each of the five clips that contained the police vehicle (41.7% of clips), with an average duration of 8.79 s (SD = .236). Fourteen of the twenty four clips were essentially filler material, containing non-emergency vehicles, or no road users at all for durations of 5, 10 and 15 s. Filler clips were included to improve ecological validity and increase the range of stimulus material. Furthermore clips featuring the police vehicle were in the minority, in order to simulate (to some extent) the lower frequency of emergency vehicles typically on UK roads, in comparison to non-emergency vehicles. The second presentation of emergency vehicle clips were reordered amongst the filler clips to counterbalance them within participants.

Stimulus materials were displayed on a High Definition screen (a 42 inch Panasonic TX-L42D25B), run on a laptop (a Toshiba Satellite with HDMI out controller set at 75 Hz, and screen resolution at 1968 × 1024) with the use of Gom Player and an external mouse capable of pausing the film clips. Participants were encouraged to sit at the same distance from the screen throughout the whole period stimulus materials were shown. The optimal distance from the screen was determined to be 81.5 cm. Daylight levels were controlled with blue and white filters to prevent screen reflections and reduce the variance in ambient light levels.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants were tested individually at the Sussex Innovation Centre. Following briefing and a test of eyesight, the procedure was demonstrated and participants practised on a filler clip featuring a non-emergency vehicle until they felt confident with the procedure. This typically took only one trial run. In the actual experiment, participants were shown the video clips which in combination with follow-up questions took approximately 20 min. Viewing time was capped at this duration to avoid the occurrence of the vigilance decrement (Nuechterlein et al., 1983). While watching each of the 24 clips, participants were asked to imagine they were waiting at a junction, looking to turn right. They were required to pause the clip upon identifying ‘another road user’ (reaction time), and secondly at the ‘last possible moment they would feel comfortable pulling out in front of the road user to turn right’ (gap acceptance). The experimenter noted the timer reading on the display when the clip was paused, and then resumed the clip so that the gap acceptance measure could be taken or the next clip shown. For each clip that contained a road user, participants were asked to rate the ‘hazard posed by the situation’ and the ‘urgency of the vehicle’ on a scale of one to five, after the clip had finished. The four EVL conditions were then repeated at the end of the procedure one to four times (depending on participant preference) enabling participants to rank them in terms of perceived urgency.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The repetition of stimulus material enabled two measures of gap acceptance, reaction time, hazard and urgency perception to be taken in response to each of the five experimental conditions (the four EVL conditions and the No Lights Condition). An average of each pair of observations was calculated and analyses (t-tests and 2 × 2 repeated measures ANOVAS) were conducted on this data. For brevity, data is not presented on participant responses to filler clips; measures were collected in the same way for all clips to reduce demand characteristics as far as possible. However no participants identified a hazard in the clips which did not feature any vehicle, therefore the false alarm count for hazard spotting was zero.

Interval data (or ordinal data which could be treated as interval) was first subjected to a repeated measures ANOVA. Post-hoc tests with a Bonferroni correction (to control for type I error) enabled the identification of whether any light combination produced superior performance on these measures in comparison to the No Light (NL) Condition. Gap acceptance scores differed significantly according to light condition (F (4, 52) = 11.64, p < .001), however post hoc tests indicate that gap acceptance in the NL condition (M = 2.95s, SD = .758) did not differ significantly in comparison to the 1 Hz single pulse (SP), condition (M = 2.58s, SD = .640). All other light combinations produced a significant improvement to the NL condition in terms of gap acceptance (see Table 1
                           ). Furthermore a repeated measures ANOVA with a Greenhouse-Geisser correction determined that both hazard perception and urgency perception significantly differed across light condition (F (2.326, 83.735) = 19.89, p < .001; F (3.003, 108.123) = 46.87, p < .001, respectively). Post hoc tests revealed that every EVL condition produced a significant improvement in hazard and urgency perception beyond the police vehicle displaying no emergency lights at all (see Table 1). In contrast, a repeated measures ANOVA (with Greenhouse-Geisser) conducted on the reaction time data confirmed that there was no systematic variation in time to detect the police vehicle due to light condition (F (2.820, 101.514) = 2.21, p = .096).

The prediction that a police vehicle with emergency lights would be detected more quickly than one without lights was therefore not supported by this data.

In the next sections, results comparing the effect of flash rate and pattern on gap acceptance, urgency perception and hazard perception are reported.

In the experimental scenarios, over 50% of the sample claimed that they would not pull out in front of the police car when it featured blue flashing lights. In contrast, 13 participants claimed they would pull out in front of the vehicle when its emergency lights were on display.

An ANOVA was conducted on this data, which revealed that the main effect of flash rate on gap acceptance was significant (F (1, 13) = 4.765, p < .05), while flash pattern was not significant (F (1, 13) = .785, p = .392). However the interaction effect between flash rate and pattern was significant (F (1, 13) = 5.696, p < .05). Essentially clips showing a faster flash rate were paused more quickly, giving the participant more time to pull out in front of the police vehicle (indicative of less risky hypothetical driving behaviour) than those showing a slower flash rate, although this only held for the single pulse pattern (M = 2.08s, SD = .663; M = 2.58s, SD = .640). This differentiation between fast and slow flash rates was reduced for the triple pulse patterns (M = 2.29s, SD = .813; M = 2.22s, SD = .548).

In terms of urgency perception, an 2 × 2 ANOVA revealed the effect of flash rate on urgency ratings was significant (F (1,36) = 5.79, p < .05). Flash rates of 1 Hz (M = 2.81, SD = .787; M = 2.90, SD = .9) received a lower urgency rating than flash rates of 4 Hz (M = 2.93, SD = .897; M = 3.09, SD = .80). Again there was no direct effect of flash pattern on urgency perception (F (1, 36) = 2.18, p = .148), and the interaction effect was also not significant (F (1, 36) = .339, p = .564). In this case therefore the flash pattern did not alter the effect of flash rate on urgency ratings.

The mean average hazard perception ratings for the stimulus vehicle displaying the four light combinations were very similar (considering they were measured on a scale of 1–5), ranging from 2.02 (SD = .787) to 2.11 (SD = .818). Although t-tests indicated that all of these conditions are perceived to be more hazardous than the No Lights Condition (see Table 1), an ANOVA indicated there were no significant differences between hazard ratings amongst the conditions, however the effect of rate approached significance (F (1,36) = 3.56, p = .067).

27% of participants (n = 10) rated the 4 Hz triple pulse combination as most urgent, or one of two combinations that were most urgent out of all the light combinations. The 1 Hz single pulse combination received the lowest amount of ‘most urgent’ ratings, at 8.1% of the sample (n = 3). The most reliable finding was that over half of the sample perceived the 1 Hz single pulse combination as the least urgent (51.3%), indeed the median rank for this combination was 3.5 (ranks ranged from 1 to 4), whereas it was 2.5 for every other combination. A Friedman test was conducted to test the statistical significance of these findings, which confirmed that the urgency rankings of the four light conditions significantly differed (χ
                           2 [3] = 24.618, p < .01). A Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test conducted on each pair indicates these differences are only amongst the 1 Hz SP combination in comparison with every other condition: 4 Hz TP (z = −3.399, p = .001), 4 Hz SP (z = −3.181, p = .001], 1 Hz TP (z = −3.878, p < .001). These results therefore indicate that the only reliable difference in urgency amongst the light combinations was that the 1 Hz single pulse combination was considered to depict the least urgency out of the four combinations.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Results indicate that participants would give a police vehicle more space when pulling out across its path if it has a faster rather than slower flash rate when it has a single pulse pattern. This could be because participants perceive the vehicle to be travelling with a greater degree of urgency when it has a faster flash rate, as supported by the finding that flash rates of 1 Hz receive a lower urgency rating than flash rates of 4 Hz. However the triple pulse pattern effectively reduced the effectiveness (as measured by gap acceptance) of the 4 Hz rate and improved the effectiveness of the 1 Hz rate. This finding is supported by participants' comments: some felt a rhythmic flash pattern resulted in a clearer warning, and the 4 Hz triple pulse pattern (effectively 12 Hz) appeared the least rhythmic of all the light combinations. However this interaction effect was not observed with urgency perception. The 4 Hz single pulse combination evoked the smallest gap acceptance times, indicating it was the optimal flash pattern as measured by this factor. These results are consistent with research which has found urgency perception is higher for higher flash rates (Cook et al., 1999). Unfortunately the authors of this report are unaware of any other research that has investigated how gap acceptance is affected by flash pattern and rate; therefore these findings can not be compared against those from prior studies.

This study found no differentiation in perceived hazard according to light combination. Other research has however found that hazard perception increases with increasing flash rates, and for triple rather than single pulse patterns (Chan and Ng, 2009). This may be because in the current hypothetical scenario, participants perceived the scenario to present little risk because they were stationary at a junction, on a different road to the approaching vehicle. Therefore there was not a great deal of variation in hazard ratings. In contrast, characteristics of the test vehicle appeared to be judged more effectively with the urgency ratings. However when participants were asked to rank the urgency of the vehicles in the EVL clips, the majority felt there was little difference between them, apart from the 1 Hz single pulse combination being perceived as the least urgent. It would seem that a conscious appreciation of the urgency suggested by the light combinations was lacking in this sample. In support of this assertion, 67.6% of the sample claimed that they did not notice that the clips featuring the police car had different light patterns (i.e. they differed in terms of flash pattern and rate) until they had the opportunity to watch the clips back-to-back during the urgency ranking scenario.

This study did not find any effect of EVL on reaction times. Reaction times to the police vehicle with any combination of EVL at all did not differ in comparison to when the vehicle had no lights on display. In contrast other research has found that flashing lights are detected more quickly when they employ a faster flash rate (Cook et al., 1999; Wells, 2004), and when they feature a double rather than single pulse pattern (Cook et al.). The discrepancy between the results of this research and similar studies may be due to methodological issues (see next section).

In terms of technical limitations involved in the development of materials, there are two key limitations. The materials were subject to rolling shutter effect (in which the camera records different parts of the frame at different times). Although this effect was barely perceptible during the trials, it will have made slight alterations to the flash patterns and rates that were viewed by participants. In addition the materials that were shown to participants were compressed and therefore of a lower resolution than the original material. It should be noted that compression artefacts were not specifically identified in the materials, although subtle effects may have been present.

More general limitations of the materials may have suppressed effects observed on the gap acceptance and reaction time measures. The vehicle was always present at the beginning of the clip in a very similar location because of the road curvature and the need to present the vehicle ‘head on’. This is likely to have reduced variation in reaction times through the role of expectation. Ideally a longer approach with an incline would be employed for future research. This would ensure that the vehicle only emerges in the distance from the peak of a hill, which would also allow the time before the vehicle appears to be varied in order to reduce the role of expectation in responses. Furthermore different locations and directions of movement could also be used for displaying the stimulus vehicle for future research, which would also reduce the predictability of the material should resources allow. The gap acceptance measure could be more discriminating if the stimulus vehicles were viewed with a longer approach. The stimulus vehicles had an approximate approach distance of 100 m in this study, which for many participants was not enough space to pull out across the path of a police vehicle displaying emergency lights.

Finally although this research found some evidence to suggest that a faster flash rate on a police vehicle is likely to produce a greater perception of urgency and more wariness about pulling out in front of its path than a slower flash rate (primarily with a single rather than triple pulse pattern), it is uncertain whether this would translate into driving behaviour. Observational studies in the field are lacking, making it difficult to ascertain whether drivers have sufficient opportunity to avoid emergency service vehicles on typically congested roads. Additionally drivers may not view the EVL of approaching vehicles for long enough to discern the level of urgency from flash characteristics. Previous research investigating search times at the same junction at which stimulus materials were filmed, found that drivers search for hazards for less than .5 s (Langham and Labbett, 2006). If search times remain at .5 s when an emergency vehicle is present, EVL which features a flash rate below 2 Hz may go completely undetected and drivers may not perceive the vehicle to be travelling in emergency mode.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Emergency vehicle lighting is a critical means by which drivers are alerted to the presence of emergency service vehicles. This research has found evidence to suggest for urgent situations, a 4 Hz flash rate should be utilised over a 1 Hz flash rate to enhance perceptions of urgency. Furthermore if a 4 Hz single flash combination is employed, this research suggests it will produce safer traffic-merging manoeuvres from stationary drivers at junctions, than any other EVL combination tested.

The findings are applicable only to the development of a high urgency mode, rather than a low urgency mode flash combination. This is because it is uncertain whether reaction times amongst EVL conditions truly did not differ or whether this was due to methodological issues. Therefore it can not be certain whether a low urgency EVL mode would effectively reduce the conspicuity of an emergency vehicle; further research is required in this respect. It is concluded that this research has made considerable progress in uncovering some of the light characteristics that would be optimal for emergency service vehicles in a situation of high urgency. However its main contribution is in trialling a methodology which is not resource-intensive, and maintains a balance between ecological validity and experimental control.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

