@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Paramedics on the job: Dynamic trunk motion assessment at the workplace

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Postural load of paramedics on the job was examined using direct field measurements.


                        
                        
                           
                           The highest trunk angles in the three planes were observed during lifting activities.


                        
                        
                           
                           Peak velocities of the trunk were observed during ambulance transport.


                        
                        
                           
                           Increased trunk motion exposure was observed in urgent and high-demand situations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Paramedics adopted trunk motions that may increase the risk of low back disorders.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Three-dimensional trunk motion

Emergency medical service

Musculoskeletal disorder

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Many paramedics' work accidents are related to physical aspects of the job, and the most affected body part is the low back. This study documents the trunk motion exposure of paramedics on the job. Nine paramedics were observed over 12 shifts (120h). Trunk postures were recorded with the computer-assisted CUELA measurement system worn on the back like a knapsack. Average duration of an emergency call was 23.5min. Sagittal trunk flexion of >40° and twisting rotation of >24° were observed in 21% and 17% of time-sampled postures. Medical care on the scene (44% of total time) involved prolonged flexed and twisted postures (∼10s). The highest extreme sagittal trunk flexion (63°) and twisting rotation (40°) were observed during lifting activities, which lasted 2% of the total time. Paramedics adopted trunk motions that may significantly increase the risk of low back disorders during medical care and patient-handling activities.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A paramedic's job can be described as evaluating and stabilizing patients' condition before the patients receive medical attention at the hospital. Among healthcare workers and the general population, paramedics have the highest percentage of early retirement, most often due to musculoskeletal disorders (Hogya and Ellis, 1990; Pattani et al., 2001; Rodgers, 1998; Sterud et al., 2006, 2008). More than 63% of paramedics' work accidents result from overexertion (push, pull, raise, hold, etc.) or bodily reaction (reach, lean, slip, climb, stumble, etc.) (CSST, 2012). Many studies have demonstrated that low back disorders are a common health problem among paramedics (Crill and Hostler, 2005; Hogya and Ellis, 1990; Jones and Lee, 2005; Studnek et al., 2010). One factor, or a combination of several, may underlie these low back disorders (Corbeil and Prairie, 2012). For instance, plausible explanations include the physical demands of the job (Aasa et al., 2005; Barnekow-Bergkvist et al., 2004; Putz-Anderson et al., 1997) and the execution of tasks in awkward postures (Doormaal et al., 1995).

Most studies have analyzed paramedics' work using questionnaires (Jones and Lee, 2005), interviews (Hignett et al., 2007) or simulations in the laboratory (Aasa et al., 2008; Barnekow-Bergkvist et al., 2004; Lavender et al., 2000a,b), but, given the wide variety of scenarios and work strategies, these studies did not allow for a complete representation of the situation. We found only two studies (Doormaal et al., 1995; Ferreira and Stanley, 2005) that analyzed paramedics' posture on the job. Both studies used the Ovako working posture analysis system (OWAS method) (Karhu et al., 1977, 1981) to describe the paramedics' general posture during a work shift (Doormaal et al., 1995) or during activities performed in an ambulance's patient compartment (Ferreira and Stanley, 2005). Doormaal et al. (1995) found that 16–29% of a work shift was spent in harmful positions and that strenuous situations occurred particularly often during emergency tasks.

One limitation of the OWAS method is that information is obtained from a static posture analysis (“snapshot”) every 30s. Consequently, the physical constraints of the job are determined by the observation of only two pictures per minute and dynamic motion assessment is ignored. However, dynamic motion characteristics may play an important role in the development of low back disorders (Davis and Marras, 2000; Marras et al., 2010). New technologies permit the more accurate collection of information about postural risk factors of dynamic trunk motion by using direct measurements of paramedics' movements obtained during field observations (Ellegast and Kupfer, 1999; Marras et al., 2010; Plamondon et al., 2007).

The aim of this study was to document the trunk motion exposure of paramedics on the job using continuous recordings of back posture (CUELA system) during work activities, from the arrival on the scene to the delivery of the patient to the hospital. We hypothesized that trunk motion exposure to risk factors for low back disorder was likely to be more significant when work duties were accomplished in urgent situations and also when the paramedic perceived the work duties as highly physically demanding, rather than not very physically demanding.

@&#METHODS@&#

This study was conducted at the Coopérative des techniciens ambulanciers du Québec (CTAQ) in Quebec City, Canada. This organization employs over 300 paramedics and operates 26 ambulances.

Paramedics receive emergency calls from dispatchers and drive an ambulance to the assigned location. They may also provide interfacility ambulance transportation (e.g., prescheduled, medically necessary transfers between hospitals and other healthcare facilities). Calls are allocated on a priority basis: priority 1 or urgent for calls requiring immediate transport because of a threat to life or limb; other priority codes are classified as non-urgent for routine calls that cannot be delayed but are not urgent (i.e., priority 3) and those that can be delayed without being detrimental to the patient.

This study focuses on work situations involving ambulance transport calls for emergencies (i.e., 911 calls) considered to be both urgent and non-urgent. More specifically, these work situations are defined as including all activities occurring between the arrival on the scene (i.e., when the paramedic exits the ambulance) and the delivery of the patient to the hospital (i.e., when the stretcher loaded with a patient is removed from the ambulance at the hospital).

The work duties of paramedics were divided into seven tasks. The first task, movements in the field, includes all paramedic movements without the patient (e.g., retrieving and storing equipment in the ambulance, walking to access patients). The second task, medical care in the field, is defined as all activities occurring at the place where the patient is located before the patient is installed on transport equipment. For ambulatory patients, this task ends when the paramedic enters the ambulance patient compartment. All activities performed in an ambulance patient compartment with or without the patient are grouped in the third task. Patient-handling activities are included in the fourth task. Patient-handling activities include transferring or moving the patient from one surface to another (e.g., home bed to stretcher, stairchair to stretcher) and repositioning or moving the patient on the same surface. The movements of the stretcher loaded with a patient belong to task #5 and those with the stairchair loaded with a patient to task #6. Stretcher-patient activities, defined as loading and unloading from the ambulance patient compartment, are included in task #7.

Nine male full-time paramedics were observed for 8 or 12h during both day and night work shifts. Participants were recruited via an electronic mailing list and word of mouth. The participants' demographic characteristics are presented in Table 1
                        . None were experiencing musculoskeletal disorders at the time of the study. Each participant signed an informed consent form prior to participating in the study.

The instrumentation consisted of a digital video camera (JVC GZ-HD30u) and the CUELA measuring system (computer-assisted recording and long-term analysis of musculoskeletal loading, BGIA, Sankt Augustin, Germany). The CUELA system was developed for measuring trunk movements in real-life situations (Ellegast and Kupfer, 1999; Freitag et al., 2007) and was used to quantify paramedics' back posture amplitudes during work activities. The CUELA system is worn on the back like a knapsack and acquires movements at a frequency of 50Hz in three dimensions: flexion in the sagittal, frontal and transverse planes. The CUELA consists of a tri-axial accelerometer and gyroscope placed on the first thoracic and last lumbar vertebrae and a digital angular sensor placed between the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. After the data were collected, the signals were processed to determine the position of the trunk as a function of time in the sagittal, frontal (lateral), and transverse (twisting) planes of the body. These data were further processed using a dual-pass 4th-order Butterworth filter with an 8Hz low-pass cut-off. Trunk velocities were derived from the first time differential of the trunk position data using a ±5-point numerical differentiation (±100ms window).

Data were collected over six weeks in August and September 2009 on nine day and three night shifts. During a shift, the paramedics worked in pairs and shared the responsibility of driving and attending to patients. Data were collected on one member of the team, who might perform both roles during the shift. At the beginning of each work shift, 30min of preparation time was allotted to install the CUELA system, familiarize the paramedic with it and explain the experimental procedures. Following installation, the CUELA sensors (Fig. 1
                        ) were calibrated using an anatomical position (Freitag et al., 2007). Data collected using the CUELA system and the video made by the observer were recorded during the activities from the arrival on the scene to the delivery of the patient to the hospital. Video recordings made it possible to ensure the accurate allocation of the measured data to the tasks performed.

The fitness component of the appraisal involved a series of physical tests and measurements. The physical evaluation included anthropometric measurements (height, body mass, skinfold measurements), cardiorespiratory fitness, and musculoskeletal fitness (hand grip, push-ups, abdominal endurance, back extension, trunk flexibility, vertical jump); each muscle test was performed in accordance with a standardized protocol (Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology, 2003; Ehrman, 2010). A single-stage treadmill walking test was used to assess the maximal oxygen consumption. Physical evaluation was performed within one month following completion of the field data collection. The participants' physical fitness characteristics are presented in Table 1.

Two methods were used to analyze postural data obtained with the CUELA system. The first method, exposure variation analysis (EVA), illustrated the signal as a three-dimensional distribution (Mathiassen and Winkel, 1990). EVA represents the relationship between the amplitude of angular movements (intensity class in degrees) and two variables: the duration of the movement (seconds) and the relative exposure time (percentage of the total work activities time). The X-axis of the distribution is made up of six intensity classes (in degrees) depending on the movement (sagittal flexion: <−5°, −5° to 10°, 10–25°, 25–40°, 40–60°, >60°; twisting rotation and lateral flexion: <6°, 6–12°, 12–18°, 18–24°, 24–30°, >30°). The Y-axis is made up of six duration classes (in seconds) for all movements (<0.5, 0.5–1, 1–5, 5–10, 10–20, >20). The Z-axis corresponds to the relative time (as a percentage) accumulated in each combination of the intensity and duration classes. An additional method was also used to calculate the “center of mass” projected on the X–Y plane of the EVA distribution (Delisle et al., 2005; Lariviere et al., 2005). It computes two distances relative to the origin of the EVA distribution: the average position of the duration (EVA-duration) and intensity (EVA-intensity). Higher values of EVA-duration and EVA-intensity result in higher movement times or angles.

The second method, the amplitude probability distribution function (APDF) (Jonsson, 1978), was used to obtain the 50th and 90th percentiles of the measures of movement amplitudes and velocities computed.

Immediately after each delivery at the hospital, paramedics evaluated their mental load using the NASA-TLX questionnaire (Hart and Lowell, 1988) and their physical demands on a 10cm visual analog scale. The scores obtained on the visual analog scale (very low to very high), based on the paramedics' physical requirements, divided emergency calls into two groups. Group 1, physically low-demand call-outs (normal emergency call-outs), included scores of less than 3cm on the scale. Group 2, physically moderate or higher-demand emergency call-outs (physical emergency call-outs), included scores greater than or equal to 3cm on the scale.

Trunk motion exposure data were analyzed using Statistica software 8.0 (Statsoft, Tulsa, USA). Descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) for each specific task are presented. Then, t-tests (p
                        <0.05) were used to compare trunk motion data in urgent and non-urgent situations, and normal and physical emergency call-out groups.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Thirty-eight emergency calls were recorded on 12 separate summer days, totaling 120h in the field. On average, each team was called out 2.9 and 4 times, respectively, during a day and night shift. Moreover, 82% of the emergency call-outs were indoors compared to 18% outdoors. Overall, 42% of the emergency call-outs were made in urgent situations, and the remainder in non-urgent situations. Also, according to the score obtained on the visual analog scale, 82% of the emergency call-outs were considered physically low-demand and 18% high-demand (mean scale values of 1.3 and 4.7, respectively; p
                        <0.01). Near half of the low-demand (42%) and high-demand (43%) emergency call-outs involved urgent situations.

Of the 38 emergency calls, four were discarded from the analysis due to technical problems with the equipment. The use of a video camera was prohibited in seven other cases (i.e., patient's decision, police intervention or interfacility ambulance transportation).

In general, the duration of an emergency call was 23.5min (ranging from 8.9 to 46.8min) involving on average 7.2 tasks. The frequency and sequence of the tasks performed by each paramedic during an emergency call were highly variable. Table 2
                         shows that the most frequent tasks were movements in the field and medical care in the field. On the other hand, the movement of a stairchair loaded with a patient occurred in one out of five emergency call-outs.


                        Tables 2 and 3
                         summarize the trunk dynamic motion in the data recorded in the field. Overall, the median sagittal trunk flexion during the observed paramedics' tasks was equal to 18.8° (corresponding to the third EVA-intensity class) and 21% of time-sampled postures were greater than 40°. The median and 90th percentile of bend in the lateral plane corresponded to a low risk with regard to the EVA-intensity class (<12°). High twisting rotation greater than 24° was observed 17% of the total time.

Walking (not running) was observed most often during movements in the field. The movements in the field have the lowest median and extreme amplitude postures in the sagittal and twisting planes among all seven tasks. In contrast, the highest median and 90th percentile of lateral velocity were observed during these movements (Table 2). Furthermore, increased extension velocity in the sagittal plane (p
                           <0.05), increased velocity in twisting and lateral planes (ps<0.05) and median values of twist and bend position of the trunk (ps<0.05) were observed when the work situations were urgent (Table 5). Hence, risks related to trunk motion dynamics during movement in the field increased in urgent situations. During high-demand work situations, risks related to trunk motion while accessing patients did not increase.

A large amount of time during the emergency call-out (44% of total time) was dedicated to medical care on the scene. This task involves prolonged flexed and twisted postures (∼10s), as indicated by the values for EVA-duration (Table 3). This resulted in very low median and extreme velocities in all three planes of trunk motion (Table 2). Paramedics adopted a quasi-static 20.1° or less flexed posture half of the time, and for 10% of the time they adopted a flexed posture greater than 52.6°. Ninety-seven percent of the patients were conscious at the time.

Increased risks were observed during urgent medical care in the field (Table 5): paramedics adopted more harmful twisting positions than in non-urgent situations (p
                           <0.05). When the emergency call-out was perceived as physically demanding (Table 4
                           ), median trunk position in all three planes increased significantly (ps<0.05) and paramedics spent more time in extreme flexion positions in the sagittal and lateral planes (ps<0.05).

On average, medical care during transport lasted 11.1min±10.6min (or 36% of the total time). Care given in the ambulance compartment was characterized by a greatly flexed posture (median and 90th percentile of flexion position are equal to 33.6° and 53.8°, respectively; Table 2). The paramedics also frequently adopted very twisted positions (>18°) during transport. Just as with medical care on the scene, care given in the ambulance compartment is also characterized by more movement time in all three motion planes, showing a larger duration of static postures than all other tasks (Table 3). Surprisingly, peak velocity for all three motion planes was observed during transport in the ambulance (Table 2).

No difference was observed between urgent and non-urgent transport (ps>0.32), although a greater bend position of the trunk was observed during high-demand work activities (p
                           <0.01).

The lifting task lasted on average 25.8s (min 9.0s; max: 53.0s). The highest median and extreme angles in the three planes of trunk motion were observed during lifting activities (Table 2). More specifically, awkward working postures in the sagittal and twisting planes (>40° flexion and >24° twist) were adopted over 60.2% and 57.4% of the duration of the lifting task. Mean duration of these postures was between 1 and 5s, as indicated by the values for EVA-duration for all three planes of motion (Table 3).

No difference in trunk dynamics was observed between urgent and non-urgent lifting activities (ps>0.11). During high-demand work situations (Table 4), paramedics executed twice as many lifts as in low-demand situations (p
                           <0.05). Consequently, the duration of the task increased by 79% (p
                           <0.05). Moreover, reduced median flexion and twist movement velocity were observed when the work situations were more physically demanding (ps<0.05). Exposure time to awkward postures in the sagittal and twisting planes increased in high- compared to low-demand situations from 4.9s to 26.2s, and from 5.5s to 24.1s, respectively. The patient's weight did not seem to explain these differences between high- and low-demand situations (mean 77kg versus 69kg, respectively; p
                           =0.36).

The results showed that 19% of the patients were capable of walking to the ambulance under their own power. Otherwise, transporting a stretcher loaded with a patient lasted 3.6min (ranging from 0.7 to 12.3min). When compared to other task families, the movements of the stretcher loaded with a patient were executed with relatively low amplitude postures and low movement velocities in all three planes (Tables 2 and 3). Paramedics spent approximately 14% of the total duration of this task in awkward working postures in the sagittal and twisting planes (>40° flexion and >24° twist).

During urgent situations (Table 5
                           ), trunk motion risks increased by 60% for extreme twists and by 36% for extreme twisting velocities (ps<0.05). Sagittal flexion postures adopted during these movements in high-demand work situations were characterized by a 14.4° (from 15.0° to 29.4°) larger median value and by a 21.1° (from 37.5° to 58.6°) larger extreme value than low-demand work situations (ps<0.05; Table 4).

Stairchair activities lasted from 118 to 225s (mean=171s). Harmful flexed and twisted trunk positions (>40° and >24°, respectively) were adopted in 39% of stairchair uses. This task was also associated with the highest median and 90th-percentile values of trunk twisting velocity observed in the field (Table 2). Maximal velocities greater than 100°/s were observed in the other motion planes.

Priority of the call did not influence the trunk motion risk observed during paramedics' uses of stairchairs (ps>0.17). During high-demand work situations (Table 4), paramedics executed twice as many stairchair activities as in low-demand work situations (p
                           <0.05).

Paramedics loaded and unloaded stretcher-patients from the ambulance in teams of two in 27% of the cases; the rest of the time, this was accomplished alone. Loading and unloading stretcher-patients lasted on average 24.6s (min 8.9s; max 50.8s). Most of the flexion positions adopted during this task were within the −5° and 10° range, with peaks greater than 38.9°. This task often involved large flexion and twisting velocities (Table 2).

Paramedics executed the task alone more than 90% of the time in urgent situations. An increased risk of back injury, as indicated by median and 90th-percentile twist position, was observed in urgent situations. More specifically, in urgent situations, the 90th percentile of twist increased from 18.8° to 28.4° (p
                           <0.05). The relative duration of the loading and unloading task decreased by 49% when executed in urgent situations (p
                           <0.05; Table 5).

We observed that paramedics always loaded and unloaded stretcher-patients alone during high-demand work situations. However, there was no significant difference in trunk motion exposure between low and high-demand situations.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The CUELA system was used to document the trunk motion patterns of paramedics on the job. The results of this study demonstrate that the paramedics' dynamic three-dimensional trunk motion was characterized by large maximum sagittal flexion and twisting angles, as well as high maximum twisting and lateral velocities. These factors are known to increase biomechanical loads on the spine (Marras, 2006). In addition, they have been associated with a high risk for low back disorders (Marras et al., 2006). We found statistical evidence to support our hypothesis that exposure to risk factors for low back disorder was greater when work duties were accomplished in urgent situations and also when the paramedic perceived the work duties as highly physically demanding. The influence of the priority of the call or high-demand work situations on the risk factors varies depending on the task.

Asymmetrical trunk postures (lateral bend and twisting) were observed in activities occurring during movements on the scene. These postures were adopted while paramedics were removing their equipment from the ambulance compartment and carrying first aid bags (weight varying between 3.6kg and 15.4kg) on one side of the body (shoulder and/or hand). Overall, trunk motion risk factors during the movements in the field are relatively low compared to the other tasks.

Paramedics spent most of their time performing medical care activities (∼80% of total time from the arrival on the scene to the delivery of the patient to the hospital). The major risk factor observed during on-scene medical care is the prolonged holding of awkward static postures. The physical setting/environment (workplace layout, temperature, noise, lighting, etc.) may force the paramedics to adopt high-amplitude flexion and/or twisting postures of the back for a long time. In one specific case observed in this study, a paramedic remained in a high sagittal flexion position to stay near the patient while monitoring vital signs from the back seat of a vehicle (Fig. 2(a)). Out-of-hospital procedures performed by paramedics may also influence exposure to awkward back postures. In another specific case, a paramedic remained in a crouched position while immobilizing the cervical spine of a patient suffering from a severe head injury (Fig. 2(b)). Some procedures may also be particularly physically demanding and are considered strenuous by paramedics (e.g., closed-chest cardiac massage), but these were not observed in the present study. The results of this study are consistent with those reported in another study suggesting that work activities related to on-scene medical care constitute a heavy task in terms of working posture (Doormaal et al., 1995). Efficient teamwork, safe work strategies and the equipment used may help reduce exposure to awkward and harmful postures.

On average, more than 32% of the time was spent in awkward flexions or back twists while providing medical treatment inside the ambulance. This result is consistent with that reported in another study (Gilad and Byran, 2007). We observed more variation in postures during medical care in the ambulance than care given on the scene even if the paramedic remained sitting during the entire trip. Movements of the ambulance may explain these variations in posture and peak movement velocities (three-dimensional) found during this task. The vibration of the vehicle and the awkward back postures adopted by paramedics may accentuate the risk of musculoskeletal disorders (Punnett and Wegman, 2004; Putz-Anderson et al., 1997). Other researchers have proposed optimizing the equipment layout in the ambulance compartment to reduce risk exposure (Arial et al., 2009; Dupont, 2009; Gilad and Byran, 2007; Slattery and Silver, 2009).

Tasks involved in lifting patients are physically demanding and often tax the musculoskeletal system to its limits (Gagnon et al., 1986; Lavender et al., 2000a,b). Patient-lifting activities have been associated with work-related musculoskeletal disorders among paramedics (Hogya and Ellis, 1990; Massad et al., 2000) and also in other professions (e.g., nursing; Engkvist, 2008). In the present study, patient-lifting tasks were often accompanied by static, awkward forward bends and asymmetric lifting. Large three-dimensional amplitudes and velocities observed during patient-lifting tasks are likely to increase the biomechanical load on the spine (Punnett and Wegman, 2004; Putz-Anderson et al., 1997; Waters et al., 1994). One study demonstrated that lifting a patient from the ground or the bed to a stretcher was the most strenuous of all lifting activities in terms of the estimated load on the back, knees and ankles (Doormaal et al., 1995). Patient weight directly influences the biomechanical load on the spine (Lavender et al., 2000a,b). Handling or lifting heavy patients may therefore accentuate awkward postures and high force levels, two known factors associated with work-related musculoskeletal disorders (Punnett and Wegman, 2004; Putz-Anderson et al., 1997).

Awkward and asymmetric postures during patient lifting have also been reported extensively in nursing research (Koppelaar et al., 2012; Resnick and Sanchez, 2009). Home health workers must deal with unpredictable patient and environmental conditions (Conrad et al., 2000), in other words, conditions similar to paramedics' work situations. A study on patient-handling practice has demonstrated that complexity of everyday care, patient treatment goals, time, knowledge and equipment are factors influencing one's judgment of the best way to move patients (de Ruiter and Liaschenko, 2011). Resnick and Sanchez (2009) proposed the use of contextual patient-handling training formats to reduce the risk of injury. Other studies have suggested designing and using appropriate ergonomic devices to reduce the risk of injury during lifting tasks (Koppelaar et al., 2012; Lavender et al., 2007a,b). Appropriate training on how and when to use such devices is necessary to optimize workers' job strategies (Resnick and Sanchez, 2009). Future research should focus on the strategies employed by paramedics during lifting activities to determine appropriate techniques.


                           Wang et al. (2009) observed that 14% of all adverse events during stretcher operations happened while moving the stretcher loaded with a patient. The task depends on floor condition and equipment functioning. All observations in the present study were made during summer and no adverse events occurred. Compared to the other paramedic work activities investigated, relatively low biomechanical risk is observed and this may be explained by the favorable environmental conditions and the absence of adverse events.

In this study, trunk postures observed while carrying a patient down a set of stairs using a stairchair were characterized by relatively low median forward and lateral bending, and twisting trunk amplitudes compared to the other work activities. However, maximal trunk postures were greater than those observed during simulated emergency rescues in stairways (transport down the stairs and through a 90° turn on a landing) (Lavender et al., 2000b). The differences may be explained by the simulation site, which was considerably wider than what is found in a typical residence, and the 48kg dummy (similar to a small female subject) used to simulate a patient. Lavender et al. (2000b) estimated that the mean L4/L5 compressions with the stairchair transport task ranged from 2600 to 3727N on the paramedic (in the leader role) when carrying the stairchair at waist level (37% greater than that estimated for the other paramedics). They claimed that only 82% of the population would have adequate back strength to perform all components of the stairchair activities with a 48kg dummy. The results of the present study, obtained under real emergency conditions, do not allow us to assess the biomechanical stresses placed on the body. In this study, the paramedics used only one evacuation stairchair model (Stryker Stair-Pro Model 6252 with Stair-Tread system). Very little stairchair carrying at waist level was observed when moving patients downstairs. With the heavier patients (mean patient weight of 79kg) and larger trunk motions observed during real stairchair activities, a higher mechanical load on the spine would be expected. The biomechanical effects of real work strategies using stairchairs may be worthy of further investigation.

Previous studies found that pushing a stretcher into an ambulance ranked third and raising a stretcher ranked fourth of all patient-handling tasks associated with injuries to ambulance workers (Furber et al., 1997; Kluth and Strasser, 2006). In the present study, paramedics used only one model of stretcher (Stryker Power™ Pro) with a hydraulic lifting mechanism designed to facilitate loading and unloading a stretcher-patient into and out of the ambulance. The physical stress experienced by operators is mostly due to the combined weight of the stretcher (57kg), the medical equipment (medical kits, oxygen tanks and other pieces of equipment typically add to the weight of a stretcher) and the patient. It is generally recommended that a minimum of two persons engage in such loading and unloading operations to reduce the physical stress on operators. Surprisingly, the paramedics executed the task alone most of the time. Adverse events related to loading and unloading operations are often reported (Wang et al., 2009), but this was not the case in our study.

Urgent situations increased exposure to trunk motion risk factors in four tasks: movement in the field, medical care on the scene, stretcher transport and loading/unloading operations. Significantly higher asymmetric postures (twisting and/or side bends) were adopted in urgent situations. The time stress that exists in urgent situations may explain the adoption of awkward postures. In such circumstances, paramedics may pay less attention to controlling their posture because they are focusing on the patient's care and well-being.

Loading and unloading operations were performed by only one paramedic 90% of the time during urgent calls (compared to 55% during non-urgent situations). This result may represent a team strategy to optimize evacuation time. It should be mentioned that the biomechanical load on the spine is higher when performing these operations alone.

Trunk motion risk factors increased in high-demand call-outs principally during medical care on the scene and in the ambulance, lifting activities, stretcher transport and stairchair activities. Physically demanding work situations are relatively infrequent (less than one per shift) and may happen during either urgent or non-urgent situations.

The frequency of lifting activities and stairchair activities, duration and amplitude of awkward postures during medical care and patient weight relative to the paramedic's strength represent factors that may influence the perceived level of strenuousness. This suggests that high-demand emergency call-outs pose a greater risk of musculoskeletal disorders than low-demand work situations.

The present study has a number of limitations. First, the number of observations is relatively low, although it is comparable to an earlier field study (Doormaal et al., 1995). This implies that not all possible work situations were observed and that considerable variability in work situations was pooled together in our analyses. Further larger-scale studies must address the specific features of each work situation and better control for covariates (e.g., patients' mobility, degree of consciousness, and weight).

Another limitation on the present study is that voluntary recruitment of subjects may have biased the results because the participants were generally confident about their work capacities (Gamble et al., 1991). All the paramedics seemed to act naturally, but it is possible that they paid particular attention to the techniques used to execute their tasks because they were being observed (Gamble et al., 1991). If his was the case, the results could underestimate paramedics' exposure to awkward postures.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study has shown that paramedics adopt trunk motions that may significantly increase the risk of low back disorders during the majority of their time at work. Increased risk factors were identified during medical care in the field and in the ambulance and during lifting activities, stairchair activities and loading and unloading the stretcher from the ambulance. More studies are needed to identify how other work-related factors (e.g., expertise, physical condition, work organization and environmental context) may increase biomechanical load and how much motion exposure is related to low back disorders. This study reinforces the usefulness of the direct measurement of three-dimensional trunk motion on the job as a sensitive tool to assess biomechanical loading of the spine associated with workplace dynamics and the risk of low back disorders.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors wish to thank the paramedics of CTAQ for their kind cooperation. In addition, we gratefully thank Dr. Rolf Ellegast (BGIA – Institute for occupational health and safety of the German social accident insurance plan), André Plamondon and Christian Larue (Institut de Recherche Robert Sauvé en Santé et en Sécurité du Travail du Québec) for lending us the CUELA measurement system for the duration of the study. We gratefully acknowledge the editing work and suggestions by Grant Handrigan and Zofia Laubitz. This project was partly supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) discovery grants to PC and by the Institut de Recherche Robert Sauvé en Santé et en Sécurité du Travail du Québec, Grant # 0099-8190.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

