@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Psychometric properties evaluation of a new ergonomics-related job factors questionnaire developed for nursing workers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We developed a new job factors questionnaire for nursing workers.


                        
                        
                           
                           It evaluates the perception about job factors and their contribution to disorders.


                        
                        
                           
                           Confirmatory factos analyses confirmed the pre-defined structure.


                        
                        
                           
                           Reliability and validity tests showed good results for using the new tool.


                        
                        
                           
                           ErgoEnf can assist in identifying problematic factors in nursing workplaces.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Musculoskeletal diseases

Risk factors

Nursing

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The objectives of this study were to develop a questionnaire that evaluates the perception of nursing workers to job factors that may contribute to musculoskeletal symptoms, and to evaluate its psychometric properties. Internationally recommended methodology was followed: construction of domains, items and the instrument as a whole, content validity, and pre-test. Psychometric properties were evaluated among 370 nursing workers. Construct validity was analyzed by the factorial analysis, known-groups technique, and convergent validity. Reliability was assessed through internal consistency and stability. Results indicated satisfactory fit indices during confirmatory factor analysis, significant difference (p < 0.01) between the responses of nursing and office workers, and moderate correlations between the new questionnaire and Numeric Pain Scale, SF-36 and WRFQ. Cronbach's alpha was close to 0.90 and ICC values ranged from 0.64 to 0.76. Therefore, results indicated that the new questionnaire had good psychometric properties for use in studies involving nursing workers.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Work-related musculoskeletal disorders are one of the most important causes of occupational injuries and socioeconomic problems in developed countries as well as in developing countries.

Studies have highlighted the health care workers as a risk group for the development of work-related musculoskeletal disorders, particularly vertebral pains (Cole et al., 2001; Alexopoulos et al., 2004; Salik and Özcan, 2004; Aasa et al., 2005; Freitag et al., 2007; Lorusso et al., 2007). Many studies also have shown that nursing workers have high incidence of musculoskeletal symptoms, and their most frequent symptom is pain in the lumbar spine (Gurgueira and Alexandre, 2003; Kjellberg et al., 2003; Smedley et al., 2003; Violante et al., 2004; Freitag et al., 2007; Lorusso et al., 2007; Kromark et al., 2009). These same studies showed a significant occurrence of musculoskeletal symptoms in other areas, such as cervical, thoracic, shoulders, hips/thighs, knees, and ankles/feet.

There is no unique cause related to these disorders, however literature shows that various job factors can contribute to their appearance, such as repetitiveness of movements, maintaining postures for long periods of time, physical effort, invariability of tasks, mechanical pressure on certain parts of the body, static work, impact, vibration, cold, organizational and psychosocial factors (Punnett and Wegman, 2004).

Therefore, nursing workers are exposed to risk factors at their workplace, which include biomechanical (awkward movements and postures), environmental (workplace layout), psychosocial (work pressure, low autonomy and competitiveness), and organizational factors (low number of colleagues during the shift and inadequate equipment and no maintenance) (Coluci and Alexandre, 2012).

There is no measurement instrument that evaluates the perception of these workers regarding the influence of job factors in the development of musculoskeletal symptoms. A questionnaire for this purpose would facilitate achievement of surveys on nursing working conditions, prioritizing certain factors in different work sectors, and it could be a simple tool that can direct the use of other instruments of objective measures which take more time and costs.

The aim of this research was to develop and validate a questionnaire regarding the nursing workers' perception of job factors that may contribute to the onset of musculoskeletal symptoms.

@&#METHODS@&#

This study was conducted in two hospitals located in the state of São Paulo, Brazil. In order to cover nursing workers from different environments, two hospitals were chosen based on their differences on infrastructure and on the type of patients, since one of them is intended to provide public services and the other one is restricted to insured and private patients.

Nurses, licensed practical nurses (LPN), and nurse technicians (NT), with at least six months of professional activity participated in the study. The Law Number 7498 from the Brazilian Federal Nursing Council (Brasil, 1986) determines the functions performed by these professionals. According to this law, nurses must perform all activities of nursing in direct care of critically patients, in addition to planning, organizing, directing, implementing and evaluating nursing services. Both NT and LPN perform predominantly direct care of patients, however the activities of the NT require lower level of decision than those performed by the LPN.

Workers who were dismissed from their activities during the period of data collection were excluded.

As this research refers to the construction of a new measuring instrument, which must include a confirmatory factor analysis, the sample size was calculated based on the number of variables in the questionnaire. It was assumed that the sample size should be at least ten subjects per variable (Hair et al., 1998). As the final instrument consists of 32 items, the minimum sample for statistical analysis was 320 subjects.

Office workers of both hospitals also participated in the study to permit evaluation of the construct validity using the known-groups technique. These workers performed functions predominantly in a sitting position without conducting physical effort. They were selected in order to have some variables similar to the group of nursing workers, such as age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and time work experience.

The sample size of the two groups to construct validation was calculated assuming a statistical power of 80%, a significance level of 0.05 (5%), and able to detect a moderate effect size of d = 0.5 (Cohen, 1988) to the difference in mean scores between the two groups (Machin and Campbell, 2005). Initially, a number of 64 subjects per group was estimated, however, to avoid possible losses, it was suggested to extend this estimate in 20% of cases in each group. Thus, the final sample size was in 154 subjects, 77 subjects in each group.

To evaluate the stability of the questionnaire, the number of subjects who were included in the retest procedure was calculated with an estimate considering the statistical measure that would be used to assess the reliability, ie, the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). This calculation indicated a minimum of 55 subjects in the retest.

The procedure of development of the questionnaire was based on the international literature, respecting the stages of item selection, construction of domains, and psychometric properties study (Lynn, 1986; Streiner and Norman, 1995; Turner et al., 2007; Snyder et al., 2007).

The first step was the development of the domains based on the theoretical area of ergonomics. In the second step, the questionnaire items were selected. The techniques used to select the items included literature research and interviews with a sample of the population (Streiner and Norman, 1995; Turner et al., 2007). A literature review searching for other measuring instruments related to the area of interest and involving nursing workers was also realized.

Data obtained from these two steps allowed the construction of the questionnaire items considering the main factors present in nursing work recognized as ergonomic risk.

The last stage of development of the new instrument was to review the previous steps, organize items in their respective domains, and check the general format of the questionnaire, considering its title, instructions and response scale. The instrument consisted of 30 items divided into three distinct domains (biomechanical, organizational and psychosocial factors).

The type of response scale was based on a generic questionnaire (Bork et al., 1996; Rosecrance et al., 2002; Goldsheyder et al., 2002; Coluci and Alexandre, 2009), considering the easiness of response and subjects' understanding (Turner et al., 2007). The analysis of the score of each item underwent an adaptation and a new classification was used: 0–1 “no influence”, 2–4 “minimal influence”, 5–7 “moderate influence”, and 8–10 “important influence”. Seeking to facilitate the evaluation of the instrument, a score for each domain was created ranging from 0 to 100 (0-19 means “no influence”, 20–49 “minimal influence”, 50–79 “moderate influence”, and 80–100 “important influence”).

The assessment of content validity was conducted by two subject matter experts (SMEs) who used quantitative procedures during this process (Tilden et al., 1990; Burns and Grove, 1997; Hyrkas et al., 2003; Alexandre and Coluci, 2011). During the development of a new measuring instrument, it is recommended that this assessment should be done at two different times, with specific guidelines for each phase (Berk, 1990). First, it is suggested that a panel of SMEs makes an evaluation during the phase of specification of domains, checking if they are suitable and representative for the studied construct. After, a second panel of SMEs performs the evaluation during the phase of items development aiming to assess the instrument as a whole, since the wording of items to the response scale (Berk, 1990).

The first committee was composed of ten judges (Lynn, 1986). The process began with an invitation to SMEs, including an explanatory letter which provided the reason for the choice of the expert as judge, and the exposition of the relevance of the involved concepts and the instrument as a whole (Lynn, 1986; Salmond, 2008; Alexandre and Coluci, 2011).

The SMEs received an instrument with specific instructions for guiding the content validity evaluation and were asked to perform it individually during a period of ten days (Berk, 1990). Attached to this instrument, they received two questionnaires (a generic questionnaire and its adaptation to physiotherapists that were used as basis for the development of the questionnaire), and the new questionnaire.

The first committee evaluated the three domains and 30 items by using the percent agreement score. The SMEs verified the comprehensiveness of the domains, and evaluated the items individually, considering its clarity and representativeness.

The percent agreement score was interpreted considering the domains and the items appropriate when they reached a percentage greater than or equal to 90% agreement by the committee (Wynd et al., 2003; Alexandre and Coluci, 2011). With the results of this evaluation and SMEs suggestions, the questionnaire was redesigned and its second version became with 34 items divided into four domains.

This second version was reviewed by another expert committee, which evaluated the title, format, instructions, items, domains, scores and its analysis using the Content Validity Index (CVI). The CVI is calculated using a four Likert-type scale. To assess the relevance/representation, the SMEs can choose the following answers: 1 = not relevant or not representative, 2 = item needs major revision to be representative, 3 = item needs minor revision to be representative, or 4 = relevant or representative item (Lynn, 1986; Rubio et al., 2003). The comprehensiveness and clarity were evaluated with the same scale, showing the options: 1 = not clear, 2 = little clear, 3 = fairly clear, 4 = very clear (Hyrkas et al., 2003; Wynd et al., 2003; DeVon et al., 2007).

The items with score of "1" or "2" were revised or eliminated. Items were considered acceptable when the percent agreement score was greater than 0.80 (Davis, 1992; Grant and Davis, 1997; Alexandre and Coluci, 2011). All suggestions and comments of the SMEs were analyzed, and the process of content validity was completed, obtaining a tool with four domains and 32 items.

The pre-test was carried out among a sample of 30 subjects from a private hospital. This sample was selected in a different hospital from those for data collection so that no worker who participated in the pretest could participate in the final data collection. Each subject completed the identification questionnaire and the questionnaire developed for nursing workers. After its administration, they were individually interviewed about their understanding of words and items as well as the mechanics of filling in their answers, and fill the answers.

Considering the observations of subjects, some changes in the final version were made, none of which resulted in significant changes. Therefore, a final version of the questionnaire was obtained for psychometric properties analysis, called "ErgoEnf – Questionnaire survey of ergonomic risks among nursing workers".

Prior to data collection, the study protocol was approved by the University Research Ethics Committee. All participants in the present study were asked to provide informed consent. Data collection was conducted by the researcher in the subjects' workplace during the workday.

Following the collection of data on the participant's sociodemographic status, the “ErgoEnf – Questionnaire survey of ergonomic risk in nursing workers” was administered. The questionnaire contained a descriptive list of 32 factors divided into four domains (Fig. 1
                        ). Each participant was asked to indicate, using a scale from zero to ten (where zero represented no influence and ten indicated an important influence), how much each factor could influence in the onset of musculoskeletal symptoms related to their work. Additionally, the Numerical Pain Scale, the Brazilian version of the SF-36, and the Brazilian version of the Work Role Functioning Questionnaire (WRFQ) were also applied to evaluate psychometric properties of the ErgoEnf.

All data was entered and stored in a Microsoft Office Excel (Version, 2003) database. Statistical analyses were performed with the collaboration of the University's Statistics Services, using SPSS for Windows version 10.0 software and the MPlus Version 5.21 software.

In this study, a new questionnaire was developed and the confirmatory factor analysis was chosen to test whether the correlations corresponded to the pre-defined structure of the scale, ie, the objective of this analysis was to confirm the number of items previously developed as well as the grouping of these items into factors or domains (Dempsey and Dempsey, 2000). The statistical software data analysis program MPlus Version 5.21 ran the confirmatory factor analyses (CFA). To assess model fit, Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Tucker–Lewis Index (TLI), Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA), and SRMR (standardized root mean-square residual) were reported. We attempted to identify sources for misfit if the CFA model did not fit one or more of the model fit criteria (i.e., CFI > 0.90, TLI >0.90, RMSEA <0.08, SRMR <0.08). After verifying the adequacy of these fit indices, we analyzed the factor loadings of each item within their respective fields, as well as the correlations between the domains.

The construct validity was also verified with the known-groups technique. The specific questionnaire for nursing workers was applied in two different occupational groups, nursing and office workers. The characteristics of the labor activities of nursing workers include varied and dynamic postures and movements, while office workers perform activities predominantly in sitting position with the use of computers. This type of validity aimed to determine whether there would be differences in the scores of the two groups, since their labor activities were contrasting.

In order to verify the differences between the responses of these two groups, individuals with similar socio-demographic characteristics (such as age, gender, weight, height and duration of employment) were chosen. The Mann–Whitney test was used to compare the socio-demographic characteristics of these two groups and to evaluate the validity by comparing the questionnaire answers of nursing and office workers. As this questionnaire was developed specifically for nursing workers, it was expected to obtain higher values among these workers and lowest values among office workers.

Convergent validity was assessed correlating the ErgoEnf responses with the Numeric Pain Scale, with six domains of the SF-36, and with two domains of the WRFQ (Table 1
                           ). Only domains that really measure concepts similar to ErgoEnf were considered to this analysis. Domains of SF-36 and of WRFQ not included in this validity test were related to aspects different from those considered in ErgoEnf. The correlation between ErgoEnf and Numerical Pain Scale was conducted only among workers who had symptoms of pain. The other correlations were made considering all subjects who participated in the data collection.

The hypotheses for correlations between ErgoEnf and the Numeric Pain Scale was a positive direction since the greater the perception of the job factor influencing the onset of symptoms, it is expected that there is an indication of high values of pain.

Moreover, it was expected that the correlation between the SF-36 and ErgoEnf would provide a negative direction since the lower the score of the SF-36, the worst quality of life of the subject, while the higher the score on the ErgoEnf, the greater the influence to the development of musculoskeletal symptoms.

It was expected that the correlation between WRFQ and ErgoEnf would also have a negative direction because their response scales are reversed, ie, while in the WRFQ, the lower the score, the worse the performance at work, in the ErgoEnf, the worst perceived problems would score higher.

Therefore, for a good result of the convergent validity, the worker that indicated higher values in the domains of ErgoEnf also should indicate higher values in Numeric Pain Scale and lower values in the domains of the SF-36 and of the WRFQ.

Spearman correlation coefficient was used to correlate the answers to the ErgoEnf with answers to Numeric Pain Scale (only workers with pain), the Brazilian version of the SF-36 and the Brazilian version of WRFQ. A level of significance of 1% should be acceptable, i.e., p-value <0.01. The correlations close to 0.30 were considered satisfactory, between 0.30 and 0.50 were considered moderate, and above 0.50 for strong magnitude (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980). It was expected at least a moderate correlation between these questionnaires.

Reliability was assessed through internal consistency using Cronbach's alpha of each domain of the ErgoEnf to verify if its items really reflected the same construct. Cronbach's alpha was considered satisfactory when >0.70 (Streiner and Norman, 1995; Terwee et al., 2007).

This psychometric property was also studied through an assessment of temporal stability (test-retest design) of the new questionnaire. To avoid measuring changes in the participant's work tasks, the questionnaire was re-administered seven to ten days after test. The Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) was used for the analysis of the test-retest stability and its interpretation was based on the definitions proposed by Streiner and Norman (1995), ie, values greater than 0.60 represent good agreement, and above 0.80 indicate excellent agreement between test and retest.

@&#RESULTS@&#

After the construction of the questionnaire, the validation process of its contents was performed in two stages. In the first step, the SMEs evaluated the three domains and 30 items developed by using the percent agreement score. The results indicated that most items were adequate, but the three domains (Biomechanical, organizational and psychosocial factors) and 13 items were modified. A new domain (Environmental factors/workplace) was created to cover items related to environment/workplace. After all the modifications, the instrument was presented with 34 items and four domains.

The second step of content validity was performed with a second panel of SMEs, which evaluated the four domains, 34 items, title, instructions, format, score and score analysis through the Content Validity Index (CVI). Results showed that format, instructions, 16 items, score and all domains obtained a value greater than 0.80, indicating suitability of the questionnaire. Two items were excluded and the remaining items, as well as the title and score analysis were modified according to the suggestions of the judges.

At the end of the content validity, the new questionnaire was composed of 32 items divided into four domains, which was submitted to a pretest with six nurses, 22 nursing technicians, and two assistant nurses. The mean age of these subjects was 31 years (SD 7.3) and the mean working time in nursing was 7.9 years (SD 6.7).

Analyzing notes taken during individual interviews, one subject had difficulty on understanding one of the items, and three other subjects questioned the interpretation of the response scale for some items. They have suggested that all items on the questionnaire should indicate problematic situations to avoid confusion in the responses, ie, that all items should be constructed in the same direction, in this case, negative direction.

After changes proposed by the subjects, the final ErgoEnf consisted of 32 items divided into four domains: Biomechanical factors (9 items), Environmental factors/workplace (7 items), Organizational factors (8 items), and Psychosocial factors (8 items) (Fig. 1).

From the total of 411 eligible subjects, 370 participated in the study, yielding a 90% response rate. There was a predominance of females (90.3%) with mean age of 32.8 years (SD 9.5). The mean body mass index (BMI) was 25.7 kg/m2 (SD 5.0). All categories of nursing participated in the study, which 31.6% were NT, 55.4% were LPN, and 13% were nurses. The mean working time in the nursing area was 8.1 years (SD 6.9).

Regarding the occurrence of a problem, such as pain, tingling and/or numbness in the past six months, 51.4% of subjects reported no problems during this period while 48.6% indicated at least one problem last semester.

The confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) had fit statistics of CFI = 0.82, TLI = 0.81, RMSEA = 0.09, and SRMR = 0.06, indicating a satisfactory fit of the factors within their respective domains developed for the questionnaire.

Satisfactory correlations were found between items of the same domain, confirming the pre-defined structure of the instrument. Items from Domain 1 (Biomechanical factors) had factor loadings ranging from 0.62 to 0.79. The factor loadings among the items found in Domain 2 (Environmental factors/workplace) ranged from 0.70 to 0.80. Items distributed in Domain 3 (Organizational factors) showed factor loadings from 0.63 to 0.80. The items belonging to Domain 4 (Psychosocial factors) showed factor loadings ranging from 0.69 to 0.85. The correlations between the four domains of ErgoEnf also varied from 0.67 to 0.89 (Fig. 2
                              ).

To evaluate the construct validity using the known-groups technique, two different employee groups (nursing and office) were compared. Socio-demographic data of the two groups were similar, with homogeneous characteristics (Table 2
                              ). The Mann–Whitney test indicated values of acceptance of the null hypothesis (p-value>0.01), demonstrating that these two groups had similar characteristics regarding age, gender, body mass index (BMI) and time working time.

A significant difference was found between the responses of these groups on all domains of the questionnaire. These results are described in Table 3
                              .

The convergent validity used to correlate the domains of the ErgoEnf with domains of other three scales showed a satisfactory level of significance in all correlations. The proposed correlations are highlighted in Table 4
                              . The results of the Numerical Pain Scale were correlated with Domain 1 of the ErgoEnf, obtaining a value of 0.43, which indicates a moderate correlation (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980).

The SF-36 had three of its domains correlated with the Domain 1 of the ErgoEnf. There was moderate correlation between this domain (Biomechanical factors) and domains Physical Functioning (−0.35) and Bodily Pain (−0.32) of the SF-36, while the correlation with the Role-Physical (−0.2) was satisfactory (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980). Three other domains of the SF-36 were also correlated with Domain 4 (Psychosocial factors) of the ErgoEnf. Psychosocial factors showed a moderate correlation of −0.39 with the domain Vitality and of −0.42 with the Mental Health domain, whereas there was a satisfactory correlation of −0.24 with the domain Role–Emotional. Therefore, the greater the influence of psychosocial factors in the development of musculoskeletal symptoms, worse quality of life related to the domains vitality, mental health and emotional aspects.

A correlation between the Physical Demand of the WRFQ and Domain 1 of the ErgoEnf were performed. The value found was −0.36, which means that the lower the worker's physical ability to perform work activities measured by the physical demand of the WRFQ, the greater the perceived influence of biomechanical factors to the onset of musculoskeletal symptoms checked with the ErgoEnf. The demand of Work Scheduling of the WRFQ showed a moderate correlation with the Domain 3 of the ErgoEnf, obtaining a value of −0.35, ie, the smaller the planning of daily activities by workers (work plan), higher the perceived influence of organizational factors as contributing to symptoms of pain and/or injury.

Therefore, it was found that all proposed correlations were significant and most of them with moderate magnitude (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980). It was also observed that the correlations between ErgoEnf and Numerical Pain Scale, the SF-36 and WRFQ presented the expected direction.

The internal consistency of the ErgoEnf was verified using Cronbach's alpha. All values for each domain were adequate (Fayers and Machin, 2000), as shown in Table 5
                              .

A total of 100 nursing workers participated in test-retest design. Table 6
                               illustrates good agreement between the scores on the domains of the questionnaire, with the ICC values of 0.71 for Domain 1 (Biomechanical factors), of 0.64 for Domain 2 (Environmental Factors), of 0.70 for Domain 3 (Organizational factors), and of 0.76 for Domain 4 (Psychosocial factors) (Streiner and Norman, 1995).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The aim of the present study was to develop a measurement instrument to assess the nursing workers' perception of the work factors that could lead to job-related musculoskeletal symptoms. The literature review seeking other measurement instruments that may evaluate the perception of job factors related to musculoskeletal symptoms and involving nursing employees indicated that there was no specific questionnaire that assesses the perception of these workers with respect to this matter.

The items of the new questionnaire were developed based on the literature review and on the results of interviews conducted with a sample of the target population, as recommended by the methodological standards. These steps also allowed to structure the questionnaire regarding their general format, title, instructions and response scale. Similar steps were followed by other authors during the development of measurement instruments (Farias et al., 2008; Buysse et al., 2010; Bergman et al., 2011; Giesler et al., 2011; Marant et al., 2011; Young et al., 2011).

An assessment of the content validity was performed by two committees of subject matter experts. Qualitative and quantitative analysis were carried out by the first committee regarding the comprehensiveness of the domains and the relevance of the items of the questionnaire. The judges suggested the inclusion of a new domain and new items. This new domain was created in order to fit more specific items of environmental factors, which, firstly, were inserted in one of the other domains. The second committee reviewed the questionnaire as a whole using a quantitative index, allowing establishing a final model for the instrument.

Content validity is an essential step for the development of an instrument and has been recommended by the international literature (Lynn, 1986; Tilden et al., 1990; Berk, 1990; Haynes et al., 1995; Dempsey and Dempsey, 1996; Sireci, 1998; Hyrkas et al., 2003; Wynd et al., 2003; Alexandre and Coluci, 2011). Studies involving the development of new questionnaires also assessed content validity through committees of subject matter experts (Farias et al., 2008; Young et al., 2011).

As previous done by a recent study (Marant et al., 2011), a pre-test was performed by a sample of the target population to check the understanding of the instructions, of the items and how to answer the questionnaire. The participants suggested only a few simple changes, which were implemented.

The evaluation of the psychometric properties of the final version of the questionnaire, called "ErgoEnf – Questionnaire survey of ergonomic risks among nursing workers", was carried out with the participation of 370 nursing workers. This population was predominantly made up of young adult women with body mass index within the normal range. The finding related to gender matches the reality of nursing as women seek more for jobs related to that area. Moreover, among the three categories of nursing staff, there was a higher percentage of nursing technicians, since these are mostly in the context of nursing in hospitals. Almost half of the subjects (48.6%) reported at least one problem such as pain, tingling or numbness in any body region in the last six months. Several studies involving nursing workers have shown the high prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms (Lipscomb et al., 2004; Smith et al., 2006; Lorusso et al., 2007; Sikiru and Hanifa, 2010).

The confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was chosen to confirm the pre-defined structure of the questionnaire. The results indicated satisfactory fit indices, ranging from acceptable to an appropriate adjustment (Hu and Bender, 1999). Strong correlations were found between items of the same domain for all four domains of the ErgoEnf. There was also a strong correlation between the domains, indicating that the items from all domains are related to the same construct. It is important to note that, of all multi factorial models tested, the best results of fit indices were with pre-defined structure of the questionnaire. Therefore, the CFA was essential to confirm the structure of the ErgoEnf.

Construct validity was also demonstrated by a statistically significant differences among the two occupational groups for all the questionnaire items. Contrasting results in the responses of the two groups was expected since nursing and office workers perform divergent work activities. The use of the known-groups technique showed the ability of the questionnaire to discriminate groups. As the ErgoEnf was developed specifically for nursing workers, higher scores in the questionnaire domains were expected among these workers than office workers.

Convergent validity was used to assess construct validity by comparing the responses of nursing workers in the ErgoEnf with the Numerical Pain Scale, the SF-36, and the WRFQ. These questionnaires were chosen because they measure constructs related to the ErgoEnf and the correlations attempted to demonstrate how this new questionnaire would be related to other measures of the same construct.

Results indicated a moderate correlation between Biomechanical factors of the ErgoEnf and the intensity of pain indicated by symptomatic workers in Numerical Pain Scale. Furthermore, moderate correlations were found between biomechanical factors and measures of difficulty in performing daily life activities from the simplest to the most stringent (Physical Functioning scale of SF-36), of the intensity and interference of pain on normal activities (Bodily Pain scale of the SF-36), and of the worker's ability to perform work activities that include physical, dynamic and static loads (Physical Demand of the WRFQ). Satisfactory correlation was also found between biomechanical factors and the measure of limitation to perform work activities due to a physical problem (Role-Physical dimension of the SF-36). This result may be explained by the fact that even though nursing workers have considered that biomechanical factors could lead to musculoskeletal pain/injury, they were still not limited to perform their activities at work.

Moderate correlation was observed between the Domain 3 (Organizational factors) and the domain Work Scheduling of the WRFQ, which means that the organizational factors measured by the ErgoEnf had moderate relationship with the worker's difficulties on planning and managing his/her daily activities on work.

Results showed that psychosocial factors measured by the ErgoEnf had moderate correlations with measures regarding the physical and emotional state of the worker (Vitality scale of SF-36), and regarding emotional aspects as discouragement, depression and state of happiness (Mental Health scale of SF-36). There was a satisfactory relationship between psychosocial factors and the extent of interference in performing the job due to emotional problems (Role-Emotional scale of SF-36). This finding may be understandable since even though the workers considered psychosocial factors as influencing on the onset of musculoskeletal disorders, they were still emotional able to perform their tasks at work.

Therefore, the results of convergent validity of the ErgoEnf showed that correlations with domains of other instruments containing a related construct were significant and, mostly, with moderate magnitude (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980). It is important to note that the questionnaires used for this validity assessment only contained some items that would be related to the ErgoEnf. There was no questionnaire to assess construct that could be completely similar to that developed in this study.

Reliability of the ErgoEnf was evaluated by internal consistency and stability of the questionnaire. Cronbach's alpha was adequate for all domains, with values close to 0.90, indicating a high internal consistency (Fayers and Machin, 2000). The test-retest assessment was used to investigate the stability of the ErgoEnf and there was a good correlation between the responses of the subjects in the two periods of data collection, with ICC ranging from 0.64 to 0.76 (Streiner and Norman, 1995).

Therefore, the process of development and validation of the "ErgoEnf – Questionnaire survey of ergonomic risks among nursing workers" was completed with results that indicate good psychometric properties to be used in ergonomic studies with nursing workers.

This questionnaire can be used for ergonomic analysis of nursing workplaces, assisting in identifying problematic factors that can lead to job-related musculoskeletal symptoms. Its use can prioritize more detailed ergonomic analyzes that require more time and cost, and it is a simple tool that can be used periodically to assess the effectiveness of ergonomic interventions.

However, further researches should study its psychometric properties with nursing workers from hospitals as well as from other health sectors, such as health centers, institutions for the elderly, and clinics.

When using this questionnaire with nursing workers crowded in different workplaces than those studied in this research, it is necessary to conduct a pilot study as well as evaluate the psychometric properties of the instrument. By using it with subjects from other cultures and/or languages, it is recommended to conduct a cross-cultural adaptation.

It is important to emphasize that the ErgoEnf assesses workers' perception about the influence of specific job factors may lead to job-related pain and discomfort. It is a questionnaire that aims to prioritize ergonomic interventions, as well as to evaluate periodically the effectiveness of these interventions. It is a quick, self-administered and easy analysis questionnaire, however, if it indicates some problem in a nursing workplace, other questionnaires and tools should be used to deepen the findings.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

All methodological steps to construct a new measuring instrument were followed as recommended by the international literature during the development of the "ErgoEnf – Questionnaire survey of ergonomic risks among nursing workers". Construct validity was demonstrated by the confirmatory factor analysis, by the known-groups technique, and by convergent validity. Reliability was assessed by internal consistency with Cronbach's alpha values around 0.90, and by test-retest stability with ICC values indicating good correlation between the responses on time interval. Therefore, the ErgoEnf has demonstrated satisfactory and reliable psychometric qualities, and it can be used for ergonomic analysis of nursing workplaces, assisting in identifying problematic factors that can lead to job-related musculoskeletal symptoms.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study received financial support from the Brazilian agencies CAPES, and FAPESP (Grant: 2008/09913-0).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

