@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#An anthropometric data bank for the Iranian working population with ethnic diversity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We measured 37 body dimensions of 3720 Iranian workers with different ethnicities.


                        
                        
                           
                           Comparing anthropometric data of Iranian with four Asian population.


                        
                        
                           
                           Anthropometric data of Iranian ethnical groups were statistically different.


                        
                        
                           
                           Observing anthropometric data differences of Iranian with the four nations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Anthropometric characteristic

Bodily proportion

Ethnicity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study constructed an anthropometric data bank for the Iranian working population. In total, thirty-seven body dimensions were measured among 3720 Iranian workers with different ethnicities (3000 male and 720 female; aged 20–60 years). Statistical analysis revealed significant differences for most of body dimensions among the ethnical groups. Moreover, the authors compared Iranian anthropometric characteristics with those of four Asian populations: Taiwanese, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean. Overall, 16 body dimensions for the five Asian populations were selected and compared. Accordingly, different morphological characteristics of these five populations were observed. The Iranian population showed wide shoulders and hips and long legs; the Chinese population showed narrow hips and shoulders and a short height relative to the other populations. The Korean sample recorded moderate body size comparing the other populations. The Taiwanese had large hands, relatively wide shoulders and short upper limbs. These differences in population dimensions should be taken into consideration for product and process design when expanding regional markets.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The compatibility of all products and working environments with the dimensions of the human body is an inevitable requirement for designing an ergonomic product or workstation. This is not possible unless the anthropometric characteristics of users or workers are considered. Determining body dimensions is important to clothing design, forensics, physical anthropology, and ergonomic design of workplaces, tools, equipment, machinery, and consumer products (Agrawal et al., 2010; Botha and Bridger, 1998; Hanson et al., 2009; Hughes and Johnson, 2012; Ismaila, 2009; Paul et al., 2012). According to the principles of ergonomics, a workplace should be designed prior to use in accordance with worker characteristics. In this sense, anthropometry provides measurements of the human body that can be used to design an ergonomically fit workplace (Reis et al., 2012). The use of anthropometric data allows the development of more effective designs that enhance user performance and productivity (Agrawal et al., 2010; Gouvali and Boudolos, 2006; Klamklay et al., 2008; Kozey et al., 2009). In addition, health problems, such as musculoskeletal disorders, are the most important consequences of mismatching anthropometric dimensions (Dewangan et al., 2008; Grimes and Legg, 2004; Trevelyan and Legg, 2010; Westgaard and Aarås, 1984), and these health issues can be reduced using anthropometric data during the design process.

Anthropometric dimensions vary based on factors such as age, gender, nutrition, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and race (Agrawal et al., 2010; Chuan et al., 2010; Farkas, 1996; Lin et al., 2004; Mohammad, 2005). Anthropometric data are assumed to be different between nations and between regional populations (Chandna et al., 2010; Mandahawi et al., 2008; Roebuck et al., 1975). These factors can lead to problems in product design (Chandra et al., 2013). Pheasant (1996) found that mean anthropometric dimensions and the ratio of body dimensions are two suitable indicators to compare the morphological variation among different groups. Bodily proportion is calculated as the ratio of one body dimension to a specific reference dimension. The mean stature is the most common body reference dimension.

A few anthropometric studies were conducted in Iran. In this regard, Mououdi (1997) reported on 28 body dimensions of 179 Iranian university students aged 20–30 years. In the study conducted by Mirmohammadi et al. (2011), 20 body dimensions of 911 Iranian university students aged 18–25 years (475 males and 436 females) were recorded. Dianat et al. (2013) measured nine body dimensions for 978 Iranian high school students (498 girls and 480 boys) aged 15–18 years. In all these studies, the sample size was small and specific populations or age groups were investigated, which limit the generalization of the reported data. Moreover, none of these studies have considered the ethnic diversity of the Iranian population as a factor that may affect body dimensions. Iran has a multiethnic population, settled in different regions of the country. Fars, Turk, Kurd, Lor, Arab, and Baluch are the most dominant ethnic groups of whom the Fars people comprise the largest proportion (over 65% of the total population).

Considering the abovementioned points, and the fact that Iran is a country with ethnic diversity, the present study was carried out to provide an anthropometric data bank of the Iranian working population with different ethnicities.

@&#METHODS@&#

The present study gathered anthropometric data for various ethnic groups (Fars, Turk, Kurd, Lor, Arab, and Baluch) to ensure that the sample collected was representative of the Iranian working population.

The studied ethnic groups are distributed in different geographical regions of the country. Therefore, the final samples were selected from various provinces including East Azerbaijan, Fars, Hormozgan, Isfahan, Khuzestan, Kurdistan, Lorestan, Sistan–Baluchestan, and Tehran. The participants were selected through the health network system divisions, covering the whole population in all parts of the country. Cluster sampling was used to select the workers according to the following stages:
                        
                           1
                           Listing all the regional health service centers, as parts of the health network system of the country

Recording the number of workers being covered by each regional health service center

Categorizing regional health service centers into six clusters according to the ethnicity

Alphabetizing the regional health service units within each ethnic cluster

Calculating the cumulative frequency of each ethnic cluster

Calculating a sampling interval for each cluster by dividing the cumulated total population of each ethnic cluster by the total number of clusters

Selecting a random number for each ethnic cluster between one and the sampling interval number using a random number table

Selecting the regional health service unit within the ethnic clusters where the number of workers exceeds the random number (obtained in stage 6) as the final cluster

Random selection of workers from the final clusters


                     Table 1
                      shows the final clusters used to consider ethnicity. As seen, more clusters were chosen for the Fars sample, as it is the largest ethnic group in Iran. Measurements were carried out using 15 sets of anthropometry kits, made in Iran. Traditional anthropometric tools were used to measure the target dimensions: a scale for measuring weight with 0.1-kg accuracy, a goniometer for angles, a measuring tape for circumference, a steel measuring tape for length of limbs, a plumb bob for vertical distance to the floor (shoulder, elbow, wrist, knee joints, and greater trochanter of the hip), a chair with an adjustable seat height, and an anthropometric measuring board with 0.1-mm accuracy (2 × 1 m). Traditional anthropometry was considered simple and inexpensive with reliable and accurate results (Feathers et al., 2004; Ghoddousi et al., 2007; Mokdad and Al-Ansari, 2009). Sims et al. (2012) reported no significant difference in body dimensions between traditional anthropometry techniques and three-dimensional (3D) scanners.

The measurements were performed by a group of experts including 30 technicians as examiners and nine supervisors. The protocol and procedure for measurements were explained to the technicians in a 2-day training workshop. To ensure the inter-measure reliability of the measurers, the technicians were asked to practice in trial sessions. For the actual measurement sessions, each supervisor checked the measured body dimensions for seven out of every 100 workers to ensure the accuracy of the measurements. If the measurements of two out of three workers were correct, the measurements were considered to have a good accuracy. The following issues were emphasized during the workshop:
                        
                           •
                           Before collecting data, the process should be explained to the workers to obtain a high level of cooperation.

Making pressure points should be avoided while measuring body dimensions.

The participants should be lightly clothed and barefooted.

The scale and caliper should be calibrated at the beginning of each examination day.

The anthropometric measuring board should be calibrated before each installation.

A total of 37 body dimensions, including weight, that are commonly used in industry (presented by Pheasant, 1996) were measured over the course of 6 months and 35 bodily proportions were calculated from the data acquired. Fig. 1
                      shows the 36 body dimensions (excluding weight) measured in the present study. The measurements were carried out according to the procedure described in ISO7250 (1996) (Figs. 2 and 3
                     
                     ). The final data were analyzed using SPSS software version 18.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Overall, 37 anthropometric dimensions of 3720 Iranian workers (3000 males and 720 females), including weight, were measured. The findings are presented separately for men and women in Table 2
                     . The participants of the present research comprised technical workers (76.1%), service workers (15.8%), and office workers (7.6%). The mean (±standard deviation (SD)) stature was 1720 (±76.3) mm for the sampled Iranian male and 1585 (±63.2) mm for the Iranian female.

A summary of the anthropometric data of different Iranian ethnicities is also presented in Table 3
                      (for males) and 4 (for females). The Kruskal–Wallis test was applied to assess whether these dimensions are significantly different among Iranian ethnicities. In general, for males, all body dimensions were significantly different among Iranian ethnic groups. For females, no significant difference was observed for their stature, eye height, shoulder height, span, and vertical grip reach (standing) dimensions. However, the rest of the dimensions were statistically different (see Table 4
                     ).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This survey provided anthropometric data of the Iranian population. The presented percentile values can be employed as a guide for production design as well as different workplace design purposes for the Iranian, in general. Moreover, a summary of the anthropometric data of six Iranian ethnic groups was collected and presented. Based on statistical analysis, some of the dimensions were significantly different among the studied ethnic groups. For instance, the highest stature belonged to the Baluch male and the Kurdish female. The Kurdish and Arab male had the longest popliteal height. The mean values recorded for body weight were highest for the Fars male (mean = 75.8 kg) and the Baluch female (mean = 64.6 kg). Overall, the differences of anthropometric dimensions among Iranian ethnic groups confirm the role of ethnicity as a key factor that has an impact on morphological characteristics.

These differences can be attributed to the differences in geographical regions in which these ethnic groups reside. As an illustration, the Kurdish population resides mostly in the west of Iran, in a mountainous area with mild weather condition, while the Baluch mainly inhabit the desert area of the eastern part of the country, with its dry and hot weather condition. However, to what extent geography may contribute to such anthropometric differences is not mentioned in any of the similar studies. However, some anthropometric differences have been reported in many of these studies. İşeri and Arslan (2009) investigated the anthropometric characteristics of the Turkish population by geographical region and found that the stature and weight of the Turkish population varied significantly for this factor. Sirajuddin et al. (1994) observed that geography affected the anthropometry of south Indian tribal groups. Launer and Harris (1996) reported that the distribution of weight, height, and body mass index (BMI) differed by geographic region and ethnic group. In the survey by Klamklay et al. (2008), various body dimensions of the southern and lower southern Thai populations were different from those of the central Thai people.

Apart from geographical regions, there are cultural differences between these ethnic groups. Up to now, various studies have concentrated chiefly on morphological differences among ethnic groups. Furthermore, factors such as hereditary, economic development, social environment, type of work, labor structure, and lifestyle can influence the anthropometric characteristics of a population group (Johnson et al., 1994; Lin et al., 2004).


                        Lin et al. (2004) compared four anthropometric databases from China, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan. These four population groups are of the Mongolian race inhabiting East Asia, while the population of Iran is of the Caucasoid race residing in southwestern Asia. Therefore, geographical environment and race are two factors differentiating Iran from the other four populations. In this research, 33 anthropometric dimensions of the four populations, collected by Lin et al. (2004), were compared with equivalent Iranian body dimensions.

The means of the anthropometric data and bodily proportions for all five groups are shown in Tables 5 and 6
                        
                        . As can be seen, the greatest heights belonged to Iranian males and Korean females. These groups of population showed the greatest eye height and elbow height in a standing posture as well. Data related to torso dimension showed that the greatest shoulder height and shoulder breadth were recorded for Iranian males and females. Taiwanese males and Korean females had the longest hand lengths. The greatest sitting height and eye height in a sitting posture were recorded for Korean males and females. The widest hip breadth belonged to Iranian males and females. The longest head length was recorded for Japanese males and females. Iranian females and Chinese males had the greatest popliteal height in a sitting posture (see Fig. 4
                        ).

In summary, the Iranian population showed the widest shoulders and hips and the longest legs. Additionally, nearly half of Iranian body dimensions, including weight, were greater than those for the other populations. On the contrary, the Chinese populations had narrower hips and shoulders and lower height. The Korean population had a moderate body shape, small head size, and long upper limb, in comparison with the other populations. Compared to the other populations, the Taiwanese showed larger hands, relatively wide shoulders, and short upper limbs.

Overall, the results reflected the effects of both geography and nationality on variations in the anthropometric measurements. Chuan et al. (2010) reported differences between Singaporean and Indonesian anthropometry. Kar et al. (2003) also compared some hand dimensions of Indian female workers with those of Koreans and observed significant differences. According to Xiao et al. (2005), anthropometric data are important for the safe and efficient design of workplaces, tools, and equipment. A large body of research pointed out the importance of applying anthropometric data to the proper design of equipment, products, and workplaces for a target population (Abeysekera and Shahnavaz, 1989; Gouvali and Boudolos, 2006; Graves, 1992; Imrhan et al., 1993; Kar et al., 2003; Kolich, 2003; Kozey et al., 2009; Lewis and Narayan, 1993; Loslever and Ranaivosoa, 1993; Mandahawi et al., 2008; Okunribido, 2000; Reis et al., 2012.; Rosenblad-Wallin, 1987; Schmidtke, 1984). By global marketing expansion, it is essential for product designers to consider the anthropometric differences of nations and also ethnic groups in the design process and to make products in accordance with consumer requirements (Abeysekera and Shahnavaz, 1989).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The present study provides a comprehensive anthropometric data bank for the Iranian working population with different ethnicities, and it compares anthropometric dimensions and bodily proportions of the Iranian population with those of the Chinese, Korean, Taiwanese, and Japanese populations. The results imply differences in body dimensions among different ethnic groups as well as different nations. The current volume of industrial and commercial commerce between Iran, the Middle East, and East Asian countries makes the anthropometric data of crucial importance to the ergonomic selection of products and equipment, as there is a lack of anthropometric data in the Middle East, despite having strong commercial and trading commerce between the East Asian countries and Iran. Therefore, the results of this study may have implications in the selection of ergonomically appropriate products and equipment. Moreover, as the data obtained in this study were derived from the working population of different Iranian ethnic groups, they can be used for designing workstations.

According to the final sampling framework (Table 1), anthropometric data were collected across the country, but not from limited areas, and they can be a representative of the Iranian sample population. However, as body dimensions can change with time, it is recommended to regularly update the anthropometric database of the Iranian population in future research.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Limitations have been defined in the present study. The first limitation is the uneven distribution of males and females, and also ethnic groups in the Iranian sample. Moreover, it should be noted that there are inherent limitations in anthropometric studies related to participant clothing, measuring instruments, and measurers. Meunier and Yin (2000) advised comparison of groups using caution and the present study is no exception. There is no comprehensive and national anthropometric data bank based on ethnicity, gender, and age group in Iran; the present research is the first extensive study (3720 adults) of the Iranian population.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study is a part of a thesis for Master of Public Health (MPH), conducted at Department of Occupational Health Engineering. The authors would like to thank all participants for their contributions. The authors also acknowledge the kind cooperation of all technicians in the data collection process.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

