@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Personal and other factors affecting acceptance of smartphone technology by older Chinese adults

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Those are younger, with higher education, non-widowed, with better economic condition are more likely to use smartphone.


                        
                        
                           
                           Cost was found to be a critical factor influencing behavior intention of older adults.


                        
                        
                           
                           Self-satisfaction and facilitating conditions significantly affect perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Chinese older adults

Smartphone

Technology acceptance

Mobile apps

Personal factors

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  It has been well documented that in the 21st century, there will be relatively more older people around the world than in the past. Also, it seems that technology will expand in this era at an unprecedented rate. Therefore, it is of critical importance to understand the factors that influence the acceptance of technology by older people. The positive impact that the use of mobile applications can have for older people was confirmed by a previous study (Plaza et al., 2011). The study reported here aimed to explore and confirm, for older adults in China, the key influential factors of smartphone acceptance, and to describe the personal circumstances of Chinese older adults who use smartphone. A structured questionnaire and face to face individual interviews were used with 120 Chinese older adults (over 55). Structural Equation Modeling was used to confirm a proposed smartphone acceptance model based on Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), and the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT). The results showed that those who were younger, with higher education, non-widowed, with better economic condition related to salary or family support were more likely to use smartphone. Also, cost was found to be a critical factor influencing behavior intention. Self-satisfaction and facilitating conditions were proved to be important factors influencing perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use.
               
            

Attitude towards using

Behavioral Intention

Cost Tolerance

Facilitating Conditions

Perceived Ease of Use

Perceived Usefulness

Smartphone Acceptance Model for Chinese Older People

Self-Satisfaction

Senior Technology Acceptance Model

Technology Acceptance Model

Technology Acceptance Model 2

Theory of Reasoned Action

Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the 21st century, network usage is increasing very rapidly and new interfaces, search engines, and features are becoming available at an unprecedented rate. The expanding power of computers and the recent growth of information technologies such as smartphones have made it possible for large numbers of people to have direct access to an increasingly wide array of information sources and services. Coupled with this explosive growth in technology is the ageing of the population. Both age-related cognitive and physiological impairments render the difficulty of daily activities (Pinto et al., 2000) and are highly relevant when interactive technology is being used (Sonderegger et al., 2016). We are now confronted with the convergence of these two major worldwide trends. In China, since 2000, the speed of population ageing has surpassed the rate of population ageing for the rest of the world. Currently, China has a larger number of older people than any other countries in the world. The number of Chinese people aged over 60 exceeded 194 million in 2010, accounting for 14.3 percent of the total population (Wu and Dang, 2013). Given that older people represent an increasingly large proportion of the population and will benefit from being active users of technology, issues surrounding aging and information technology are of critical importance (Czaja and Lee, 2009). Meeting ageing-related demands such as social security systems, health care and community services with a relatively low level of economic development is a tough challenge for China. Thus, if older adults in China are able to use technology, the economic and social burdens of families, communities and the country may be lowered significantly (Chen and Chan, 2013).

ICT (Information and Communications Technology) is regarded as an effective tool to help create a successful intergenerational society (Chen and Chan, 2011). Among the various kinds of ICT products, the mobile phone is the one most generally used by older adults in daily life. In society at large, the mobile phone has become an essential component for work, education, communication, and entertainment, and it is being increasingly used within the healthcare area. Previous studies have shown that older people are aware of and willing to use various types of technology, especially mobile phones, which have the potential to improve the quality of life for older people (Plaza et al., 2011).

According to the 32nd Statistical Report on Internet Development in 2013 released by CNNIC (China Internet Network Information Center, 2014), the growth of netizens has entered into a steady state, and mobile phones have become the primary source of new netizens. The popularity of 3G, the development of improved wireless networks and innovation of mobile phone applications has greatly facilitated the rapid growth of mobile phone netizens. The CNNIC investigation showed that in 2013, 89.2% of the population was using mobile phones in China. Furthermore, among the age group 45–64, 51% of the population were using smartphones, which suggested that many adults who are at the early stage of ageing are now using smartphones.

Mobile phones enable older adults to keep in touch with others all the time and at different locations so that they do not need to stay at home waiting for news or communications with friends and family. This can encourage them to lead a more active social life as they can potentially go out at will and still be in touch with family and friends. In addition, mobile phones can provide a sense of safety and security for older people when they are at home alone or when they go out alone (Kurniawan, 2008). Mobile phones, especially smartphones, increasingly play an important role in the homecare of older adults. Current research of mobile phone usage among older adults is covering an increasing variety of clinical domains (Joe and Demiris, 2013). There exists a golden opportunity to utilize smartphone technologies to help manage the health of older adults and to improve their quality of life and well-being.

Venkatesh concluded that, like anyone else, older adults accept and adopt technology when it meets their needs and expectations (Venkatesh et al. 2003; Conci et al. 2009). However, Verdegem and De Marez (2011) reported that technology innovations often fail to be fully utilized because of not enough attention is given to user acceptance. Wilkowska and Ziefle (2011) showed that the more carefully and sensitively the cognitions and mindsets of users are addressed and included in the concepts and designs of communication and information equipment and systems, the higher the chance of broad user acceptance and the adoption of new technologies. It is very much the issue of user acceptance that determines usage behavior and wider use of technologies. In order to ensure that older adults are able to adapt to new information environments, the factors that influence their acceptance of technologies such as the smartphone, and the difficulties that they experience when using smartphones and mobile apps need to be explored.

Technology products and services, especially the use of the Internet and mobile phones, that older people have reported using were primarily in the home and related to domestic matters (Mitzner et al., 2010; Ziefle and Röcker, 2010). Mobile phone technology acceptance by older adults has recently receiving considerable attention and models have been proposed to predict factors that influence acceptance and adoption from different perspectives. Renaud and van Biljon (2008) used structured interviews to qualitatively confirm the factors affecting the acceptance and adoption of technology by older users. Their interviews employed usage scenarios as well as a mobile phone design activity. Conci et al. (2009) showed that intrinsic motivations play an important role albeit always mediated by utilitarian motives. Verkasolo et al. (2010) generally found that perceived enjoyment and usefulness can explain intention to use smartphone applications for both users and non-users. With regard to usability problems, Ehmena et al. (2012) pointed out that it was essential to consider abilities and deficiencies of the older population as part of the development process for technological devices. Also, Teh et al. (2014) offered fresh insights for mobile device manufacturers and application developers to focus their design efforts around the three aspects of intuitiveness, convenience and usefulness, as needed in different ways by users from different age groups. In China, research on this topic is just beginning, Deng et al. (2014) investigated the adoption of mobile health services by middle-aged and older people, and the results revealed that perceived value, attitude, perceived behavior control, technology anxiety, and self-actualization need positively affected the behavior intention of the older users. Zhou and Rau (2014), using explorative analysis, studied the acceptance of new functions on smartphones, with particular focus on the mobile phone functions, and concluded with ten important functional requirements reported by participants. Overall, the research concerning smartphone technology acceptance has just started in China and, as yet, is insufficient, such that, there is a lack of research that explores and confirms the determinants of behavior intention for smartphone usage from a structured perspective among older Chinese people.

The present study aimed to investigate the critical factors which may have significant impacts on smartphone technology acceptance and behavioral intention among older adults in China using confirmatory factor analysis. It explored both the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that influence the acceptance of older adults of smartphones and mobile apps. Considering the relatively low per capita income level, education status and traditional cultural background that exists in China, this study aimed to develop a Smartphone Acceptance Model for Chinese Older People (SAMCOP) based on the theory and constructs of the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1986) and incorporating the following three additional hypothesized factors: “Facilitating Conditions (FC)”, “Self-satisfaction (SS)” and “Cost Tolerance (CT)”. Through the study, the basic personal circumstances of Chinese older adults who are smartphone users will also be described.

The factors influencing usage of technology have been studied extensively. Several models have been proposed to explain technology acceptance behavior, including the theory of reasoned action (TRA) (Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975), the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1986), the technology acceptance model 2 (TAM2) (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000), and the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) (Venkatesh et al. 2003). More recently and specific to the older population of Hong Kong, Chen and Chan (2014) proposed a gerontechnology acceptance model called the “Senior Technology Acceptance Model (STAM)”. From all of these theoretical models, a series of determinants for technology acceptance by older adults, for example, social influence, self-efficacy and facilitating conditions were found.

Two common constructs proposed in TAM, TAM2 and STAM are perceived usefulness (PU) and perceived ease of use (PEOU). Perceived usefulness is defined as the subjective belief of prospective users that a particular system will increase their job performance within an organizational context (Davis, 1989). Perceived ease of use is defined as the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system will be free from effort (Davis, 1989). TAM suggests that people will form a behavioral intention (BI) in relation to which they have a positive attitude (AT), and/or which they believe will improve their job performance (PU) and achieve various instrumental rewards (such as pay increase or promotion) without necessarily activating the positive attitude. Perceived ease of use is also hypothesized to have a significant effect on attitude, the influence of which is based on intrinsic motivation whereby the easier a system the greater should be the user's self-efficacy and perceived control. However, although TAM exists as a reliable acceptance theory, it sometimes suffers from inadequate explanatory power since technological, cultural, usage-context and longitudinal behavioral process will affect the validity of the constructs in TAM (Sun and Zhang, 2006; Schepersa and Wetzels, 2007; Johnson et al. 2014). The ability of the original TAM to predict self-reported behavior intention and actual use is limited (Taylor and Todd, 1995; Bagozzi, 2007). However, a number of studies have shown the effectiveness of extending TAM by incorporating new constructs to increase the explanatory power of TAM (Dishaw and Strong, 1999; Hsu and Lu, 2004; Liu et al. 2010). Thus, in this study it is proposed to extend TAM with the addition of relevant constructs specific to the use of smartphones and mobile apps. Chen and Chan (2014) have shown that TAM can be effectively modified for use for older adults and that the TAM constructs, such as PU, PEOU and AT, are critical for older people as well as for the young (Braun, 2013; Chen and Chan, 2014). The hypotheses related to factors PU, PEOU and AT in the proposed smartphone acceptance model were developed as follows:


                        H1.1-H1.2: Perceived usefulness (PU) has significantly positive influences on attitude towards using (AT) and behavioral intention (BI).


                        H2.1-H2.3: Perceived ease of use (PEOU) is significantly positively associated with attitude towards using (AT), behavioral intention (BI), and perceived usefulness (PU).


                        H3: Attitude towards using (AT) directly predicts behavioral intention (BI).

The unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) (Venkatesh et al. 2003) identified three determinants (performance expectancy, effort expectancy, and social influence) that affect behavioral intention directly, two determinants (behavioral intention and facilitating conditions) that influence usage behavior directly, and four incorporated moderators (gender, age, experience, and voluntariness of use). UTAUT also identified self-efficacy and anxiety as indirect determinants since their influences on technology usage were fully mediated by PEOU (Venkatesh et al., 2003). In the study of Venkatesh et al. (2003), Facilitating Conditions (FC) was defined as the degree to which an individual believes that an organizational and technical infrastructure exists to support the use of the system. However, in UTAUT, facilitating conditions had no direct influence on behavioral intention but had direct influence on actual usage behavior. In China, limited by education and social services system, most older people do not have the knowledge and ability or sufficient learning opportunities to manipulate technological products. Thus, resource and technology facilitating conditions may be a potential solution to promote smartphone technology acceptance in China. In this study Facilitating Conditions (FC) was regarded as an extrinsic motivation factor, and the hypotheses related to Facilitating Conditions (FC) were:


                        H4.1–4.3: Facilitating conditions (FC) positively affects perceived ease of use (PEOU), perceived usefulness (PU), and behavioral intention (BI).

Self-Satisfaction (SS) is the degree to which a product/service gives the user satisfaction with his or her achievements (Park et al. 2013). For example, user perception of having an individual and distinct personality, achieving something new and difficult which requires great effort, and belief in oneself and one's abilities reflected by a product/service, all of these can generate great motivation through self-satisfaction. Self-related positive affect may mediate the effects that physical activity has on life satisfaction (Rejeski and Mihalko, 2001). In mainland China, the effect of individual self-esteem and self-related life domain satisfaction is stronger in older people than in the young (Zhang and Leung, 2002). In this study, Self-Satisfaction (SS) was regarded as a positive factor with regard to usage intention and as an intrinsic motivation factor. The related hypotheses were developed as follows:


                        H5.1–5.3: Self-Satisfaction (SS) has a positive effect on smartphone acceptance, increases the degree of perceived ease of use (PEOU), perceived usefulness (PU), and behavioral intention (BI).

Several studies have considered the socio-economic issues (job status, occupation and income) that confront older adults, and which may influence their adoption of technology products and services (Ho and Kwok, 2003; Bina and Giaglis, 2005). Recently, the Senior Technology Acceptance Model (STAM) proposed by Chen and Chan (2014) also indicated that the economic factor was a critical factor for acceptance of gerontechnology among Hong Kong Chinese seniors. With regard to the economic situation in mainland China, per capita income is relatively low compared with other developed countries, people, especially older people, are greatly concerned with the costs of products and services, and their willingness to bear costs is by considering their income in relation to their idea of the value of the products/services. In this study, Cost Tolerance (CT) was considered to be a direct factor determining the behavioral intention of the older people when using smartphone technology. The hypotheses related to Cost Tolerance (CT) were:


                        H6.1–6.3: Cost tolerance (CT) has a positive effect on smartphone acceptance, and higher cost tolerance increases the degree of perceived ease of use (PEOU), perceived usefulness (PU), and behavioral intention (BI).

Also, mediating factors, such as demographic characteristics, were assumed to mediate acceptance towards smartphones. All of the constructs and hypotheses considered in the proposed Smartphone Acceptance Model for Chinese Older People (SAMCOP) are shown in Table 1
                        .

@&#METHODS@&#

A quantitative method with structured questionnaires was applied to determine the significant constructs in the Smartphone Acceptance Model for Chinese Older People (SAMCOP). A confirmatory study, through the development of sophisticated measurement tools, was used to test the newly proposed theoretical model for predicting smartphone technology acceptance by older adults. The structured questionnaire was implemented by face to face individual interview in order to ensure the quality and accuracy of the results.

The questionnaire consisted of four parts, a) information about user basic usage of smartphones in terms of usage frequency [“very frequently” (coded 1), “often” (coded 2), “occasionally” (coded 3)]; b) the exploration of acceptance constructs (PU, PEOU, AT, FC, SS, CT); c) health and ability conditions of older users; d) demographic characteristics of older users. The measurement scales and items adopted for the present survey have been used and validated in previous empirical studies (Davis, 1989; Venkatesh et al. 2003; Arning and Ziefle, 2007; Park et al., 2013). Considering the context of this study, two new items regarding Cost Tolerance (CT) were added, as shown in Table 2
                        .

For each construct, a 7-point Likert scale was used to measure all the items in the questionnaire; ‘1’ indicated ‘strongly disagree’, ‘2’ indicated ‘disagree’, ‘3’ indicated ‘somewhat disagree’, ‘4’ indicated ‘neutral’, ‘5’ indicated ‘somewhat agree’, ‘6’ indicated ‘disagree’, and ‘7’ indicated ‘strongly disagree’.

The United Nations (UNFPA China, 2006) referred to those of 60 years of age and over as the older population. The current retirement age in China is 50–55 for women and 60 for men. Nursing homes in China welcome inmates and daytime visitors aged 55 and above. Thus, the target participants for this study were Chinese residents aged 55 and above. Since the study was concerned with the smartphone usage behavior of older adults, the target participants were required to have at least two months experience of using smartphones. The participants chosen to be interviewed were generally healthy and had to be able to communicate well with the interviewer. Considering the scarcity of eligible older participants, the sample was recruited through a convenience sampling method from four elderly centers in Tianjin, China. In terms of urban population, Tianjin is one of the five largest cities in China. A total of 120 eligible older adults were willing to participate in this study and each signed a consent form. After face to face interview with a structured questionnaire, a total of 101 valid data samples were collected. Nineteen questionnaires were not used because the participants did not complete the whole process and the interviews were abandoned for the following reasons: 1) The questionnaire was relatively long and some participants got tired before the questionnaire was completed; 2) Some participants had difficulty understanding and answering the questions; 3) Some unexpected events such as guests visiting or ad hoc physical examinations arose during the interviews.

Demographic information of the participants including age, gender, living arrangement, education, marital status, work status, source of income and economic status was collected (see Table 3
                        ). The results indicated that the largest proportion of respondents were in the age group 55–59 (64.35%), living with family members (75.25%), with secondary education (46.53%), married (71.29%), still with full time job (55.45%), living rely on salary/wage (62.38%), and with relatively good economic status (88.11%). The personal circumstances of those older respondents who were using smartphones were described with several items as follows: they are just at the early stage of ageing, well-educated, non-widowed, still working, and living with a relatively good economic status.

Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) using maximum likelihood method with AMOS 21.0 software was employed in this study. SEM is a useful technique that is able to explain multiple relationships, and test measurement properties and theoretical relationships (Hair, 2010). The process involved data coding, confirmatory factor analysis, model fit testing, and path analysis. Confirmatory factor analysis was performed to assess the measurement model which represented the relationships between measured variables and theoretical constructs. Path analysis was used to test the proposed structural model paths and evaluate the hypotheses of the study. As suggested by Hu and Bentler (1999), some indices such as NFI (Normed Fit Index), BL86 (Bollen's Fit Index (1989)), CAK (a rescaled version of Akaike's information criterion), CK (cross-validation index), CN (critical N), GFI (Goodness-of-Fit Index), and AGFI (Adjusted Goodness-of-Fit Index) performed poorly and were not recommended for evaluating model fit. Thus, for the model fit test, five indices were chosen for use here: Chi-square value, chi-square to its degree of freedom (χ2/df), root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI) and comparative fit index (CFI).

In this study, the basic usage behaviors of older people when using smartphones and mobile apps, including usage experience (years), usage frequency (very frequently/often/occasionally, coded 1, 2, 3 respectively), total number of mobile apps installed on their smartphones, number of frequently used mobile apps, and monthly cost (RMB/month) of using smartphones were analyzed. The descriptive statistics of these behavior and cost parameters are shown in Table 4
                        . The participants had an average of 1.77 years of smart phone usage experience and usage frequency was 1.89 which indicated that they used smartphones frequently. The average number of mobile apps installed on their smartphones was 8.06 while the average number of frequently used mobile apps was 3.57. The average monthly expenditure on smartphone usage was 52.03 RMB, with a maximum of 200 RMB. The qualitative records from the interviews revealed that monthly cost was regarded as an important factor for smartphone acceptance among Chinese older adults.

The means and standard deviations (SD) of usage behavior by demographics are shown in Table 5
                        . Examined with the Chi-square test, only monthly cost varied significantly with the source of income (χ
                        2 = 12.218;p < 0.05). The total number of mobile apps installed on smartphones showed significant variance with gender (χ
                        2 = 4.13;p < 0.05). The number of frequently used mobile apps per day varied significantly with respondents’ age (χ
                        2 = 11.407;p < 0.01), education (χ
                        2 = 16.718;p < 0.005), marital status (χ
                        2 = 13.909;p < 0.005), work status (χ
                        2 = 10.144;p < 0.01), source of income (χ
                        2 = 9.995;p < 0.05). Usage experience varied significantly with age (χ
                        2 = 9.747;p < 0.05), marital status (χ
                        2 = 8.538;p < 0.05), work status (χ
                        2 = 8.547;p < 0.05). Usage frequency only varied with education (χ
                        2 = 10.877;p < 0.05). As may be seen in Table 5, living arrangement did not significantly affect the variance of any usage behaviors. When considering source of income, those who enjoyed economic support from their family were more likely to be able to afford higher monthly costs on their smartphone. Those who were younger, married, working, and with family support were more likely to have a longer usage experience with a smartphone. Participants who were younger, higher educated, non-widowed, still working, relying on a salary/wage and with a relatively good economic status were more likely to have a higher number of frequently used mobile apps per day.

In order to understand the potential causal dependencies between the hypothesized constructs, a structural equation model was built for this study. Thus, the measurement model fit and the structural model fit were examined to see how well the model fits the set of observations based on the survey data.

First, missing values regarding constructs such as cost tolerance and self-satisfaction were estimated using the expectation maximization method. A Total of 26 missing values from 9 cases were estimated. The measurement model fit was examined using AMOS 21.0 with five model fit indices which contain both incremental and absolute indices: Chi-square value, chi-square to its degree of freedom (χ
                        2/df), Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI), comparative fit index (CFI), root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA). The results showed that the Chi-square value was 152.48 (p > 0.05), which indicated the good fit of the model. The χ
                        2/df value was 1.318, which was below the maximum allowable value of 2.00. The values of TLI and CFI were 0.968 and 0.977, respectively, which were higher than the suggested criteria of 0.95 (Brown, 2006; Hu and Bentler, 1999). Also, the RMSEA value was 0.054, which was below the allowed maximum value of 0.07 (Steiger, 2007). All these results indicated that the measurement model fit was acceptable.

In this study, the value of Cronbach's Alpha (Cronbach, 1951), an estimation of the internal consistency of the measurement and reliability of a psychometric test was used. Table 6
                        , shows that Cronbach's Alpha for each construct was higher than the minimum required level of 0.7 (Nunnally, 1978). Convergent validity, which represents the correspondence or convergence between similar constructs, is judged to be acceptable if factor loading estimates are higher than 0.50 (Hair, 2010). As shown in Table 6, all factor loading values were higher than this threshold which indicated that all the factor loadings were significant. Thus, the measurement model was considered to have an adequate convergent validity. To sum up, the satisfactory model fit and adequate reliability and validity of the measurement model shown indicated that the current model was appropriate for the analysis of the structural model.

The proposed model and hypotheses were evaluated with structural equation modeling (SEM) using Amos 21.0. Five goodness-of-fit indices were used to assess the fit of the proposed structural model, namely Chi-square value, χ
                        2/df, RMSEA, CFI, and NFI. Chi-square value was 104.96 (p > 0.05), which indicated the good fit of the model. χ
                        2/df was 1.220, which was below the maximum allowable value of 2.00. TLI and CFI were 0.971 and 0.982, respectively; they were both higher than the minimum cutoff value of 0.95 (Brown, 2006; Hu and Bentler, 1999). RMSEA was 0.045, which was lower than the suggested criteria 0.07 (Steiger, 2007). All the fit indices of the structural model met the suggested criteria, which indicated that the proposed structural model was a good representation of the hypothesized relationships. The results of path analysis of the hypotheses in the proposed structural model are shown in Table 7
                        .

The results in Table 7 indicated that perceived usefulness (PU) had a significantly positive influence on attitude towards using smartphones (AT), but was not significant for behavioral intention (BI). Perceived ease of use (PEOU) had a significantly positive effect on perceived usefulness (PU), but was not significant for attitude towards using (AT) or behavioral intention (BI). Attitude towards using (AT) did not have a significant effect on behavioral intention (BI). Facilitating conditions (FC) had a significantly positive influence on perceived ease of use (PEOU), but not on perceived usefulness (PU) or behavioral intention (BI). Self-satisfaction (SS) had significantly positive effects on both perceived ease of use (PEOU) and perceived usefulness (PU). Cost tolerance (CT) had a significantly positive influence on behavioral intention (BI) directly. With these results, the structure of the proposed Smartphone Acceptance Model for Chinese Older People (SAMCOP) was established as shown in Fig. 1
                        .

Apart from the direct effects reported above, there were several significant indirect effects. There was a significant effect for SS to PU (0.425, p < 0.05) which indicated that SS affected PU indirectly. There was another significant effect from SS to AT (0.701, p < 0.01) which indicated that SS also affected AT indirectly.

The structure showed that the attitude of older people and their behavioral intention towards using smartphone technology cannot be sufficiently explained by only the three external factors (FC, SS, CT), there are many other external factors or mediating variables that will influence acceptance of smartphones by older people. From previous studies (Conci et al., 2009; Chen and Chan, 2013), there was evidence that the most important mediating factors were related to the demographic characteristics of the users. Thus, a correlation study between the model constructs above and demographics was conducted in order to better understand how personal characteristics influenced/mediated both attitudinal constructs (PU, OEOU, AT, BI) and external factors (FC, SS, CT). All constructs were composited using the mean values of corresponding items. The results are shown in Table 8
                        .

The results in Table 8 revealed several interesting observations. First, age, education, marital status, work status, source of income and economic status all had significant relationships with the attitudinal constructs of perceived usefulness (PU), perceived ease of use (PEOU), attitude towards using (AT), and behavioral intention (BI). Age was negatively correlated with all of the attitudinal constructs, indicating that ‘younger’ older people were more likely to accept smartphones. Education had a positive influence on these attitudinal constructs, which revealed that higher education might lead to a more positive attitude towards using smartphone technology. Marital status was negatively related with all attitudinal constructs, suggesting non-widowed older people were more positive about using smartphones. Also, work status had negative effects on PU, PEOU, AT and BI, which meant that non-retired older adults were more likely to accept smartphones. It was also noted that economic status played a positive role towards acceptance; older adults with good economic status were more likely to accept to use smartphones. Second, from the correlation table, except for marital status, all the other demographics showed significant relationships with facilitating condition (FC). However, it was surprising to find that except for education, all the other demographics had negative relationships with FC. In other words, adults who were older, widowed, and with lower economic status reported lower importance for FC. However, those with higher education reported higher importance for FC. Third, older people with higher education had a higher degree of cost tolerance (CT). Work status and economic status had negative relationships with CT, indicating that people with better economic situations (still working, with salary/wage, good economic status) had higher CT. Finally, self-satisfaction (SS) was negatively related with all these demographics except education. In summary, older adults who were younger, with higher education, non-widowed, still working, independent with regard to economics and with good economic status had more positive view about their lives.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study aimed to investigate the factors that influence the acceptance of smartphones amongst Chinese older users, and to give a profile of older smartphone users. Face-to-face interviews with a structured questionnaire were employed to conduct the study. The study explored a Smartphone Acceptance Model for Chinese Older People (SAMCOP) on the basis of the technology acceptance model (TAM) and the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) with good model fit. Several additional variables (Facilitating Conditions, Self-Satisfaction, and Cost Tolerance) were incorporated in this model due to consideration of the average education status and per capita income in China. Also, the study demonstrated the importance of a series of mediating variables, such as age, economic status, education level, etc. in understanding the acceptance of smartphones by older Chinese adults.

There seems to be a general tendency towards acceptance of smartphones among older Chinese users, but usage behavior varies with demographic characteristics, those who are younger, with higher education, non-widowed, with higher economic status by relying on salary or family support are more likely to accept the use of smartphones. In particular, age and education are the most significant personal factors that influence acceptance of smartphones by older Chinese people. For the structural model and constructs, older adults who have higher self-satisfaction are more likely to have a higher degree of perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use. Cost tolerance is the most important factor that needs to be considered for Chinese older people since it will directly influence their behavioral intention, such that higher cost tolerance may lead to a higher rate of acceptance towards smartphone usage. For Chinese families, facilitating conditions are also very important in that older people may need a better environment to use smart technologies. For example, proper training before use of an unfamiliar technology is needed, and concerns about the costs associated with learning or relearning to use a product might be especially important when considering older users (Sharita et al., 2004). Many previous studies have reported that attending training programs or workshops can help older individuals to build self-confidence, elicit positive attitudes, and increase intention to use technology (Lagana, 2008; Lam and Lee 2006). In agreement with previous work, the use of technology by older adults was found here to be encouraged mainly by facilitating conditions. The opportunity of getting external help is very important for smartphone acceptance. Thus, more attention should be put on user attributes and facilitating supports rather than just focusing on improving technological features when deciding on innovative strategies.

According to the findings above, in order to encourage older adults to use smartphones, difficulties in the personal, technological, and environmental contexts should be removed. Presented here are some recommendations to encourage and assist older people in China to use smartphones.
                        
                           •
                           Since older people in China are especially concerned with the costs of using a smartphone every month, it is suggested that telecommunication operators and smartphone manufacturers should provide special monthly data plans and deals for the older population to promote usage by older people.

Considering the limited education and learning ability of many older adults in China, appropriate training programs and techniques are needed to improve this situation. However, there are some persistent traditional notions in China, such that older people may feel shame or embarrassment to accept training from younger people. Therefore, there is a pressing need to explore ways of removing these traditional obstacles and to facilitate the use of smartphones by older people in China.

Older adults in China place a high value on the images that they have within their social networks. The ways in which older people are viewed and treated will greatly affect their usage of technology. A study by Yao et al. (2011) indicated that older Chinese people are generally introverted and afraid of being laughed at because of their poor performance when, in old age, they attempt to chase after and adopt new fashions. In order to promote technology use by older adults, it is important to avoid labeling the older person as “technophobic”. The confidence of an older person can be very fragile, and they need society to encourage and protect their confidence when they try to keep pace with the changing world. They should be shown respect for trying out and adopting new systems. Media and public opinion should promote and encourage the general idea that older adults have the right, need, and capability to use technology.

However, all these findings must be considered in the context of the limitation of this study. Results from this study cannot accurately represent the smartphone usage situation of all the older people in China. This study did not consider the regional diversity in China, all participants were from Tianjin, thus, their education and economic level was better than the average level of China since Tianjin is one of the five most developed cities of China with better economic and education status (United Nations Development Programme China, 2013). Also, usage of technology is influenced by the context of culture. Cultural diversity exists within and between the different provinces of China (Al-Emadi and Al-Asmakh, 2006); the sample in the present study cannot represent the diverse cultural attributes of Chinese older people in general. Future research could usefully focus on identifying the major cultural dimensions and their corresponding relationships with smartphone usage. A study by Holden et al. (2015), analyzed the usage of a specific technology system by older adults through four different aspects; person-related barriers, task barriers, tool barriers, and context barriers. This approach may present a possible comprehensive method for smartphone acceptance research, to be taken as a reference point for future work. Finally, since there are many functions and applications on smartphones, it may turn out to be very useful to focus on functions and applications related to health care for older people because they may pay more attention to their health than young people and see these applications as immediately relevant.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

