@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Variable Message Signs for road tunnel emergency evacuations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The Theory of Affordances is proposed to evaluate Variable Message Signs (VMS).


                        
                        
                           
                           A questionnaire study is used to investigate VMS for tunnel evacuation.


                        
                        
                           
                           VMS including amber text, flashing lights and emergency exit symbol results as best.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Emergency evacuation

Variable Message Sign

Tunnel evacuation

Theory of Affordances

Way-finding

Notification

System design

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This paper investigates the design of Variable Message Signs (VMS) as a way-finding aid for road tunnel emergency evacuations. The use of the Theory of Affordances is suggested to provide recommendations on the design of VMS. A preliminary evaluation of 11 selected VMS systems was performed and 6 of them were further evaluated using an affordance-based within subject stated-preference questionnaire administered to a sample of 62 participants. Results are used to provide recommendations on the characteristics of the VMS systems, such as (1) size of the sign (large or small); (2) use of flashing lights; (3) colour scheme; (4) message coding (i.e., text, pictograms or a combination of them). The best performing VMS features for road tunnel emergency evacuation included the use of larger signs, flashing lights, the combination of emergency exit pictorial symbol in green in one panel and text in amber in the other panel.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A Variable Message Sign (VMS) (also called Traffic Information Sign) is a programmable electronic panel capable of displaying different types of messages. Depending on the type of technology employed, the panel is capable of displaying messages composed of text, pictograms or a combination of them. Visualization technologies employed in VMS, e.g. LCD screens, include dynamic features such as the use of animation, flashing, scrolling, etc. This leads to a great flexibility in the content and type of information that can be displayed (Wang et al., 2006). This allows a great range of possibilities to the designer of the VMS. In addition, it poses several questions on the information to be displayed in order to provide understandable and effective messages (Dudek, 1991; Dudek and Ullman, 2002).

In the case of a road tunnel emergency, e.g. fire evacuation, VMS can be a useful tool to convey concise and precise information to motorists about the emergency as well as instruct them on the appropriate actions to perform to reach a place of safety, i.e. an emergency exit (Nilsson et al., 2009). In fact, VMS can be used as a procedural measure (providing real-time information/instructions) to influence people's decision making and route choice. Nevertheless, to date, little research has been carried out on the use of VMS as a way-finding aid and notification system in the case of emergency evacuation in road tunnels.

To address this issue, dedicated research efforts are needed in order to evaluate the use of VMS for road tunnel emergency evacuations to provide information to motorists and pedestrians in case of evacuation. It should be noted that the present study refers to the design of VMS within the scope to instruct people in case of evacuation on foot (i.e. motorists or passengers leaving their vehicle and walking towards an emergency exit). Some of the concepts used to design VMS for normal operations can be applied to the design of VMS for evacuation emergencies. In order to increase the probability of identification, signs should be placed in visible and expected locations (Borowsky et al., 2008). The effectiveness of a VMS primarily depends on the design of its message and the display format (Wang et al., 2006). Key design parameters are the type of display technology (light-emitting display, light-reflecting display, etc.), height and width of the characters and symbols (Dudek, 1991; Zwahlen and Schnell, 1999), the stroke width of the characters and the type of font displayed (Dudek and Ullman, 2001). The relationship between people and a VMS can be considered as a transmission of information from the VMS to people in order to modify their behaviours (Crundall and Underwood, 2001). For instance, Koyuncu and Amado (2008) have systematically investigated the effect of location and content on the understanding/effectivity of traffic signage.

This paper suggests and applies the Theory of Affordances (ToA) (Gibson, 1986, 1977; Hartson, 2003) as a framework to design VMS for emergency evacuations. The ToA has been used in a variety of different research fields to analyse the design of everything from climbing routes (Boschker et al., 2002) to human–computer interaction design (Hartson, 2003). It has also been used to evaluate the design of emergency exits (Sixsmith et al., 1988) and to explain the effectiveness of way-finding systems for evacuation (Nilsson, 2009). In addition, the theory has been successfully employed in fire safety research to understand individual pedestrian evacuation behaviour (Joo et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2011).

In order to identify the characteristics of the VMS selected for evaluation, a preliminary literature review has been carried out. Then the evaluation of selected VMS systems is performed in two steps. In a first step, a qualitative evaluation based on the ToA is performed and a sub-set of best VMS systems is selected. Further evaluation of the selected VMS systems is made using an affordance-based stated-preference within subject questionnaire with a sample of 62 participants. A stated-preference within subject questionnaire refers to a method in which individual respondents' statements about their preference/choices in a set of options are recorded (Hensher, 1994). Recommendations on the design of the characteristics of the VMS systems have been provided.

The present work is currently used to directly assist the design of the emergency systems in a real world tunnel project, namely the Stockholm Bypass project (Sweden), co-funded by the EU Trans-European transport network (TEN-T). Given the practical application of this paper in the tunnel engineering world and their relevance in assessing the effectiveness of VMS for road tunnel evacuation, four VMS design variables have been selected for evaluation, namely 1), the size of the sign (large or small); 2) flashing effects, 3) colour scheme, 4) message coding (i.e., text, pictograms or a combination of them). This selection has been driven by the need to investigate variables which may be dependent on the type of message to be conveyed. This refers to the cases in which literature on road signs for normal operation (i.e., not in an emergency) are not entirely applicable. In fact, it is important to note that motorists may observe the VMS either while driving their car (as in normal conditions), while stopped in a car queue or while walking on foot. In addition, the layouts of the VMSs are identified in order to correspond to designs currently used in tunnel safety engineering practice.

This paper summarises the main findings of the research conducted. A technical report of this research study is also available for tunnel safety designers (Ronchi and Nilsson, 2014).

The use of the ToA to study evacuation system design has been previously investigated and applied by Sixsmith et al. (1988) and by Nilsson (2009). In the present study, this theory is used for the first time to evaluate VMS systems. In particular, the categorization of affordances based on the research studies made by Hartson (2003) is here used. In fact, Nilsson (2009) showed that in order to enable the analysis of the affordances provided to people (i.e., evacuees) by an evacuation system, it is useful to divide affordances into different categories. One possible division suggests that affordances can be divided into the following four categories: 1) Sensory affordance, 2) Cognitive affordance, 3) Physical affordance, 4) Functional affordance (Hartson, 2003).

Sensory affordance is determined in VMSs by their capability of attracting the attention of the motorists and their impact on the ability in seeing the message provided. This is associated with the location (which is constant in this study) and size of the panels, the colour in use and the type of code displayed in the sign (text, pictorial symbols, and flashing lights) and its characteristics. For instance, text provided by a visual evacuation system must be sufficiently large (Dudek, 1991) and the content of the VMS should be easy to see.

Cognitive affordance is associated with the effectiveness of the VMS in providing information that motorists can understand. This is dependent on the methodology used to provide information (text, pictorial symbols, flashing lights) and the written message design and their combination. The signs are intended to instruct people on appropriate actions (Dudek, 1991). In this case, the two required actions to perform are to turn off the engine and to reach an emergency exit on foot. The use of written messages in different languages may affect cognitive affordance in relation to the expected type of population involved. The cognitive affordances provided by a design should also take into account of the context. For example, a VMS sign during the fire in the Södra Länken tunnel in Stockholm on June 16, 2008 (Åberg et al., 2008) presented an “evacuate tunnel” written message. This sign led many motorists to drive out their car through dense smoke instead of leaving their vehicle and evacuating on foot. This is a clear example in which a message was interpreted differently than the designers had intended.

Physical affordance supports the user physically performing an action. An example can be an opening device for doors. The VMS is a sensory system which does not require a physical interaction with the object under consideration, so the study of physical affordance is not relevant to VMS.

Functional affordance is associated with the goals of the tunnel evacuees. Main people's goals include reaching a safe place overcoming possible property attachment (i.e. the reluctance to leave the vehicle) and inhibiting negative social influence (Kinateder et al., 2014a, 2014b; Ronchi, 2013). VMS systems are designed in line with the same goals. For this reason, it is argued that functional affordance can be directly derived as a consequence of the factors affecting the other affordances (sensory and cognitive in this case). High scores in functional affordance are resulting from a powerful combination of the other affordances. If a system fails in terms of one of the affordances, the functional affordance will also be low as a result of the failing of that affordance. For example, a VMS that is easy to notice (sensory), easy to read/see (sensory) and easy to understand (cognitive) will also provide appropriate functional affordance.

The VMS system under consideration consists of two rectangular VMS panels conveying information to motorists and three intermediate smaller squared signs (see schematic representation in Fig. 1
                        ). The dimensions of the VMS panels have been selected in order to be a credible representation of a realistic design and they have been inspired by the design of VMS panels in a real-life project (the Stockholm Bypass project). The VMS panels have a fixed dimension of 240 × 90 cm on the opposite side of the emergency exit and two possible dimensions on the side of the emergency exit, either 240 × 90 cm or a larger size of 240 × 170 cm. In fact, two different sizes are taken into consideration in order to evaluate the impact of the sign dimension (large or small) on the effectiveness of the VMS system. The intermediate panels have fixed dimensions corresponding to 90 × 90 cm. In the case of emergency, the smaller panels show red crosses which are used to encourage people to stop their vehicles. The choice of those specific sizes and layout has been done to reflect current engineering practice, i.e. they are based on real world designs (Modig et al., 2014). For instance, the width of the panels is generally dependent on the width of the lanes, which are defined by tunnel design regulations.

Flashing effects can be used for lights or during the display of text messages. Message lines should be static (in line with the studies by Chan and Ng (2009) and Wang et al. (2006)) and zero or four flashing amber lights in the corners of the VMSs (see examples in Fig. 2
                        ) are selected for experimental testing. The four flashing amber lights are assumed to flash all at the same time in accordance with the studies performed in evacuation research (Nilsson, 2009). This is in contrast with general VMS practice in which lights generally flash alternatively (Dudek, 1991). The flash rate of the lights is 1.0 Hz since previous experimental research (Nilsson, 2009) demonstrates that this flashing rate enhances the degree of perceived urgency (cognitive affordance) without creating a flashing effect which may annoy motorists, as investigated in laboratory experiments (Ronchi et al., 2015).

Several studies have been carried out in order to investigate the effectiveness of different colours to provide information to motorists, e.g. Christ, 1975; Lai, 2010, 2008; McDougald and Wogalter, 2014. Colour codes can generate higher sensory affordances if compared with the use of text, pictograms, etc. given the lower reaction times associated with them (Christ, 1975; Wright, 1968). Colour coding can be designed in line with international standards, e.g. ISO 3864-1:2011 (2011). Nevertheless, response times of users in recognizing and understanding the content of an object given the colour employed (cognitive affordance) may depend on several factors, such as the meaning of the colour code given different cultural and national backgrounds (Chan and Ng, 2009; Lai, 2008; Ou and Liu, 2012), or the class of information provided (Adams et al., 1998; Chan and Ng, 2009; Wickens, 2004). Sensory affordance is affected by the colour employed and the correlation between the meaning of the colour code and the type of information displayed (Lai, 2012, 2010, 2008; Pastoor, 1990; Tang et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2006).

In line with the literature available (Chan and Ng, 2009; Dudek, 1991; Lai, 2012, 2010, 2008; Pastoor, 1990; Wickens, 2004), panels containing either two or three colours are selected for experimental testing for the background and the written messages. The suggested background colour of the VMS is always black and the elements in the panel may be either amber, red or white in relation to the type of information provided (e.g. respectively warning message, danger, information, etc.) and the possible combined use of pictorial symbols, in line with the recommendations provided by Dudek (1991) and ISO 3864-1:2011 (2011). The combinations of these elements produce VMS panels with a two-colour or a three-colour scheme.

Message coding is here intended as the selected type of message employed to convey information, i.e., written text, pictograms or a combination of them.

Different factors need to be taken into account during written message design, such as the number of units of information, message load and length (Dudek and Ullman, 2001; Liu, 2005), font size (Borowsky et al., 2008; Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013), wording, separation and abbreviations (Wang et al., 2006).

In the case of road tunnel evacuations, VMSs can contain three different types of information such as 1) the problem (i.e. the accident), 2) the location of the problem and 3) the recommended motorist action (Dudek, 1991). Nevertheless, given sign space and legibility constraints it is not always possible to provide information on all elements (Dudek and Ullman, 2001). In those cases, motorists actions should be given priority to avoid people uncertainty (Dudek, 1991).

In line with the literature available (Borowsky et al., 2008; Dudek, 1991; Dudek and Ullman, 2001; Liu, 2005; Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013; Wang et al., 2006; Wang and Cao, 2003), the selected written message for experimental testing is made of either one or two lines (see Fig. 3
                           ). Each line will contain only one unit of information. Dudek (1991) recommends that in the case of a 1-line message, the unit of information informs motorists on the main action to perform (to evacuate the tunnel or use the emergency exit). In the case of 2-line message, the two lines recommend motorists on the actions to perform in more detail (to turn off the car engine and to evacuate the tunnel). The message lines should not include abbreviations (Dudek and Ullman, 2001). Text is written in capital letters and size is selected (25 cm in this case) in order to take into account legibility distance. Given the direct application of the current study in a Swedish tunnel, the message is written either in Swedish only or it is constituted by two frames in Swedish and English. The content of the text is a warning message. The warning messages are selected in order to instruct motorists on the action to perform. A set of messages are selected in line with previous experimental research (Nilsson et al., 2009).

Two-line warning message:
                              
                                 Line 1: “STANNA MOTORN” (Swedish) – “STOP ENGINE” (English)

Line 2: “UTRYM TUNNELN” (Swedish) – “LEAVE TUNNEL” (English)

One-line warning message:
                              
                                 Line 1: “UTRYM TUNNELN” (Swedish) – “LEAVE TUNNEL” (English)

It should be noted that the direct translation in English of “Utrym Tunneln” would be “Evacuate Tunnel” rather than “Leave tunnel”. Nevertheless, the translation “Leave Tunnel” is used due to space restrictions in the panel (which may usually occur).

Motorists generally have high accuracy rate when responding to pictorial symbols rather than text only since they present information concisely, thus requiring short response time (Liu, 2005). In contrast with the use of text only (where familiarity is less important), the sole use of symbols is advantageous when the observer is familiar with it (Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013). Many studies (Koyuncu and Amado, 2008; Liu, 2005; Ou and Liu, 2012; Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013) investigated the combined use of text messages and pictorial symbols, pointing out that pictorial symbols enhances people capacity in remembering and understanding the content of a message. Experimental and field studies (Koyuncu and Amado, 2008; Shinar and Vogelzang, 2013; Wang and Cao, 2003; Wolff and Wogalter, 1998) on traffic signs confirm that written and symbolic stimuli activate both early perceptual and late cognitive processes (Koyuncu and Amado, 2008).

In line with the literature available and international standards (International Standards Organization, 2011), the pictorial symbols selected for experimental testing are the standard “do not enter sign”, the “warning sign” (ISO 3864-1:2011) and the “emergency exit sign” based on the Swedish standard (AFS, 2008) (See Fig. 4
                           ), depending on the information that is intended to be provided (a warning message or information on the emergency exit). Pictograms are used in the VMS panel considering the adopted colour scheme. It should be noted that the pictorial symbols have been selected for test purpose and that the “do not enter sign” and the “warning sign” are not generally intended to be used for panels concerning evacuation emergencies since they have their own meanings in relevant signage standards (International Standards Organization, 2011).

Based on the previous literature review on VMS systems and the aims of the study, a set of eleven VMS systems were selected and subjected to an affordance-based evaluation to identify a set of possible appropriate designs. It should be noted that a complete experimental testing would require the analysis of a significantly higher number of designs. Nevertheless, the choice of the designs has been made in order to represent some of the most common VMS systems used in engineering practice as well as allowing the relative ranking of some of the main features affecting the effectiveness of VMS systems for road tunnel evacuation. The selected designs for evaluation are presented in Table 1
                     .

The selected VMS systems in accordance to Table 1 are shown in Fig. 5
                     .

A qualitative evaluation based on the ToA was used to identify the best VMS system in terms of their capability to instruct people on the action to perform in case of an emergency. This analysis has been done in order to demonstrate the usefulness of the ToA to perform an evaluation of different systems. For instance, the methodology in use can be adopted by practitioners for system evaluation. A set of a priori qualitative level of affordances has been obtained by the authors deriving information available in the literature. To facilitate the qualitative evaluation of the VMS design, the affordances of each system are compared to a benchmark design (see Fig. 6
                        ). In particular, the impact of each VMS feature on the final score of each design is evaluated in relation to the associated affordances. The qualitative evaluation is based on a systematic analysis based on the following 5-step procedure:
                           
                              1)
                              Identification of the features of each VMS system

Linking each feature with the relevant affordances, i.e. identification of the affordance scores (in this case sensory and cognitive) that can depend on the features of the VMS

Qualitative comparison between the features of the benchmark design and each VMS system under consideration for sensory and cognitive affordance

Assignment of qualitative scores to sensory and cognitive affordances for each design

Evaluation of functional affordance scores (low/medium/high) based on the qualitative scores of sensory and cognitive affordance

Further information on the procedure can be found in Ronchi and Nilsson (2014).

People tend to perceive amber faster than other colours in the case of written messages in VMS (Lai, 2012, 2010, 2008; Wang et al., 2006), thus the use of red and white colour (e.g., VMS system 8 and VMS system 10) may produce a lower sensory affordance. Flashing can increase sensory affordance since it may capture people attention to objects in a display better than colours (Duarte et al., 2014; Thackray and Mark Touchstone, 1991). The use of panels of bigger size on the size of the emergency exit (240 × 170 cm) is deemed to increase sensory affordance, although experimental tests are needed to evaluate the impact of the size of the panel. Double-line messages generally lead to a faster reading if compared with single line messages (Lai, 2010) (VMS systems 7, 8 and 11).

The use of pictorial symbols of different colours than the text (VMS systems 5, 8, and 9) is deemed to create confusion in the motorists and it may decrease cognitive affordance. This solution is not recommended, but experimental tests are needed to verify if this negative effect can be balanced by the use of an effective pictorial symbol (e.g. VMS system 5). The use of pictorial symbols in an unusual colour may decrease cognitive affordance (Lai, 2010; Wickens, 2004) (e.g. VMS system 8). Since the information to be transmitted concerns an emergency, it is deemed that the use of a white colour scheme for the text (VMS system 8) may decrease cognitive affordance on the message if compared with the use of amber or red, i.e. motorists may not perceive the emergency and the urgency of the situation (Chan and Ng, 2009). The use of the single unit of information “Utrym tunneln” (“Leave tunnel” in Swedish) may decrease cognitive affordance and be mis-understood since motorists are not specifically instructed to abandon their cars and perform their evacuation on foot.

A summary of the qualitative evaluation of the VMS systems based on the interpretation of the literature using the ToA is presented in Table 2
                        .

The VMS systems which present either a low score in sensory, cognitive or functional affordance have been excluded from further experimental evaluation. In conclusion, the use of the ToA permitted the exclusion of five VMS systems, namely VMS systems 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11. The VMS systems selected for further research are therefore VMS systems 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.

The analysis of VMS systems using the ToA permitted the selection of six possible VMS designs. The selected designs are tested experimentally with an affordance-based questionnaire in order to validate the results of the preliminary analysis, give recommendations on appropriate VMS system and select the best designs. Questionnaire studies are not subjected to ethical review in Sweden, thus no ethical application has been submitted to the national ethical board.

@&#METHOD@&#

VMS systems are evaluated with an affordance-based questionnaire performing dedicated pairwise comparisons of designs which permit the testing of different variables. A within-subject experimental design has been employed; test participants were required to sit in a room where two screens were made available, each one presenting one VMS system. Each participant performed several tests. A stated-preference approach is used, i.e., participants are offered a series of hypothetical designs to be evaluated. The variables under consideration are evaluated using the tests presented in Table 3
                           .


                           Test A.

This comparison is performed in order to investigate the impact of the use of written text (in Swedish) only vs the combined use of text and pictograms in the two panels. The analysis is performed by comparing VMS system 6 and VMS system 4.


                           Test B.

This comparison is performed in order to investigate the use of different pictorial symbols (the warning symbol and the emergency exit symbol). Flashing lights are not available in the panel with the emergency exit sign in order to avoid contradictory messages (flashing lights communicate warning while the emergency exit signs indicate safety). The analysis is performed by comparing VMS system 1 and VMS system 5.


                           Test C.

This comparison is performed in order to investigate the impact of the size of the panel on the side of the emergency exits (large or small size, see Fig. 1) and the subsequent size of the pictogram. The analysis is performed by comparing VMS system 1 and VMS system 4.


                           Test D.

This comparison is performed in order to investigate the impact of flashing lights. The analysis is performed by comparing VMS system 1 and VMS system 3.


                           Test E.

This comparison is performed in order to investigate the impact of the use of written text (in Swedish and English) only vs the combined use of text and pictograms in the two panels. The analysis is performed by comparing VMS system 2 and VMS system 4.

A total of sixty-two participants took part in the experiment (28 female). Test participants' age ranged from 18 to 54 years old (average = 24.3 years and standard deviation = 6.8 years). Fifty-eight of the sixty-two participants (93.5%) were of Swedish nationality, two participants had double citizenship (Swedish and another citizenship) and 2 participants were not Swedish. All participants were Swedish speakers, and 60 out of 62 participants were able to read and understand English as well. The sample was mainly composed of students (85.5% of the participants); the rest of sample included people of different ages and professions (e.g. lecturers, janitors, etc.). Participants did not declare to have sight impairments with the exception of one participant who declared to have difficulties in distinguishing colours. Most of the participants (93.5%) did not have previous experiences concerning tunnel evacuations. Four participants (6.5%) declared to have previous experiences on tunnel evacuation such as experiencing the traffic being stopped while inside the car in a tunnel due to an accident (two participants) and two cases of full evacuation of the tunnel (one case including visible smoke from the car involved in the accident). Most of the participants (89%) had a driving license. Participants without a driving license were included in the study since they could be evacuees in a tunnel while being passengers in a vehicle. The majority of the participants were not very frequent tunnel users, with the most common use being once per year (46.8%), followed by less than once per year (27.4%) and once per month (22.6%). This is deemed to be a conservative assumption in the sample since tunnel users are not deemed to have large experience about tunnel evacuations.

The questionnaire included five questions investigating the affordances associated with different VMS systems (see Table 4
                              ) and a set of background questions. A stated-preference approach has been employed. In the first four questions, test participants chose one of the two VMS systems or stated that the two systems were equally performing. In the final question, test participants must select only one of the two configurations. The first two questions dealt with sensory affordance. The first question investigated the capability of the sign of capturing the attention of the participants. The second question asked the participants if the VMS system was discernible and the information can be distinguished. The third and fourth questions investigated cognitive affordance corresponding to the expected goals of the VMS systems. This assumption is made in order to permit an overall evaluation of the VMS system as a result of functional affordance scores. In fact, the fifth question investigated functional affordance and the test participants were required to select only the best VMS system.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants for the affordance-based questionnaire study were recruited among students and staff at Lund University, Sweden. Approximately two weeks before the experiment, information about the study was sent through a University mailing list to employees at Lund University. Participants were also recruited among students by contacting them at the end of lectures at the university. General information about the experiments was provided (e.g. possible dates, location and duration of the experiments, etc.). People interested in the experiments were given the possibility to express their interest by providing their name and contact information. Students at fire protection engineering program at Lund University were excluded from the recruitment process in order to ensure that the sample does not include participants fully aware of the research conducted. One day before the corresponding experimental trial, a message was sent to the test participants to remind them about the experiment. Given the within-subject experimental design, participants were split in four different experimental trials where the sequence of pairs was randomized in order to avoid sequence effects. Similarly, the position of the VMS systems on the two screens (A or B, i.e., left or right) was also randomized to avoid systematic errors. Pilot testing was also conducted in order to ensure that the questions proposed to the participants were correctly understood.

The first two trials were conducted in the A:B room in the Architectural building at Lund University, Sweden, respectively on the 22nd and 27th of November 2013. On 4th and 5th of December 2013 trials 3 and 4 respectively took place. Trials 3 and 4 were conducted in the EC3:109 room at the Economy building at Lund University, Sweden.

The day of each experiment, participants were gathered in the room with the two screens. Prior to start the tests, participants were told to take different seats in the room. Questionnaires were made available and participants were observing the screens (see Fig. 7
                              ).

Introductory information about the experiments was given by one of the researchers (including the number of questions, participants' right to withdraw and confidentiality of the answers). Participants were then told to imagine themselves being in a stopped car during a hypothetical tunnel evacuation scenario (see Fig. 8
                               for an example of the visualization of the two screens in the room). The hypothetical scenario was given to respondents in order to have them stating their preference in a setting which refers to a situation which might actually happen in reality. Once participants agreed to have fully understood the instruction, lights in the room were switched off. As the questionnaire had a within-subject design, the VMS systems were shown to the test participants who were asked to fill out the questionnaire and evaluate the pairs (A and B) of VMS systems. VMSs were showed blank during the description of the hypothetical scenario. Once all information was provided, a sound alarm went off (the alarm was based on British Standards (2013)), and the trial began. Inter-trial intervals were dependent on the slowest respondent of each group of participants, i.e. participants were left as much time they wanted to evaluate the VMS pairs. This choice has been driven by the experimental method in use (stated-preference rather than revealed preference). The hypothetical view from the car was created using the freeware Virtual Reality software Unity3D. After the participants evaluated the VMS systems through the affordance-based questionnaire, they were thanked and they were given a cinema ticket for their participation.

@&#RESULTS@&#

No significant impact of the background characteristics of the sample has been found on the results. Statistical testing has been performed in order to test the null hypothesis that the independent variables in the design of the Variable Message Sign (VMS) affect the preference of one sign over another. Repeated exact binomial tests with Bonferroni corrections have been performed (corrected significance 
                              
                                 
                                    α
                                    c
                                 
                                 =
                                 0.01
                              
                           ) to test this hypothesis for each comparison. In the present case, the null hypothesis is that two categories are equally likely to occur 
                              
                                 
                                    (
                                    
                                       
                                          p
                                          0
                                       
                                       =
                                       0.5
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                           . A summary of the results of is provided in Table 5
                           . It should be noted that the number of responses considered for binomial testing for each questions are different because participants stating (in Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4) that there were no differences among the designs were removed.

Conditional probabilities have been calculated in order to analyse the individual answers to the questions about sensory (Q1–Q2) and cognitive (Q3–Q4) affordances and their relation to the final choice of the VMS system (i.e., Q5), (see Fig. 9
                           ). This analysis is conducted for all tests A–E. This has been done by relating the answers in Q1–Q4 with the final answers in Q5 and calculating the percentages of the corresponding conditional probabilities. The matching between answers in Q1–Q4 and Q5 can then be analysed.

Three different conditions are possible. In the first case, there is agreement between the answers to Q1, Q2, Q3 or Q4 and the final preference of the design expressed in Q5; i.e., respondents choose consistently one of the two system designs (A or B). The second case is the disagreement between the design selected when answering to Q1, Q2, Q3 or Q4 and the final choice of the preferred design expressed in Q5. The third case relates to the cases in which respondents claim that designs are equally performing when answering to Q1, Q2, Q3 or Q4 and eventually choose one of the two systems when answering to Q5. For instance, the “Q1 → Q5” label in the x axis in Fig. 9 is used to indicate the case of the answers to Q5 in relation to the answer to Q1 (which may agree, disagree or have an equal stated preference in Q1). The higher is the percentage displayed in Fig. 9, the higher is the observed frequency of conditional probabilities representing the answers in Q1–Q4 in relation to the final choice of the VMS system (Q5).

Test A (written text in Swedish vs text an pictogram) shows that the higher matching of answers for the conditional probabilities is observed for sensory affordance. In fact, the highest observed agreements between questions are Q1 → Q5 (73%), and Q2 → Q5 (68%) (i.e. questions on sensory affordance vs questions on functional affordance). This indicates a stronger agreement between sensory affordance and the final choice of the VMS system in comparison with cognitive affordance. A similar trend is observed in Test C about the size of the panel (e.g. the agreement for Q1 → Q5 is 87%) and Test D on flashing lights where perfect agreement is found for the answer to Q1 and to Q5 (100% of participants answered B in Q5 if they answered B in Q1). In contrast, high agreement of answers are observed for Q3 → Q5 (79%) and Q4 → Q5 (85%) in TEST B about different pictorial symbols, as well as answers Q3 → Q5 (76%) in TEST E (written text in English vs Swedish). In those cases, cognitive affordance seems to have a higher agreement with the final choice of the VMS system.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This paper presents a method to evaluate the design of VMS for tunnel emergency evacuations. The ToA has been successfully employed to evaluate different variables and provide recommendations on VMS design. The use of the ToA for a preliminary qualitative assessment of VMS design is a simple method to evaluate the effectiveness of VMS designs for emergency evacuations and exclude designs which presents low affordances scores. The ToA has also been employed to develop an affordance-based questionnaire which has been administered to a sample of 62 participants through a within subject stated-preference study.

The ToA has been used as a tool for identifying potential design faults of evacuation systems early in the design process (Nilsson, 2009). By systematically exploring the sensory, cognitive, physical and functional affordances provided by an evacuation system, it should be possible to identify conflicts and non-optimal design. Hence, the theory can be used to analyse an array of possible system designs in order to rule out the least appropriate system. The two-step evaluation presented in this paper using the ToA permits the definition of a set of recommendations on the design of VMS such as the type of message coding to employ (e.g. text, pictograms, flashing lights, and their combination).

In general, conditional probabilities (see Fig. 9) seem to show that sensory or cognitive affordance may have different impacts on functional affordance and the subsequent final choice of a VMS system in relation to the comparison under consideration. Results indicate trends in the impact of certain sensory and cognitive features. The “emergency exit” pictogram (VMS system 5) generates significantly higher cognitive affordance if compared with the warning pictogram (VMS system 1) and this affects the final choice of a VMS system over another. The sign with warning symbols (VMS system 1) seems to generate higher sensory affordance if compared with the emergency exit pictogram (significant differences are observed only for Q1). This is deemed to be driven by the use of flashing lights in VMS system 5 and the use of amber rather than green in the pictogram.

The use of a bigger size of the panels (VMS system 1) is preferred over a smaller size (VMS system 4) because of the significantly higher sensory affordances they generate (Q1 in Test C shows a clear preference of the bigger panel).

If the pictogram employed is constant (TEST D), signs including flashing lights (VMS system 1) are preferred over signs without flashing lights (VMS system 3). Significant differences in preference for the VMS system including flashing lights have been found for both sensory and cognitive affordance (Q1, Q3 and Q4).

Descriptive statistics show that participants indicate a preference of the VMS including a small pictorial symbol over the VMS with text in Swedish (69% of the participants selected the VMS with pictorial symbol) and a preference of the VMS with the text in English and Swedish over VMS with the small pictorial symbol (67% of the participants selected the VMS with text in English and Swedish). Nevertheless, exact binomial tests with Bonferroni corrections indicated no significant statistical differences between the VMS including small pictorial symbols vs VMS including text in Swedish (p = 0.015 for Q5 in Test E) or text in Swedish and English (p = 0.012 for Q5 in Test A). The use of pictorial symbol generate higher sensory affordances (see Q1 and Q2 in TEST A and TEST E), but this benefit seems to be compensated by the higher cognitive affordances generated by the presence of text. For instance participants seems to prefer VMS system 2 (including text in Swedish and English) over VMS system 4 (including the use of a pictorial symbol in the left panel) in terms of cognitive affordance (see the results of binomial testing for Q3) and this has a strong correlation on their final choice of the sign. It is argued that this may be associated with the sample under consideration (mostly composed by Swedish and English speakers). Further testing is necessary to address this issue in relation to the type of population involved.

The analysis of the affordance-based questionnaire indicated three strong trends:
                        
                           •
                           The “emergency exit” pictorial symbol is preferred over the warning symbol (TEST B)

Bigger size of the panels are preferred over signs with smaller size (TEST C)

Signs including the use of flashing lights are preferred over signs without flashing lights (TEST D)

The present study has been carried out in order to provide recommendations for the design of VMS in a future tunnel, the Stockholm Bypass project. For this reason, one limitation of the present study is that the layout of the VMS system under consideration has been chosen in order to represent possible solutions that may be installed in the tunnel, i.e., different VMS system layout could have been investigated if the study was more generic (i.e. different dimensions and layout of the panels, different written messages and pictograms, etc.). Despite this limitation, the design features used in this study reflect current engineering practice, thus general recommendations on the design of VMS systems can be provided.

It should be noted that the sample under consideration in the questionnaire study included only one person with visual impairment. For this reason, the results of this study should be carefully evaluated if applied to population which might include a larger portion of people with visual impairments or colour blindness.

One criticism that the present methodology can receive is that the scores obtained in the preliminary evaluation are based on a subjective evaluation of the authors based on the literature, rather than experimental data. For this reason, the suggested methodology includes a second step consisting of an experimental evaluation of the affordances provided by the VMS. The preliminary evaluation of the designs has been made with the scope to remove the designs which are clearly deemed to not perform well and provide a simple methodology for practitioners. In contrast, the assessment of the affordance scores for possible suitable VMS systems is based on experimental testing. It should be noted that the identification of a final “best” VMS system solution would require a more detailed analysis of different design combinations (i.e., a complete experimental design with all possible combinations of features) as well as multiple cross validation of results using different experimental methods (including testing in situ). Nevertheless, this work represents the first attempt to discuss and perform a preliminary evaluation of some of the main VMS variables for road tunnel evacuation which reflect the most common designs in use in current engineering practice.

Another limitation is associated with the data collection method employed during the affordance-based questionnaire study, i.e. the use of within-subject stated preference approach. The main advantage of a stated preference approach is its ability to control the choice context and the independent variables, while the main disadvantages are that individuals are not committed to perform choices in accordance with their stated preference response (Kroes and Sheldon, 1988). Nevertheless, empirical studies have shown reasonable correspondence between stated preference and revealed preferences, see for instance Hensher (1992), Khattak et al. (1993), Wardman et al. (1997, 1996). Similarly, despite pilot testing has been carried out in order to ensure that the questions were correctly understood, the use of an ad hoc affordance-based questionnaire would need dedicated validation efforts. In particular, this is needed to test that each question is actually evaluating the type of affordance under scrutiny. Future studies should provide a systematic assessment of possible questionnaires to evaluate evacuation systems using the ToA. In addition, future research could further investigate the methodology by using a revealed preference approach, by for instance directly measuring the time needed by test participants to notice a sign.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The use of the Theory of Affordances (ToA) is proposed in this paper for the evaluation of the Variable Message Sign (VMS) designs for tunnel emergency evacuations. A two-step process has been presented, including a preliminary qualitative evaluation of the affordances associated with different VMS systems and a subsequent use of an affordance-based stated-preference within subject questionnaire study. Results show that the “emergency exit” pictorial symbol is preferred over the warning symbol due to increased cognitive affordance, an increased size of the panels and the use of flashing lights are preferred since they generate higher sensory affordance.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This paper is part of the project “Stockholm Bypass, tunnel safety studies”, co-funded by the EU Trans-European transport network (TEN-T). The work presented in this paper is a sub-part of this project and it is called “Evacuation route design”. The authors wish to acknowledge Sara Petterson (MTO Säkerhet), Andrew Pryke (Faveo Projektledning) and Jörgen Norén (Lund University) for their support. The authors acknowledge Per-Erik Isberg for his useful suggestions on statistical issues. The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

