@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Systematic engineering tools for describing and improving medication administration processes at rural healthcare facilities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Providing a clear road map to identify potential issues in a clinical activity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Medical staff not exchanging the up-to-date MARs promptly.


                        
                        
                           
                           Nurses spent a lot of time seeking tools, supplies, or missing drugs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Nurses prepare more than one patient's drugs at a time out a convenience.


                        
                        
                           
                           Some drugs or supplies are stored in inappropriate locations due to limited space.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Electronic health record

Hierarchical task analysis

Medication administration process

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study demonstrates a series of systematic methods for mapping medication administration processes and for elaborating violations of work standards at two rural hospitals. Thirty-four observational periods were conducted to capture the details of clinical activities, and hierarchical task analysis (HTA) was used to demonstrate the current medication administration process. Facility nurse managers in five units across the two facilities participated in focus group discussions to validate the observational data and to generate a reliable context-appropriate medication administration process. The potential errors or misconduct when passing the drugs were identified, such as unsafe storage and transportation of drugs from room to room. Those hazards would cause drug contamination, loss, or access by unauthorized individuals. Hospitals without 24-hour pharmacy coverage and other interruptions would hinder the medication administration process. Preparing drugs for more than one patient at a time would increase the risk of passing the drugs to the wrong patient. This study shows the use of observation and focus groups to describe and identify violations in the medication administration process. A clear road map for continuous clinical process improvement obtained from the current study could be used to help future health information technology implementation.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In 2009, President Obama signed a $19.2 billion stimulus package, the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, to incentivize medical practices to adopt and implement electronic health record (EHR) systems. In order to provide effective information exchange for the healthcare systems in the United States, the legislation envisioned the utilization of EHR systems. Hospitals and clinics implementing such a system could receive bonus payments, as long as their databases meet information-exchange regulations (Blumenthal, 2009, 2010, 2011; Department of Health and Human Services 2010).

However, the transition of daily clinical documentation from a paper-based system to electronic-based records would impact the conventional workflow. Many medical practitioners, facility managers, or stakeholders could underestimate the impact of this transition (Chan et al., 2006; Ghosh et al., 2006). Due to the changes involved with using the new Health Information Technology (HIT), EHR, hospitals and clinics seek professional assistance for evaluating the new workflows. For example, hospitals either seek aid from contracting consulting services or by establishing the quality assurance units within their facilities (Cendán and Good, 2006; Guite et al., 2006; Harders et al., 2006). Those interventions can help the facilities to perform process mapping, identify problems, aid in setting expectations for achieving HIT goals, and ensure that quality of care is retained or enhanced while having new technology.

On the other hand, the changes due to adapting new HIT could have greater impact in small, rural facilities than in hospitals in urban areas. In general, rural facilities have fewer financial capabilities for seeking professional opinions or to invest in advanced technological options (DesRoches et al., 2008; Jha et al., 2009a,b; Middleton et al., 2005). Thus, in order to help rural hospitals accommodate the new EHR system for workflow transitions, the main purpose of this study is to introduce systematic methodologies and to guide medical professionals in modeling and describing the clinical practices in detailed steps. Rural hospitals are defined as non-federal and short-term general acute care hospitals that are located in rural areas. The U.S. Census Bureau (2010) defines a rural area as an area with a population of less than 2500 people. This study seeks to elaborate on the continuous improvement to demonstrate: (1) how to map clinical practice into visual aids, (2) how to conduct valid and reliable field study in healthcare settings, and (3) how to conduct successful group discussions for improving clinical practices. Once the practitioners (e.g., medical staff or quality specialists, etc.) are familiar with those methodologies, the same study procedure can be applied to various clinical practices. This study mainly focuses on a specific clinical practice, the medication administration process, to demonstrate the applications of the systematic tools in rural hospitals.

The medication administration process is a series of complex tasks conducted by nurses in healthcare facilities (Alper et al., 2012; Carayon, 2006; Fraind et al., 2002; Grigg et al., 2011; Keohane et al., 2008; Lane et al., 2006). The most relevant studies have focused on applying information technology (IT) (e.g., the barcode scanning system or EHR system) to medication administration so as to prevent medical errors and to increase patient care safety (Agrawal and Glasser, 2009; Carayon, 2010; Cescon and Etchells, 2008; Koppel et al., 2008; Patterson et al., 2006, 2004; Poon et al., 2008, 2009, 2006). In general, the underlying medication administration process should satisfy the “five rights” principle. “Five rights” means that the nurse should give the right medication to the right patient in the right dose by the right route at the right time (Cescon and Etchells, 2008; Eisenhauer et al., 2007; Grigg et al., 2011; Koppel et al., 2008). In addition, some literature also mentions a sixth right for medication administration – the right documentation (Pape et al., 2005; Roach, 2000; Salmon and Pomerantz, 2009). Nurses should record the patient's status prior to administering medications. The nurses must also make a note on the patient's record, along with the dose given, time given, and the route given (Harrison and Weiss, 2010).

Even with the “five rights” principle firmly established, it can still be a challenge to implement a standard procedure that is safe for administering medications in hospitals. The differences between units within a facility or differences between facilities are the primary causes of this challenge. In particular, it is not easy to have an identical standard work procedure for medication administration in these healthcare facilities due to the differences in physical layouts, equipment installations, workforce deployments, organizational culture, and practice policies across the facilities.

The purpose of this study is to investigate the differences between units within rural healthcare facilities focusing on the medication administration process. Based on the findings, this study can provide insights into the medication administration workflow to demonstrate the violations of work standards within this clinical activity. Further, the current study provides a clear road map for the clinical process and it can be used to help future health information technology implementation.

@&#METHOD@&#

The work system analysis scheme (Karsh and Alper, 2005; Kleiner, 2008) was modified and used in the current study to identify a target clinical task as well as the stakeholders within a practice. The work system analysis scheme would offer a systematic methodology to design, develop, evaluate, and establish interventions for achieving a successful work system (Carayon et al., 2014; Kleiner, 2008). In this study, the detailed steps of the work system analysis are shown in Fig. 1
                      for examining a specific clinical activity. Facilitating the work system analysis approach would help give an understanding of how a system works, how individual components impact the system, and then discover the flaws embedded in the clinical activities (Karsh et al., 2014; Wiegmann et al., 2010). Karsh and Alper (2005) have focused on using the work system analysis methodology (Fig. 1) to search out the research/improvement boundaries in the healthcare settings. However, detailed step-by-step clinical activities were not included in their study. Thus, this study aims to specifically investigate the detailed medication administration process while adopting the methodology from Karsh and Alper (2005). Demonstrating a step-by-step work system improvement process also can benefit rural hospitals because of those hospitals usually have fewer resources or manpower to conduct a systematic process evaluation and improvement (AHA, 2011; Bowens et al., 2010).

In this study, the first author of the study was the representative lead of the research team. The main duties of the lead were to compile the observational data and to mediate the focus group study (Step 3 in Fig. 1). Briefly, direct observation and focus groups were used to investigate the medication administration process within rural hospitals. Two trained human factors engineering graduate students independently completed field studies by shadowing nurses who were administering medications to patients in the first round of medication administration (morning routines). Faculty investigators monitored and reviewed the observational data to ensure the quality of the study.

After observation, the data from the qualitative field notes were reviewed and transcribed into medication administration flowcharts for each department and facility. Follow-up focus groups for nurse managers in each facility were conducted to identify the “context-appropriate” medication administration process for their rural small-scale hospitals. Focus groups are not only suitable for examining how knowledge and ideas operate within a given cultural context but are also better for exploring how those participants' opinions are constructed (Kitzinger, 1995).

Task analysis (TA) was used to consolidate and summarize the research data (e.g., observational and focus groups) from the medication administration process. Specifically, hierarchical task analysis (HTA) was used in this study. It is not only a tool to describe step-by-step detailed tasks, but it can also be presented in a visualized and hierarchical manner for demonstrating the contents and sequences of tasks (Shepherd and Stammers, 2005). For example, HTA was widely used in the aviation industry for maintenance and inspection, and it was successfully implemented in aviation maintenance technical documentation (Drury, 2008).

This study focused mainly on documenting the medication administration workflow in the morning routines at two small rural hospitals in South Carolina. Due to staff from other departments (e.g., pharmacy or lab) not working after 5:00 PM, as well as for documenting the maximum amount of detailed activities involving patients, nurses, physicians, support staff, and patient's family, the observations of the medication administration processes were only conducted during the morning routines.

A structured field note sheet was used to document the nurses' activities associated with medication administration. Detailed documentation procedures were as follows: First, researchers recorded the time when a new task occurred. Second, a specific number was assigned to a patient and was recorded on the field notes. In general, the numbers were assigned in the order of patients who receive care. For example, the ninth patient to receive medications would be tagged as number 209 in the second day of observation. The type and number of medications for each patient were also documented on the field notes. The forms of the medication can be categorized into eight distinguishing types: oral medication, intravenous, subcutaneous, liquid, cream, patch, intramuscular, and powder. In addition, interruptions in a clinical activity have been addressed as a factor to increase risk of medication errors (Elganzouri et al., 2009; Wakefield et al., 1998). Collecting interruptions data can help identify errors to a specific task within the whole medication administration process. Thus, during the observation, if any interruption was observed during a certain task, researchers would place a mark on that task.

Regarding the medication administration, two major tasks were recorded on the field notes: the nursing task and the documentation task. Nursing tasks refer to those that involve activities for patient care, such as taking care of a patient's wound, assisting the patient's daily lives, explaining the effect of medications, assessing the patient's cognitive status, or communicating with other medical staff. The documentation tasks refer to the regular charting, verifying the patients' intake of correct medications, and confirming that patients received their medications properly. All observational data obtained from the study were kept confidential. No personally identifiable nursing staff data were recorded, and no patient information was recorded for this study. A partial screenshot of the data collection sheet is shown in Fig. 2
                        .

After the data collection, two graduate research assistants verified the reliability of this study by cross-checking each other's research field notes. Faculty investigators monitored and reviewed the observational data to ensure the quality of the study. The qualitative field note data were then transcribed into medication administration flowcharts (e.g., a preliminary workflow diagram).

This study was conducted in five different units within two rural South Carolina hospitals (four units in Hospital A and one unit in Hospital B) from January to July 2011. The four units in Hospital A were (1) Labor, Delivery and Nursery; (2) Long-Term Care; (3) Medical/Surgical and Pediatric; and (4) Orthopedics and Post-Partum. For Hospital B, the study was only conducted in the Medical/Surgical department. In addition, there were 90 and 55 beds in Hospitals A and B, respectively.

Nurses from the two hospitals were invited to participate in this observational study. Facility managers informed all nurses about this study using the following methods: internal staff meetings, facility newsletters, and bulletin board postings. Participation was voluntary, and all participants were recruited due to their initial willingness and availability. Managers forwarded a list of voluntary participants (nurses) to the research team in their respective units. The research team followed up on the list to identify plausible voluntary participants in the observational study based on time allowances.

Ten registered nurses (7 RNs from Hospital A and 3 RNs from Hospital B) participated in the observational study and all of them were full-time nurses in the facilities. Researchers disseminated information about the observation study procedure before the study began, and all participants signed an informed consent form. Participants could withdraw from the study at any time. Both observation and focus group study protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Clemson University.

Each focus group discussion was held at each study facility, and each session was around 45–60 min. There were a total of six and five participants from Hospital A and B, respectively. The participants included facility IT managers and nurse managers from each unit. None of the focus group participants were involved in the prior observation study. The group discussion used semi-structured interviews with unit managers to confirm observation results. The major purposes of the group discussions were two-fold: (1) to validate the medication administration flowcharts to ensure that they reflect current processes, and (2) to request that unit managers identify any misconduct and violation of work standards based on the observational data. To ensure the quality of the context-appropriate medication administration flowcharts, the unit managers in the two facilities confirmed the detailed procedures associated with medication administration. This study protocol also measured the accuracy of the results of the observational field study.

Before a group discussion, medication administration workflow charts for each unit within a facility were presented to all participants. The researcher acted as a mediator to give a brief introduction about the current workflow based on the observational findings. Later, participants could freely critique how well the work flowcharts describe the ideal procedures in the unit. During the group discussion, the researcher would go through the workflow step-by-step to motivate discussion. The group discussion data were recorded in the notes and marked on the preliminary workflow charts accordingly. Data analysis mainly focused on differences between observed and discussed tasks contained in the flowcharts. New and context-appropriate medication administration flowcharts for each unit within the two facilities were generated in response to the focus group data. Fig. 3
                         lists the detailed data collection procedures from the field study and focus groups.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Thirty-four observational periods (21 patients from Hospital A, and 13 patients from Hospital B) were conducted during the morning medication administration rounds (starting at 8:00 AM) at the two hospitals. The observation hours for Hospital A and B were eight and six hours, respectively. Table 1
                      summarizes the number of patients, nurses, and hours from the field study, as well as the number of participants for the two focus group discussions. Based on the observational data, medication administration processes in the five units across the two facilities were depicted in flowcharts to demonstrate the step-by-step work procedures. Fig. 4
                      shows an example of a preliminary workflow diagram for passing medications within the Medical/Surgical and Pediatric Unit at Hospital A.


                     Carayon et al. (2007) and Wolf et al. (2006) have elaborated the medical staff's work in detail using qualitative and quantitative tools, and they provided insightful analysis regarding how work system factors impact clinical activity. This study adopted these methodologies to elicit the current status of medication administration processes in the two rural healthcare facilities by using visualized presentations, such as flowcharts, for systematic process descriptions.

The medication administration process in the Medical/Surgical and Pediatric Unit at Hospital A (Fig. 4) consisted of 24 independent tasks, including eight distinguishing tasks such as documentation, process, decision, preparation, delay, inspection/confirmation, transportation, and storage. The symbols for each type of task in the flowchart are defined by the International Standard Organization (ISO, 1985). However, in the flowchart practitioners can also depict customized symbols or notes to denote the work steps by themselves. For example, the thunderbolt symbol in Fig. 4 represents an interruption observed during the medication administration process.

The entire medication administration process (Fig. 4) starts by reviewing the patients' paper-based medication administration records (MARs), which are usually printed out and put in the patients' folders accordingly. At the beginning of each morning medication pass, nurses retrieved all patient MARs and made a note of each patient's whole day medication pass schedule on paper or in their private notebooks. The major purpose of this was to prioritize their medication administration tasks.

In one scenario, the nurses needed to log into a medication station by typing in their usernames and passwords. Since the medication station was located in the nurse station, some interruptions were observed while nurses were using it. Sometimes, the nurse would need extra tools for medication preparation, such as a medicine cutter to split pills. Once the nurse had prepared all medications for the patient, the nurse carried them along with the patient's MAR to the patient's room. In addition, some interruptions were observed while preparing medications or on the way to the patient's room.

Before passing drugs to the patients, the nurses would first sterilize their hands, then they would greet the patient and ask for the patient's name and date of birth. The purpose of greeting and asking the patient's name and birth date was twofold: to verify the correct patient and to help the nurse identify the patient's cognitive status and assess whether the patient was ready to take the medications. If a patient was ready for the medications, the nurse would administer them. Then, the nurse needed to confirm that the patient had applied the medication properly. On the other hand, the patient may not be ready for the medication, in which case the nurse would take the patient's medications back to the nurse station and store them in a cabinet drawer located in a chamber beside the nurse station.

After administering medications to the patient and the patient taking the medications properly, the nurse crossed out the time and names of the medications on the patient's MAR. Before leaving the patient's room, the nurse also checked and initialed his/her name on the round sheet that was usually hanging on the wall in the patient's room.

Follow-up focus groups were conducted to validate the preliminary workflow diagram for the medication administration process within the two facilities to ensure that they reflected current processes, and to request that unit managers identify any misconduct and violation of work standards based on the observational data. Based on the feedback and consensus from the focus group participants, researchers compiled the data and modified the preliminary workflow diagrams for medication administration into context-appropriate workflow charts. These updated flowcharts not only present a series of work procedures that fit the work standard, but also better fit in with the organizational culture or settings in a certain unit. For example, interruptions were observed infrequently in a particular unit due to the medication station not being located in the nurse station, so the nurses had fewer chances to have conversation while accessing drugs.


                        Fig. 5
                         shows a context-appropriate medication process in the Medical/Surgical and Pediatric Unit at Hospital A (this flowchart is a modification of the flowchart in Fig. 4). Focus group participants (facility nurse managers and frontline nurses) raised eight concerns regarding the preliminary observed medication administration process.

The eight concerns contained in the medication administration workflow included: (1) Note taking tasks for the medication schedule. Focus group participants indicated that making a note for the medication schedule was not a formal medication administration procedure, but just individual preference. Therefore, the task should not be included in the standard operating procedure. (2) Interruptions at the nurse station. Since the medication station is located near the nurse station, another nurse generally interrupted the medication preparation tasks by engaging in conversation. Thus, nurses should avoid interrupting others who are engaged in the medication preparation task. (3) Availability of the medication. A standard operating procedure should be created for when medications are not available for the patients. Nurses should know how to seek help from the pharmacy, other units, or supervisors regarding missing drugs. (4) Get essential tools for medication preparation in advance. It was observed that nurses left the medication station unattended (e.g., left the tray at the medication station opened) when obtaining tools for medication preparation which could be a safety issue within the facility. (5) Administration of medications to patients without checking their cognitive and physical statuses. It is important to evaluate the patient's status before passing drugs. For example, some patients should not take any medication with a low blood sugar. (6) Check round sheets and administer drugs at the same time. Participants also indicated that checking the round sheets was not a part of the medication administration process. The round sheets should be checked once every hour, but not after passing the medicine. (7) Recheck if the patient is available to receive medications. When the patient was not ready to take medications, nurses needed to ensure that the medications were stored securely. However, focus group participants could not tell if there was any policy or regulation for nurses to follow regarding when to recheck a patient's availability for the medications. (8) Initial the MAR in the patient's room. Participants came to a consensus that nurses should initial the medication record on the MARs immediately after distributing medication in the patients' rooms.


                        Figs. 4 and 5 represent medication administration process flowcharts based on the data from observation and the focus group study, respectively. Those flowcharts contain series of task steps as boxes in order and demonstrate the framework of the particular clinical activity. However, each task box in a flowchart could embed in various sub-tasks in detail. To have a deeper investigation of the work procedure, the HTA would be a proper tool for presenting the tasks in a hierarchical structure and sequential workflow (Shepherd and Stammers, 2005). The HTA also has the advantage of analyzing at practical framework toward a specific goal and having the work steps in the correct order. Each task in the HTA needs to be assigned with an ordinal number, which is used to present the level of the tasks or goals. In the HTA, task steps (activities) can be broken down into clusters with further analysis of those sub-groups (Lane et al., 2006; Phipps et al., 2008).


                        Fig. 6
                         shows an HTA diagram for the context-appropriate medication administration process within five units across two rural hospitals. Short executing descriptions were provided in the HTA diagram to demonstrate how to achieve a set of goals (plan). For example, to achieve the second level plan, Plan 1 (review MARs), the practitioners need to finish 1.1 “gather all MARs for the shift”, 1.2 “read MARs” and 1.3 “prioritize the medication administration schedule” in that order. Furthermore, to execute 1.2 “read MARs,” practitioners need to finish tasks 1.2.1 to 1.2.5 in sequence. Those executing descriptions can also be used to distinguish various patterns in the medication administration process among units or facilities.

An HTA can present not only a series of detailed procedures in a hierarchical structure diagram, but can also present them in a tabular format for demonstrating the detailed evaluations in each task. In general, the hierarchical diagram is more easily understood by the users, but the tabular format would be more appropriate for use in evaluating and improving the tasks (Shepherd and Stammers, 2005). Therefore, Table 2
                         shows a tabular HTA for addressing all the potential violations of work standards in the medication administration process from observational and focus group data.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

From the results of this study, potential problems with the medication administration process within the two rural hospitals can be summarized into a few categories. First, the exchange of medication information among medical staff is via paper-based MARs. The disadvantage of using paper-based MARs is that staff members do not exchange the up-to-date MARs promptly. By using paper-based MARs, there is no mechanism for informing the nurses that the MARs are updated/modified by physicians or the pharmacy, unless the nurses print out the paper-based MARs and check them regularly. Hughes and Blegen (2008) also considered that being unable to access up-to-date drug information for patients is a working condition that could facilitate medication error.


                     Shepley and Davies (2003) have indicated that the amount of time spent by nurses in walking would affect their time spent at the bedside. The current study has observed issues with nurses spending a lot of time seeking tools, medical supplies, or missing medications during medication preparation (e.g., seeking a glucometer for checking blood sugar). Some nurses do not have the good habit of returning a shared tool back to a fixed location after using it. Thus, individuals have to search for the tool elsewhere. In addition, nurses would temporarily leave the medication preparation site to obtain the tool but leave the medication cabinet opened. As a result, drugs could be contaminated or lost.

Third, it was observed that nurses would prepare medications for more than one patient at a time in order to reduce their walking distance or their trips from room to room and from the patient's room to the medication room. Preparing drugs for more than one patient at a time could cause the drugs to be administered to the wrong patient, and this issue has been recognized as the second most common fatal medication error from the FDA's medication error record (the most common fatal medication error is a drug overdose) (Phillips et al., 2001).

It has been noted that improper medication storage during the medication administration process would increase the risks of drug contamination and the accessing of drugs by unauthorized individuals (Kapborg and Svensson, 1999). In the current study, similar violations were observed. Due to the nurses transporting too many medications at a time from the medication room to the patient rooms, it was also observed that the drugs were put in nurses' pockets. Furthermore, due to the limited physical space in these rural hospitals, some medications or medical supplies are stored in inappropriate locations. For example, IV fluid bags are usually too big to fit in the medication station or cart. Thus, in one of the studied sites, IV bags were stored in the utility room alongside cleaning detergents.

Fifth, a logistical issue regarding the stocking of medications or supplies on time was observed as well. Sometimes, nurses could not pass drugs to the patients due to the pharmacy staff not stocking the inventory on time. This was caused by hospitals lacking a 24-hour pharmacy to prepare the morning round medications in advance. Henriksen et al. (2005) reported that for hospitals which do not have a 24-hour pharmacy, high-risk drugs would be accessed and administered without proper pharmacy reviews.

The final common issue observed during the medication administration process was that interruptions occurred frequently. Interruptions have been recognized as a primary hazard leading errors in medical settings (Flynn et al., 1999; Kohn et al., 2000; Westbrook et al., 2010), especially during the medication administration process (Biron et al., 2009; Relihan et al., 2010; Rivera-Rodriguez and Karsh, 2010). Interruptions could happen when nurses talk to each other in the hallway while traveling, at the nurse station while medication was being prepared, or when responding to other staff while engaging with patients.

Facilities often have their own culture or regulations for the medication administration process. Those special regulations could evolve from the “constraints” present within their facilities. For example, one of the rural healthcare facilities under study uses a small common refrigerator with a lock to store controlled medication (e.g., insulin) due to the facility having no budget to buy a medication cabinet with a cooling function. Thus, the workflow for obtaining drugs is different from other facilities/units. Although this study provides a series of context-appropriate medication administration workflows for two rural hospitals, the study findings are not expected to apply generally to all other facilities.

The other limitation in this study would be that the observations were only conducted during the morning shifts, and this observational time period may affect the frequency of interactions with other staff from various units. For example, the morning medication administration started at 8:00 AM, which was the same schedule for the pharmacy technicians to restock medication carts. Thus, more frequent interruptions by the pharmacy staff were observed while nurses were preparing medications in the morning.

While shadowing the nurses' medication administration processes, the number and type of medications were recorded by engineering research assistants. Since the research assistants may not have sufficient medical knowledge to determine the amount of the drug and the correct path to deliver the medication during the observation, the study could be improved by recruiting some medical professionals (e.g., nursing students) to help with data collection in the future.

In this study, the research team did not collect/record any demographic information about the participants from either the field study or the focus group. Yet, it would be meaningful to analyze participants' performance based on, their age, gender, education, or experience. This study focuses on the demonstration of the methodology for mapping the medication administration process. In addition, the amount of time to achieve a single task within the medication administration process were collected, but it was not reported since the recorded time would be associated with the evaluation of nurses' performance, which is not within the scope of the current study.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study provides a clear road map for demonstrating the use of a systematic methodology to describe and to identify the potential issues in a clinical activity. The daily medical activities were captured via field studies, and the detailed clinical workflows were mapped using visual aids such as flowcharts or an HTA diagram. Focus groups were conducted in the healthcare facilities that involved the relevant medical staff participating in the workflow improvement process. Through the detailed task analysis, staff in two rural hospitals had the chance to review their everyday clinical practices.

The healthcare reform act in the U.S. is currently taking effect. It is a good starting point for reviewing clinical activity while planning or implementing a new HIT system (e.g., EHR) in the sector. However, the practitioners should realize that process improvement or workflow redesign is a continuous journey. Workflow will keep evolving due to changes in tools, equipment, physical settings, regulations, or even facility culture (Zink, 2014). Thus, the basic skill of modeling clinical activity is essential for medical practitioners to retain sustainability by improving clinical practices. Make the process improvement activity a usual routine in the healthcare community, thus maintaining the safety of care and increasing the quality of care.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

