@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Beyond safety outcomes: An investigation of the impact of safety climate on job satisfaction, employee engagement and turnover using social exchange theory as the theoretical framework

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Safety climate perceptions linked with employee outcomes beyond accidents, injuries


                        
                        
                           
                           Employee safety climate perceptions were linked to job satisfaction and engagement


                        
                        
                           
                           Employee safety climate perceptions were linked to objective turnover rate


                        
                        
                           
                           Job satisfaction mediated between safety climate, employee engagement, turnover rate


                        
                        
                           
                           Social exchange theory was used to explain the relationships


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Safety climate

Job satisfaction

Employee engagement

Objective turnover rate

Social exchange theory

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Safety climate, a measure of the degree to which safety is perceived by employees to be a priority in their company, is often implicated as a key factor in the promotion of injury-reducing behavior and safe work environments. Using social exchange theory as a theoretical basis, this study hypothesized that safety climate would be related to employees' job satisfaction, engagement, and turnover rate, highlighting the beneficial effects of safety climate beyond typical safety outcomes. Survey data were collected from 6207 truck drivers from two U.S. trucking companies. The objective turnover rate was collected one year after the survey data collection. Results showed that employees' safety climate perceptions were linked to employees' level of job satisfaction, engagement, and objective turnover rate, thus supporting the application of social exchange theory. Job satisfaction was also a significant mediator between safety climate and the two human resource outcomes (i.e., employee engagement and turnover rate). This study is among the first to assess the impact of safety climate beyond safety outcomes among lone workers (using truck drivers as an exemplar).
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Safety climate, the degree to which employees perceive that safety is prioritized in their company (Zohar, 2010), is often implicated as a key factor in the promotion of injury-reducing behavior and safe work environments. Research examining how safety climate can impact non-accident and injury outcomes of workers is underdeveloped as compared to the impact on more traditional safety outcomes (e.g., safety behaviors and accident rates). This study aims to address these gaps in the literature and makes the following contributions: 1) it examines how safety climate perceptions at both the group and organization levels might directly and differentially predict employee outcomes; 2) it examines the mediating effects of job satisfaction between safety climate and two types of human resources outcomes (i.e., engagement and turnover rate); 3) it draws from the social exchange theory as a theoretical basis for the hypothesized relationships; and 4) the study is among the first to assess how safety climate may impact these outcomes (e.g., perceived engagement and objective turnover) for lone workers in an industry (e.g., trucking) where turnover is very high and drivers may not have many opportunities to interact with their coworkers or supervisors.

Most safety climate research thus far has focused on traditional work environments in which supervisors and workers interact regularly under the same roof. Huang et al. (2013) were among the first to extend safety climate research to the population of mobile remote/lone workers (i.e., truck drivers). Based on the etiology approaches of climates (i.e., structural, attraction-selection-attrition, and symbolic interactionist (Schneider and Reichers, 1983)), Huang et al. (2013) found that lone workers, truck drivers in particular, did form safety climate perceptions of their companies and these perceptions have an impact on their safety behaviors and other safety-related outcomes. Huang et al. (2013) suggested that, for example, truck drivers may form their safety climate perceptions based on whether good safety training is provided and how well the truck is maintained in their companies. They may also form their perceptions based on interactions with their supervisors/dispatchers using electronic devices or the telephone. The current study seeks to extend Huang et al.’s (2013) study by examining the impact of safety climate for truck drivers beyond typical safety outcomes.

While the research examining the effects of safety climate on health- and injury-related outcomes has proliferated in recent years, a dearth of information exists on how safety climate may affect employee outcomes beyond injury. The current paper uses social exchange theory (Blau, 1960) as a general framework to explain how employee perceptions of safety climate may lead to employee outcomes other than those traditionally studied regarding safety (e.g., accidents and injuries).

Social exchange theory posits that in interdependent relationships, transactions between parties beget a norm of reciprocity and, possibly, quid pro quo reciprocity (Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005; Uhl-Bien and Maslyn, 2003). The reciprocity norm (Gouldner, 1960) specifies that favorable treatment received by one party obligates him/her to provide favorable treatment in return. That is, when one party provides a benefit, the receiving party is obligated to respond in kind. The reverse would then also be true; when negative treatment is shown, negative treatment or poor behavior would be reciprocated. As opposed to receiving tangible benefits or commodities in economic exchanges, the rendering of benefits in social exchanges is discretionary (Aryee et al., 2002).

The application of the social exchange theory and the reciprocity norm to organizations has been supported in previous studies (e.g., Eisenberger et al., 1990). For example, the perceptions of organizational support for, and investment in, employees creates an obligation among employees in providing treatment favorable to the organization in return (Dejoy et al., 2004). In other words, employees respond accordingly to how they perceive they are treated by their organization (Mearns et al., 2010). In fact, Dejoy et al. (2010) have found support for the application of social exchange theory in the context of safety climate, such that management commitment to workplace safety functions as part of the social exchange dynamics in that employees were found to react more positively when they perceived greater levels of organizational support for workplace safety.

The connection between safety climate perceptions and management commitment to safety has been grounded in both theoretical reviews and empirical findings. Based on a review article published by Cohen (1977), Zohar (1980) listed multiple characteristics of safe organizations: management commitment to safety, high rank and status of safety officers, emphasis being placed on safety training, open communication between management and workers, frequent safety inspections, good housekeeping and environmental control, a stable workforce, and promotion and recognizing of safety (Cohen, 1977; Zohar, 1980). The current study follows the same argument based on the social exchange theory, such that employees who work in a company with positive safety climate are more likely to perceive organizational commitment to and support for safety as beneficial to their personal well-being. They are also more likely to reciprocate by engaging in safer behaviors, thereby reducing the occurrences of accidents and injuries (Hofmann et al., 2003). In addition to the greater motivation to perform more safely at work, a positive safety climate is also expected to lead to other benefits beyond traditional safety outcomes, such as greater job satisfaction and organizational commitment (e.g., Cropanzano and Mitchell, 2005; Eisenberger et al., 1986; Michael et al., 2005).

In this study, two specific types of employee outcomes were examined: (1) psychosocial factors and (2) human resource outcomes. Job satisfaction was used as the indicator of psychosocial outcomes while employee engagement and turnover were used to represent human resource outcomes.

Job satisfaction is a specific job attitude relating to the reaction an individual has to either their work overall or specific facets of the job (Judge and Kammeyer-Mueller, 2012). Employee job satisfaction has been shown to be an important outcome for organizations as it is related to variables such as performance on the job (Judge et al., 2001; Riketta, 2008) and employee turnover intentions (Tett and Meyer, 1993). Morrow and Crum (1998) were among the first to assess the relationship between safety climate perceptions and job satisfaction and found that railroad workers' perceptions of organizational safety climate were positively predictive of employees’ satisfaction. A recent meta-analysis by Clarke (2010) found that individual safety climate perceptions are directly related to employee job satisfaction. The author reasoned that this relationship exists due to the fact that positive safety climate perceptions indicate to employees that a basic need for safety at work is met and may result in their positive feelings toward the job. This is in line with the traditional needs theories (e.g., Maslow, 1954) which postulate that job satisfaction is determined by how well the job or the organization is able to satisfy certain employee needs such as safety.

Additionally, as discussed earlier, employees with positive safety climate perceptions are more likely to perceive support from their organizations as favorable treatment and commitment to their personal well-being. This may then be more likely to create greater motivation to perform safely at work, and also lead to other beneficial outcomes for the organization, such as improved job satisfaction (Michael et al., 2005). Therefore, we propose the following hypothesis:
                              Hypothesis 1a
                              Employee safety climate perceptions (both organizational-level and group-level safety climate) that are more positive will relate to higher levels of employee job satisfaction.

The human resource outcomes assessed in the current study have both a subjective and an objective component. Engagement, a subjective component, can be thought of as a persistent and pervasive positive work-related state of mind whereby employees feel vigorous, dedicated, and absorbed in their work (Schaufeli et al., 2002). Job engagement is also conceptualized as a motivational state whereby employees invest their physical, emotional, and cognitive resources into the work role and job performance (Kahn, 1990). While job satisfaction and job engagement are related concepts in that they both have affective dimensions, the two constructs are conceptually distinct. Warr and Inceoglu (2012) differentiate the two based on employee behaviors. Engagement is a relatively active or directed state whereby employees invest resources to attain a goal, whereas satisfaction can be viewed as a more passive feeling about goal attainment.

Support has previously been found for a meta-analytic relationship between safety climate and aspects of safety engagement. Nahrgang et al. (2011) found that not only were safety climate perceptions positively related to engagement, but safety climate accounted for more variance in engagement than other job resources (e.g., social support). The findings of Nahrgang et al. (2011) are in line with the social exchange theoretical framework, such that management commitment to safety signals to employees that not only has management fulfilled the employee's implicit psychological contract, but that management cares about employees. It can be argued that when employees perceive that their organization is investing resources and providing a safe work environment for the employees' benefit, employees will then reciprocate by investing more of their personal resources into their job performance (i.e., greater engagement).

Other safety climate scholars have also obtained similar findings supporting the positive relationship between safety climate and employees’ commitment to their organizations (e.g., Dejoy et al., 2010), which further supports the social exchange argument in that employees tend to be more attached or committed to the organization when they perceive organizational concern for their personal well-being. Employees who are committed tend to be more energized and motivated to perform well at their job, thus resulting in higher levels of engagement or vitality at work (Dejoy et al., 2010). As such, we propose:
                              Hypothesis 1b
                              Employee safety climate perceptions (both organizational-level and group-level safety climate) that are more positive will relate to higher levels of work engagement.

As the objective human resource performance outcome, employee turnover was also examined as an outcome of safety climate perceptions. In general, it is in the best interest of the company to keep turnover low, as turnover behaviors are associated with substantial costs. It is estimated that the total costs of turnover can range from 90% to 200% of an individual's annual salary (Mitchell et al., 2001).

The broader social exchange literature supports that employees' perceptions of the extent to which their organization values their contributions and is concerned about their well-being are significantly related to withdrawal behaviors (Rhoades and Eisenberger, 2002). Research by Kath et al. (2010) in the field of safety showed that, as social exchange theory would predict, when a positive exchange relationship is damaged by negative perceptions of management's commitment to safety, employees tend to “pay back” the organization by intending to leave. Morrow and Crum (1998) found that controlling for perceived risk, good safety climate was positively related to the intent to remain with the organization. Prior studies within the safety climate literature have mainly found safety climate to be related to employee turnover intentions, instead of actual turnover rate. The current study, however, offers further insight into the relationship by studying actual turnover. The following hypothesis is put forward:
                              Hypothesis 1c
                              More positive employee safety climate perceptions (both organizational-level and group-level safety climate) will relate to a lower turnover rate.

Previous studies have shown that a more positive safety climate is related to greater employee job satisfaction (Clarke, 2010; Goldenhar et al., 1998) and will result in more positive feelings toward the job. Additionally, job satisfaction (along with organizational commitment) has previously been found to act as a mediator of the relationship between safety climate and safety behaviors (Clarke, 2010). Employees who rate their company as having good safety climate may “pay back” the company with safer behaviors (Hofmann et al., 2003). The literature on job satisfaction also shows that employees' job satisfaction is related to both employee engagement (Saks, 2006) and turnover (Tett and Meyer, 1993). As suggested in the literature, we anticipate, based on the social exchange theory, that safety climate perceptions that are more positive will be linked to a higher level of employees' job satisfaction because a positive safety climate signals to employees that the organization cares about them and, hence, the employees are more satisfied with their jobs as their safety needs are satisfied. Subsequently, employees who are more satisfied with their jobs are more likely to “pay back” the organization with a relatively active or directed state whereby employees invest resources to attain their company's goal (i.e., higher level of engagement) and lower withdrawal rates. It is, therefore, proposed that job satisfaction will mediate the relationships between safety climate and the two human resource outcomes (i.e., employee engagement and turnover).
                              Hypothesis 2a
                              Job satisfaction is hypothesized to mediate the relationship between safety climate (both organizational-level and group-level) and employee engagement.

Job satisfaction is hypothesized to mediate the relationship between safety climate (both organizational-level and group-level) and employee turnover.

The mediating hypotheses of the current study can be combined into a conceptual model of the expectations for how safety climate may affect outcomes beyond safety outcomes (see Fig. 1
                           ). Both organizational-level and group-level safety climate are proposed to have direct relationships with job satisfaction, employee engagement and turnover. Job satisfaction is also hypothesized to mediate the relationships between (1) safety climate and employee engagement and (2) safety climate and turnover.

@&#METHOD@&#

The present study utilized data collected for the development and validation of a safety climate scale for truck drivers (Huang et al., 2013). Particular to the current study, in order to cross-validate the results and improve generalizability, survey data were collected from two large-size trucking firms. Additional objective turnover information (i.e., employment starting and end dates) was collected from these two companies one year after the initial survey completion. A total of 2204 surveys (female drivers: 7%) was collected from company A, with a response rate of 34%, and 4003 surveys (female drivers: 3%) were collected from company B, with a response rate of 51%. Turnover information was identifiable for 2117 drivers from company A and 2818 drivers from company B so they were utilized for the analyses.

While shared perceptions have been identified as critical to understanding safety climate, not all workers have the opportunity to work directly with their supervisors or co-workers (e.g., lone workers). Lone workers, such as truck drivers, are those who work alone or whose primary work activity can be done alone. Lone workers may constitute a subgroup where the recent safety literature may not fit as well.

Lone workers, long-haul truck drivers in particular, may have limited contact with their coworkers and, possibly, their supervisors. They can be on the road for weeks or months at a time (Zohar et al., 2014), thus reducing the number of opportunities to reconcile their individual perceptions. Research by Huang et al. (2013) did not find sufficient statistical evidence (i.e., between-group variance) to aggregate individual drivers' safety climate perceptions to the shared safety climate perception for their unit/group level. However, results found in Huang et al. (2013) are consistent with measurement of psychological safety climate, individual perceptions of safety policy, practice, and procedure (Christian et al., 2009). Recent meta-analytic support exists for the positive relationship between psychological safety climate and safety performance and the negative relationship between psychological safety climate and accidents and injuries (see Christian et al., 2009). Therefore, the current study will examine truck dirivers' individual perceptions/psychological safety climate (Beus et al., 2010; Christian et al., 2009).

All survey items were rated on a 5-point Likert scale (1: strongly disagree, 5: strongly agree).

Trucking industry-specific safety climate scales developed by Huang et al. (2013) were utilized to assess safety climate perceptions of the target truck drivers. The scale consists of two 20-item subscales (total 40 items) measuring organization- and group-level safety climate. Example items include: “My company uses any available information to improve existing safety rules (organization-level safety climate subscale)” and “My supervisor compliments employees who pay special attention to safety (group-level safety climate subscale).” Internal consistency statistics (Cronbach's α) of the organization- and group-level safety climate subscales were all satisfactory with .92 and .94, respectively, for company A as well as .90 and .94, respectively, for company B.

The extent to which the participants were satisfied with their job was measured using two items adapted from Huang et al. (2004); “I like working for this company and expect to be here for another year or more” and “I would recommend this company as an employer to other drivers I know.” Between the two items, correlations were .86 and .88, respectively, for companies A and B (both were statistically significant at p < .01).

Eight items adapted from a short version of the Utrecht Work Engagement Scale (UWES; Schaufeli et al., 2006) were used to assess employee engagement. One sample item was “To me, truck driving is interesting and challenging.” Internal consistency statistics were .87 and .86, respectively, for companies A and B.

Whether the participating truck drivers were still working for the companies was examined using company human resource records one year after the survey data collection; the turnover variable was computed based on dichotomous data classification (i.e., still working/no longer working for the company). For companies A and B, turnover rates during a one-year period after the survey implementation were, respectively, 37.5% and 27.1%. The turnover variable was used for logistic regression and path analysis.

Employment start and end dates at each company were obtained from company human resources records. By subtracting the former from the latter, company tenure was calculated and this variable was utilized for survival analysis.

Analyses testing the hypotheses were preformed separately for each of the two companies in order to cross-validate the results. Pearson-correlations among the study variables were examined to test Hypotheses 1a and 1b. Point-biserial correlations (Gupta, 1960; Neter and Maynes, 1970) were calculated to examine the relationships between the binary variable (i.e., turnover) and other continuous variables. Logistic regression and survival analyses with Kaplan–Meier estimation method were used to test Hypothesis 1c. Survival analysis, which is frequently used for epidemiological studies, can efficiently handle incomplete data due to censoring events such as death and turnover (Lawless, 2003). Based on the life table that can be obtained from survival analysis, the tendency of censoring events across time can be visualized (i.e., survival curve). For these analyses, SPSS version 13.0 was utilized. Additionally, Hypotheses 2a and b were tested by path analysis using open source R statistical package “lavaan” developed by Rossel (2012). As the hypothesized mediation relationship included a dichotomous dependent variable (i.e., turnover), confidence intervals of the mediation effects were calculated by bootstrapping technique (number of replicates = 20,000). For model fit criteria we used Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Tucker–Lewis Index (TLI) over .95, and root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) smaller than .05 as satisfactory (Hu and Bentler, 1999). Suggested analyses were conducted independently across the two trucking companies to augment the generalizability of the hypothesis testing results.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Descriptive statistics (i.e., means and standard deviations) and correlations of the study variables are presented in Table 1
                        . Organization- and group-level safety climate subscales, engagement, and job satisfaction were all statistically significantly associated. Specifically, employee job satisfaction was significantly correlated with both the organization-level safety climate subscale (r = .59, p < .01) and the group-level safety climate subscale (r = .52, p < .01). These findings were consistent with Hypothesis 1a. Also, employee engagement was significantly correlated with both the organization-level safety climate subscale (r = .55, p < .01) and the group-level safety climate subscale (r = .52, p < .01). Hypothesis 1b was, therefore, supported.

As objective turnover was a dichotomous variable, its point–biserial correlations with other study variables were calculated. Turnover rate for the 12-month period in trucking company A was 36.4% (mean tenure = 1987.60 days [or 5.46 years], SD = 2094.60) and it was significantly correlated with both organization-level (r = −.11, p < .01) and group-level safety climate (r = −.11, p < .01). Unadjusted separate logistic regression analyses showed that organization- and group-level safety climate subscales were related to turnover. Odds ratio of the organization-level safety climate subscale was 1.35 (i.e., exp(B) = .74, p < .01, 95% confidence interval = .65–.84) 1.31 (i.e., exp(B) = .76, p < .01, 95% confidence interval = .68–.85) for group and safety climate. Survival analysis was conducted to further investigate the turnover tendency across high and low safety climate groups. Across the above- and below-mean organization-level safety climate subscale groups, a statistically significant difference in turnover rate was detected based on survival analysis (χ
                        2 = 13.22, df = 1, p < .01). Similarly, across the above- and below-mean group-level safety climate subscale groups, a statistically significant difference in turnover rate was observed (χ
                        2 = 24.87, df = 1, p < .01). Fig. 2
                        a and b visualize the turnover trends across time in high or low safety climate conditions. Under the low safety climate condition, the data showed truck drivers had quicker and more frequent turnover. These findings supported Hypothesis 1c.

Additionally, logistic regression supported the association between job satisfaction and turnover. Odds ratio of employee job satisfaction in prediction of turnover was 1.25 (i.e., exp(B) = .80, p < .01, 95% confidence interval = .73–.87). As the direct relationship between job satisfaction and turnover was demonstrated, and as our Hypotheses 1a, b, and c were supported, the mediating effect of job satisfaction (i.e., Hypotheses 2a and b) was examined.


                        Fig. 3
                         depicts the initially hypothesized and alternative path model. For the initial model, model fit indices were all satisfactory (i.e., χ
                        2 = .00, df = 0, p < .01, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.00, RMSEA = .00, 90% RMSEA confidence interval = .00–.00). This model is a just-identified (saturated) model and its degree of freedom is zero. However, direct paths from the organization- and group-level safety climate subscales toward turnover were non-significant, with coefficients = −.06 (SE = .06, p = .35) and −.07 (SE = .06, p = .23), respectively. Thus, to improve the model parsimony, these two paths were deleted in the alternative path model. Model fit indices of the alternative model were again all satisfactory (i.e., χ
                        2 = 2.17, df = 2, p = .34, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.00, RMSEA = .01, 90% RMSEA confidence interval = .00–.04). The deletion of the two paths did not result in significant deterioration in model fit in terms of χ
                        2 (i.e., Δχ
                        2 = 2.17, Δdf = 2, p = .38). Therefore, we preferred the alternative model as our final path model. Direct and indirect effects based on the final alternative path model are presented in Table 2
                        . All the hypothesized relationships were statistically significant (p < .01). Specifically, job satisfaction partially mediated the relationship between safety climate (both organization- and group-level) and employee engagement, supporting Hypothesis 2a. Also, job satisfaction fully mediated the relationship between safety climate (both organization- and group-level) and employee turnover. This finding supported Hypothesis 2b.


                        Table 3
                         shows the study variables’ means, standard deviations, and correlations for company B. The study variables (organization- and group-level safety climate subscales, engagement, and job satisfaction) were statistically significantly related to one another. Specifically, a statistically significant correlation between the organization-level safety climate subscale and employee job satisfaction was found (r = .53, p < .01). A statistically significant correlation was also observed between the group-level safety climate subscale and employee job satisfaction (r = .51, p < .01). These findings were in line with our Hypothesis 1a. Employee engagement was significantly associated with both the organization-level safety climate subscale (r = .56, p < .01) and the group-level safety climate subscale (r = .55, p < .01), supporting Hypothesis 1b. In trucking company B, the turnover rate for the 12-month period was 25.4% (mean tenure = 2069.55 days [or 5.67 years], SD = 2133.96).

Logistic regression analysis revealed that neither organization- nor group-level safety climate subscales were related to turnover directly. Likewise, survival analyses failed to observe a significant difference in the turnover trends across high (above-mean) and low (below-mean) safety climate groups. Turnover trends across the above- and below-mean organization-level safety climate subscale groups were statistically non-significant (χ
                        2 = .00, df = 1, p = .99). Also, across the above- and below-mean group-level safety climate subscale groups, turnover trends were statistically non-significant (χ
                        2 = .57, df = 1, p = .45). Fig. 4
                        a and b are graphical illustrations of the turnover trends across time in high or low safety climate conditions. Although the low safety climate group, in general, tended to leave the job more frequently, this difference was not statistically significant. Hypothesis 1c, thus, was not supported. However, non-significant direct relationships from the organization- and group-level safety climate subscales to turnover do not rule out the possibility of important mediators, such as job satisfaction. In our final path model examined with company B data, direct paths from the organization- and group-level safety climate subscales to turnover were trimmed down because they were non-significant, while the full mediation effect of job satisfaction on these relationships was supported. Thus, we still need to examine whether job satisfaction can mediate the safety climate and turnover relationship, even though safety climate did not directly predict employee turnover.

Logistic regression analysis showed that job satisfaction could predict turnover significantly. Specifically, odds ratio of the employee job satisfaction in relation to turnover was 1.25 (i.e., exp(B) = .80, p < .01, 95% confidence interval = .74–.86).

Both initial and alternative path models (Fig. 5
                        ) were examined with company B data to test Hypotheses 2a and 2b. The initial path model reported good model fit (i.e., χ
                        2 = .00, df = 0, p < .01, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.00, RMSEA = .00, 90% RMSEA confidence interval = .00–.00). This model is a just-identified (saturated) model and its degree of freedom is zero. However, neither organization- nor group-level safety climate subscales could predict turnover. Path coefficient for organization-level safety climate → turnover was .11 (SE = .06, p = .06) while path coefficient for group-level safety climate → turnover was .01 (SE = .05, p = .79). For model parsimony, these two paths were omitted in the alternative path model. The alternative path model also showed good fit (i.e., χ
                        2 = 3.17, df = 2, p = .21, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.00, RMSEA = .02, 90% RMSEA confidence interval = .00–.04). No significant model fit deterioration in terms of χ
                        2 was noted after the omission of the two direct paths from organization- and group-level safety climate to turnover (i.e., Δχ2 = 3.17, Δdf = 2, p = .20). The alternative model was preferred as our final path model. Table 4
                         presents the estimated direct and indirect effects based on the final alternative path model. Hypothesized relationships in this model were all statistically significant (p < .01). Job satisfaction partially mediated the relationship between safety climate (both organization- and group-level) and employee engagement. This supported Hypothesis 2a. Moreover, job satisfaction fully mediated the relationship between safety climate (both organization- and group-level) and employee turnover. This finding was in congruence with Hypothesis 2b.

In this study, we developed and tested a model that sought to better understand the effects of safety climate. Using the social exchange theory as a guiding framework, the current study assessed how employee safety climate perceptions are related to non-safety-related outcomes for lone workers by examining the relationships between employee safety climate perceptions and employee satisfaction, engagement, and turnover. According to the social exchange framework and its associated reciprocity norm, employees' perceptions of organizational support and favorable treatment obligate employees to respond positively to the organization. Specifically, positive safety climate can serve as a proxy for organizational investment in workplace safety and the true or relative priority of safety as compared to other competing demands, thus indexing the extent to which an organization values employees’ safety. The more employees perceive this form of support, the more likely they will feel obligated to reciprocate by performing more safely and having more positive job attitudes and behaviors.

Research utilizing the social exchange theory in examining how safety climate can impact the non-accident and injury outcomes of workers is less developed as compared to the impact on more traditional safety outcomes. This study aimed to address these gaps in the literature by: 1) examining how safety climate perceptions at both the group and organization levels directly and differentially correlated with employee outcomes beyond accidents and injuries; 2) examining the mediating effects of job satisfaction between safety climate and the two types of human resources outcomes (i.e., engagement and turnover rate); and 3) extending previous findings in the literature for these relationships with traditional in-house workers to lone workers (e.g., truckers), a population that may have limited face-to-face contact with co-workers and supervisors and where turnover is very high.


                        Hypotheses 1a and 1b each predicted that more positive employee perceptions of both organizational- and group-level safety climate were related to higher levels of (a) employee satisfaction and (b) employee engagement. A greater level of employee safety climate perceptions for the group and organization was found to be associated with moderately greater employee satisfaction and employee engagement. These results provide support for the authors’ assertion that social exchange theory is a possible mechanism through which safety climate at different levels can impact important human resource outcomes other than the traditionally-studied safety outcomes.

The relationship between employee safety climate perceptions and employee turnover (Hypothesis 1c) was addressed using logistic regression and survival analysis. Analyses for company A showed that at both the organization and group levels, a higher level of safety climate perceptions significantly reduced the chances of employees leaving the organization, which is great news. Additionally, survival analyses conducted on the differences between those employees above the mean and below the mean of reported safety climate revealed significant differences. Employees reporting below-average organization- and group-safety climate perceptions were found to leave the organization sooner than those above the average.

However, results from company B regarding turnover were non-significant. Survival analyses also failed to find differences in the turnover patterns of those reporting above and below average organization- and group-level safety climate perceptions. Therefore, Hypothesis 1c was supported for company A, but not company B. These seemingly contradictory results may occur due to differences in turnover rates, with company B experiencing less turnover than company A. It should be noted that 36.4% of the truck drivers in company A quit their job within one year after our survey implementation while 25.4% of the truck drivers in company B quit their job during the same period. If there is a relatively small number of turnover cases, differences in the trends of quitting the job across high or low safety climate groups might not be marked enough to be statistically significant. Because turnover was a dichotomous variable, having fewer cases may create power issues whereby the differences would need to be especially pronounced in order to be detected. Future studies may consider collecting objective turnover data across a longer period (e.g., two years) to provide greater statistical power to examine the relationships.

The path analysis used to examine Hypotheses 2a and 2b tested not only whether job satisfaction mediates the relationship between employee safety climate perceptions and turnover, but also whether job satisfaction mediates the relationship between safety climate perceptions and employee engagement (see Fig. 2 for hypothesized path model). Path analyses supported both Hypotheses 2a and 2b in both companies. Results showed that job satisfaction was a significant mediator between safety climate and employee performance outcomes. While the direct relationship between both organization and group safety climate perceptions and turnover were not found to be significant and were removed from the model, job satisfaction was found to partially mediate the relationship between employee safety climate perceptions (both at the organization and group levels) and employee engagement, and fully mediate the relationship between employee safety climate perceptions and turnover at both levels.

As suggested in the literature, our results indicate that higher levels of safety climate perceptions are associated with higher levels of employees’ job satisfaction because, in line with the traditional needs theory, a positive safety climate may signal to employees (i.e., truck drivers) that their trucking company cares about them and that their safety needs are met, hence, these truck drivers are more satisfied with their jobs. Then, according to the social exchange theory, truck drivers whose safety needs are met and who are more satisfied with their jobs are more likely to “pay back” the organization by being more engaged at work and are less likely to leave the organization. As anticipated, our results indicated that truck drivers with higher safety climate perceptions were more satisfied with their jobs and, in turn, more engaged at work and less likely to leave the organizations.

The results of this study have important theoretical and practical implications. The current study adds to the scientific literature by providing evidence that safety climate can have significant impact beyond safety outcomes, even for lone workers. The current study augments this literature by showing that some of the same performance mechanisms known to take place with traditional workers also occur for lone workers. Specifically, our findings support previous studies (Dejoy et al., 2010) that workplace safety does not only have an impact on traditional safety outcomes, but it may also be related to outcomes highly relevant to an organization's effectiveness and success (i.e., job satisfaction, engagement and turnover). Based on a rationale similar to what Dejoy et al. (2010) proposed, we were able to find significant relationships between safety climate and withdrawal outcomes, thus highlighting that a positive safety climate can potentially translate into greater engagement and retention. Researchers should continue exploring this relationship in order to refine our understanding of it.

Our current model and findings provide insights into possible safety climate mechanisms that may inform both researchers and practitioners of other explanations of how safety climate is a leading indicator of non-safety-related outcomes. The current study supports the application of the social exchange theory as a theoretical foundation in understanding the mechanisms between safety climate and employee outcomes. In particular, our findings highlight that safety climate is an important indicator of management commitment to workplace safety and concerns for employees' safety and well-being, and it is an important proxy in understanding employees’ perceptions of safety-related treatment by their employers.

From a practical standpoint, our study shows that safety climate indirectly impacts specific employee human resource outcomes, suggesting that safety climate may also directly or indirectly impact other employee human resource outcomes, such as occupational or organizational commitment, citizenship behaviors, or counterproductive work behaviors. This further highlights that the impact of safety climate is not limited to traditional safety outcomes, but can affect other organizational outcomes that have important implications for business strategy and policy. In line with what Mearns et al. (2010) concluded, organizational investment in workplace safety can have far-reaching implications that may not necessarily be within the typical scope of ‘safety’. Both researchers and practitioners should, therefore, look beyond the typical realm of safety when understanding safety climate and related policies, and take into consideration how investment in workplace safety can affect employees at a more personal level. These relationships can be explained by social exchange theory, positing that employees may pay back organizations for their treatment of employees. Future research should continue to examine these relationships.

Additionally, this research may provide organizations with another avenue through which to increase desirable employee outcomes and minimize undesirable outcomes. For example, safety climate interventions implemented by organizations to impact safety-related outcomes may also be able to act as interventions to increase desirable employee human resource outcomes which extend beyond safety. Safety investment may foster more positive attitudes and behaviors benefiting the worksite and/or organization. Finally, within the trucking industry, the outcome of employee turnover is particularly salient as turnover has been quite high. The results of the current study provide evidence for one way in which turnover can be indirectly decreased; that is, through strengthening safety climate.

The contributions of this study should be viewed in light of some limitations. First, although turnover rate was collected using objective data one year after conducting the survey, survey data were collected at one time point; therefore, longitudinal relationships among survey variables could not be observed. Future research could examine the relationships found in the path models longitudinally. Second, all data utilized in this study (with the exception of objective turnover) were self-reported data from employees only. Therefore, it is possible that socially desirable responding and common method bias may have influenced the study outcomes and caution should be used when interpreting these results. However, some researchers have argued that common method bias is not as problematic as commonly thought (e.g., Spector, 2006). The turnover variable was obtained independently from the other study variables, thus alleviating the potential concern of method bias which is expected from a simple survey-based research design. Furthermore, variance inflation factors (VIFs) for the organization-level safety climate, group-level safety climate, and job satisfaction were respectively 2.77, 2.55, and 1.41 in prediction of engagement and 2.76, 2.54, and 1.41 in prediction of turnover, suggesting no serious concern of multicollinearity (i.e., VIF < 5; (O'brien, 2007)). Lastly, since the current study focused on a lone working sample of truck drivers, it is possible this research may not be generalizable to workers in other jobs or industries or even other populations of lone workers.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The results of this study contribute to the safety climate literature in a number of ways. First, the study demonstrates how safety climate perceptions at both the organization and group levels directly and indirectly impact employee outcomes beyond those regarding safety. Second, the present study used social exchange theory as the theoretical framework to understand the relationships between safety climate, job satisfaction, and human resource outcomes (i.e., employee engagement and employee turnover rate). Finally, the study adds to the literature about the safety climate effects on human resource outcomes for lone workers (i.e., truck drivers) in an industry where turnover is quite high. The results of this study will aid researchers, practitioners, and organizations in understanding how other employee outcomes, beyond those regarding safety, can be affected by improving safety climate at both the organization and group levels.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

