@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Potential of adjustable height carts in reducing the risk of low back injury in grocery stockers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Adjustable height cart reduced the probability of LBD risk during stocking of larger items.


                        
                        
                           
                           Adjustable height cart reduced sagittal flexion but increased twist motion.


                        
                        
                           
                           Adjustable cart reduced the NIOSH lifting equation indicating a safe task.


                        
                        
                           
                           Targeted intervention was marginally effective due to impact at the cart and not the shelving.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Posture

Kinematics

Ergonomic

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  While the workers of the Wholesale and Retail Trade industrial sector suffer from musculoskeletal disorders at an alarming rate, there have been few investigative studies into potential effective interventions to reduce the ergonomic stress. The objective of the study was to determine whether a cart with an adjustable shelf could reduce awkward postures and motions while stocking products in a grocery store. Fifteen workers at a small grocery store in Puerto Rico completed stocking tasks with two types of carts: traditional and adjustable height cart or Ergo Cart. Trunk kinematics, LBD risk index, NIOSH lifting index, subjective ratings, and productivity indicators were collected during four typical stocking tasks. The Adjustable Ergo Cart reduced the sagittal trunk flexion by 7° and velocity by about 5°/s but increased twisting by about 2° and twist velocity by 4°/s as compared to the traditional cart. The LBD risk index was reduced by a small 2.4% in probability although greater reductions were found for larger items (e.g. bags of dog food and 2-L of Soda). The consensus among workers was that the adjustable cart would be easier to use. Overall, the study provides objective evidence that an ergonomically designed cart (e.g. adjustable height) has some potential to reduce sagittal trunk flexion, LBD risk index, and the NIOSH lift index. Overall, the results indicate that any intervention such as an adjustable cart can only have marginal effectiveness unless the entire systems perspective is considered.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

During the period of 1999–2004, the retail trade sector had more than 70,000 Workers Compensation musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) claims in the state of Ohio, which accounted for about 12.5% of all claims and more than $350 billion in medical and indemnity costs (Dunning et al., 2010). The top three body regions suffering a MSD were low back (29.2%), hand/wrist (20.1%), and knee (15.1%) (Dunning et al., 2010). In 2000, according to Bureau of Labor & Statistics, there were more than 20,000 musculoskeletal disorders in grocery stores in the United States (Bureau of Labor and Statistics, 2000). More than 50% of these MSDs were linked to lifting of material in the stores (Bureau of Labor and Statistics, 2000). The injury and illness rate for retail in Puerto Rico is 3.5 per 100 full-time workers and more specifically 5.5 per 100 FT workers for grocery store workers (Bureau of Labor and Statistics, 2000). Thus, the retail and trade industry, specifically grocery stores workers, suffer from significant number of MSDs related to lifting of boxes and bags typically with varying weights.

One research group reported significant loading on the spine when lifting boxes during palletizing and depalletizing of boxes, in a simulated warehouse order selector task (Marras et al., 1999a,b; Davis et al., 1998). Lifting from lower heights also was found to be more detrimental indicating the importance of lifting at mid-thigh height or above (Marras et al., 1999a,b). The bottom line is that item selectors in grocery stores handle a plethora of products while stocking shelves in the stores. In general, the stocking of shelves includes the loading of a cart with product from the temporary warehouse, transferring the cart, and unloading product onto the shelves in the store. Traditional carts have a bed that is low to the ground (less than 20 cm high) so that the product can be stacked. However, the low cart requires the stocker to bend forward significantly to place the product similar to the lower layers of a pallet, which has been shown to have the highest loads on the spine (Marras et al., 1997).

One potential intervention that may have utility for the stocking of product in grocery stores is an adjustable height cart where the cart platform height starts at mid-thigh height and lowers as product is added to allow the height of the product to remain at or slightly below waist height. In order to be an effective intervention, the cart would need to reduce the awkward postures that traditionally accompany stocking of orders without influencing the productivity of the stockers. Thus, the objective of the study was to determine the effectiveness and feasibility of an adjustable cart as a potential intervention for the handling of products in a grocery store setting. Specifically, the project quantified the kinematic responses and ergonomic risk indicators (LBD risk and NIOSH lifting index) for stock handlers in a grocery store in Puerto Rico when utilizing two carts: 1) traditional low flat bed and 2) an adjustable height cart that allows product to remain at mid-thigh level or higher at the origin of the lift.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

The current study attempted to determine the effectiveness of an adjustable cart (referred to hereafter as Adjustable Ergo Cart) in reducing the awkward postures and trunk motions commonly found when loading and unloading a traditional low bed cart in grocery stores. Workers in a regional grocery store in Puerto Rico were observed while conducting common stocking tasks including loading and unloading of a cart. Two types of carts were investigated: 1) traditional cart—standard non-adjustable base and 2) Adjustable Ergo Cart—adjustable base that had variable height (e.g. product lowered as more items were placed on the cart). The study design was a sample of convenience with respect to experimental conditions since products were selected based on items available in the store stock warehouse. Quantitative and qualitative measures were recorded when workers completed the stocking tasks with both carts. Questionnaires were administered in Spanish, which were translated by the research team prior to the study being conducted from English versions in literature.

Fifteen workers in a regional grocery store in Puerto Rico were recruited. All of the participants were males and worked as either Shelf stockers for the store (n = 11), Product handler in warehouse (n = 1), Product handler in freezer (n = 1), and Meat product handlers (n = 2). All participants were Spanish speaking and were symptom free of musculoskeletal disorder pain. The average age was 31.0 years old (std. dev. = 7.7 yrs) with a wide range of experiences as a stocker: five of the participants had less than 1 year of experience while the remaining 10 had more than 3 years. The body dimensions of the 15 workers were typical in size with an average body weight of 90.6 kg (std. dev. = 17.8 kg) and height of 173 cm (std. dev. = 6.8 cm).

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

The study design was a two-factor design that took place in the field at the grocery store in Puerto Rico. The evaluations were completed in the warehouse section of the store that simulated the stocking activities of loading product on the cart and unloading product to the shelves. Given that data collection took place during store hours, it was not feasible to collect the data on the store floor due to worries about customer shopping interference. The independent variables were task condition (e.g. food product transferred) and type of intervention (e.g. Traditional vs. Adjustable Ergo Cart). The dependent variables included: 1) three-dimensional trunk posture and velocity, 2) probability of high risk group membership from the LMM model, commonly referred to as the LMM LBD risk index, 3) horizontal moment arm and static load moment, 4) subjective ratings of exertion, ease of use, and productivity, 5) time to complete task, and 6) NIOSH cumulative lifting index (CLI). Complete details of the independent and dependent variables are below.

Two types of carts were investigated in the current study: 1) traditional cart and 2) Adjustable Ergo Cart (intervention) cart. The traditional cart was a four-wheel (all rotating) cart with a fixed base that was 17.8 cm high. The dimensions of the base were 127.0 cm long by 45.7 cm wide. The cart had two ends that were fixed to the base (See Fig. 1
                           ). The traditional cart was the primary cart utilized for stocking at the grocery store selected. The Adjustable Ergo Cart had a platform that adjusted to the weight of the product placed on top of the cart (Fig. 1). The adjustable base could be tuned to respond to weights between 50 kg and 150 kg. The cart used a spring mechanism to counteract the weight placed on the cart platform. The platform dimensions were 71.1 cm long by 45.0 cm wide with an adjustable range between 27.4 cm and 66.3 cm from the ground. A single handle at the height of 91.4 cm allowed easy maneuverability. The cart had four caster wheels with two fixed and two rotating.

There were four different task conditions evaluated in the warehouse of the grocery store: 1) loading cart with 2-L bottles of soda pop, 2) loading cart with bags of dog food, 3) loading cart with 12-can boxes of soup, and 3) unloading cart of 12-cans packages of soda pop. The task conditions were selected to represent the full diversity of items that stockers commonly handle as well as loading and unloading of the cart. However, the selection of the items transferred was partially a sample of convenience as items were selected based on what was present in the warehouse at the time of data collection.

For each cart, the participants lifted six packages of 2-L bottles of soda pop. Each package contained four bottles that were plastic wrapped together with an opening on both sides that served as a handle. The six individual packs of bottles were stacked on a pallet (4 packages on the bottom row, 2 packages on the top row) and transferred to the carts (See Fig. 1A). The height of the bottles for the bottom row on the pallet was 68.6 cm while the 2nd row bottles were at a height of 106.7 cm. For the traditional cart, the packages of 2-L were stacked with 5 on the bottom row and 1 on the top. For the Adjustable Ergo Cart, the packages were stacked with 3 on top and 3 on bottom. The selection of the pattern was individually selected as no instructions were provided. All of the stockers used these patterns. The stacking was based on how the selectors used the different carts. Each package of four bottles of soda pop weighted 7.4 kg for a total of 44.3 kg.

The participants lifted 12 boxes of soup cans from storage shelf to the each of the carts, performed in random order. The boxes contained twelve 0.3 kg cans that were shrink-wrapped with plastic (4 rows of 3 cans). Each box weighed 3.58 kg. The boxes of cans were stacked in two columns of 9 boxes where the entire right column and the top three boxes of the left column were lifted to the carts (total of 12 boxes of soup). The typical pattern that the majority of the stockers utilized was lift two boxes at a time for four lifts followed by the lifting of one box from the left stack and then lift two boxes followed by one box from the right column. The height of the boxes on the shelf started at 20.4 cm and increased 10.2 cm per box to a height of 111.8 cm. The heights for the two box lifts were at the bottom of the top box while the heights for single lifts were in the middle of the box, corresponding to the center of the weight. Thus, in total, seven lifts were usually completed. Twelve of the selectors utilized the typical lift pattern while three lifted single boxes of cans for each lift. The typical pattern of stacking on the traditional cart depended upon the stocker with all the two box lifts being placed on the bottom of the cart and the remaining four lifts being placed on the top of previous boxes of cans. The other dominant placement pattern was two columns. The pattern was four columns of boxes of cans. Again, since we wanted the stockers to complete the lifting of soup cans realistically, no directions on how to unload or load with respect to placement or number of boxes were provided. See Fig. 1B for placement of cans on the two carts.

The selection of 6 bags of dog food represented a large item where stockers lifted the bags from a pallet, carried bags approximately 4.5 m, and placed them on the carts. The bags were stacked on the pallet in a single column starting at a height of 53.3 cm, increasing 10.2 cm for each subsequent bag. Each bag of dog food weighted 6.8 kg. For the traditional cart, two types of patterns were used: 1) single column and 2) two columns. The single stack had all six bags stacked in order on top of each other. For the two-column placement, the typical pattern adapted by the stockers was to place the 1st bag on the left side on cart followed by the next on the right side. The stockers would then stack the next bags on top in the same pattern, resulting in 2-columns of three bags. For the Adjustable Ergo Cart, the bags were stacked in single column for all stockers. Fig. 1C provides a view of the two types of stacking in single columns.

Twelve boxes of 12 soda pop cans were stacked in two columns on each of the carts. The cans of soda were lifted in pairs of 12-packs from the cart and then placed on the shelf in two columns. In all, six lifts were utilized to transfer the cans of soda from the cart to the shelf. The height for each of the 6 sets of two boxes was 30.5 cm, 30.5 cm, 53.3 cm, 53.3 cm, 76.2 cm and 76.2 cm, respectively. Refer to Fig. 1D for the typical lifting pattern for both carts. One 12-packs of soda weighed 6.05 kg.

The lumbar motion monitor (LMM) measured the instantaneous three-dimensional trunk kinematics (position and velocity) during the grocery stocking tasks. The LMM is a tri-axial electrogoniometric system that is essentially an exoskeleton of the spine, which measures the instantaneous position, velocity, and acceleration of the spine in the sagittal (forward flexion), lateral (side flexion), and twist planes of motion. The LMM was mounted on the participant's back using a shoulder harness and waist belt. LMM data were transmitted via telemetry to a laptop computer where they were recorded for post processing. Further information about the design and accuracy of the LMM can be found in Marras et al. (1992).

Specific trunk kinematics and static trunk moment was input into a Low Back Disorder (LBD) risk model that predicts `probability of membership in the high risk low-back disorder group’. The LBD risk index is based on a probability estimate that incorporates five kinematic and workplace variables (maximum sagittal flexion position, lift rate, maximum external moment, maximum lateral velocity, and average twisting velocity) through logistic regression methods (Marras et al., 1993, 1995). The LBD risk index provides an estimate of how likely the condition resembles a “high risk” job in industry.

Moment arm measurements were also collected by one of the investigators (KD) using a standard tape measure. The moment arm was measured as the horizontal distance between the low back (at the expected L5/S1 level) and the center of the hands where the object was grasped. The maximum external load moment (in Nm) was defined as the product of the horizontal moment arm (in meters) times the measured weight of the object being lifted (converted from kg to N).

Immediately following the completion of the task condition with either of the carts, participants were asked to give a Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE, Borg's scale, 6 = very, very light to 20 = very, very hard) (Borg, 1982). Borg's RPE is measure of a whole body exertion level. The RPE provides an estimate of the perceived effort level.

After all task conditions were completed with each of the carts, two follow-up questions were asked to gather perceptions about usability and productivity. The first question was “Please rate how easy the adjustable cart was to use?” which was scored on a 10-point Likert scale (1—“Very Difficult” to 10—“Very Easy”). The second question was “The intervention cart allowed me to work” which was scored on a 10-point Likert scale (1—“Much Slower Than Normal” to 10—“Much Faster Than Normal”).

The NIOSH 1991 lifting equation (Waters et al., 1994) was utilized to calculate the cumulative lift index (CLI) was for each lift condition and cart. The following methods and assumptions were utilized: 1) horizontal distance was measured by tape measure (using method described above for horizontal moment arm), 2) Vertical distance of object was measured at the origin and destination with the cart being the destination for 2-L bottles, soup cans, and bags of dog food and the origin for 12-pack of soda), 3) Vertical travel distance was the difference between the origin and destination heights with a minimum of 10 cm (e.g. DM factor capped at 1.0), 4) Frequency was estimated to be 166 units per hour for both carts and thus contribute to the LI equally (includes both lifting and break time), 5) Coupling was viewed as fair for bags of dog food, 12-pack of soda, and box of soup and good for 2-L of soda that had handles, and 6) Asymmetry was estimated by video and was typically 90° for soup, 2-L, and 12-pack of soda and 0° for dog food since they carried the bags at significant distance between carts. The LI was then calculated by multiplying the load constant by the resulting multipliers.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

One member of the research team communicated with each of the participants using a set Spanish script. After being briefed about the study, the stocker was provided a consent form (Spanish version), which was then read and signed. The research team member confirmed the understanding of the consent process through a verbal script. Next, the research team measured the anthropometric dimensions including body weight, body stature, body segment lengths, and trunk depth and breadth. The participant was then fitted with a lumbar motion monitor. The four task conditions were then completed in random order. The stockers were instructed to lift normally, which typically corresponded to completing the lifts as fast as they can, given they are under time restraints and paid by the amount of material delivered. The pattern of placing the products on the cart or shelf was not designated and left to the discretion of the stocker. The traditional cart was loaded/unloaded first for each condition followed by the Adjustable Ergo Cart. While the carts were not randomized which would have been the ideal, the order was facilitated by attempting to capture a good comparison between the carts and concentrating on normal lifting activity. For the LMM data collection, each transfer of product was recorded from the point of lifting the product (e.g. hands connect to product) to the point of release (e.g. hand release product on cart or shelf). This interval is standard for LMM data collection and allows the capture of every lift for each condition. After each task condition was completed with each cart, the participant rated the perceived exertion (RPE). When both carts were complete for a task condition, the participant rated the productivity and usability of the Adjustable Ergo Cart relative to the traditional cart. A stopwatch was utilized to collect the total time to complete each task condition with each cart. All 15 participants completed all four task conditions with both carts.

The trunk kinematic data were collected through the Ballet software that accompanies the lumbar motion monitor and computes the kinematic dependent variables of interest. All kinematic data were entered into a database for subsequent analyses. The horizontal moment arms, weight of objects, heights at origin and destination, and perceived ratings were measured by a research team member and manually entered into the database. The database was randomly scanned for data entry errors. LBD risk index was calculated for each lift using the appropriate exponential equations (Marras et al., 1993). The cumulative lifting index was computed using the workplace measurements and product weight for the entire task condition for each of the carts (e.g. 4 CLIs for each cart and subject). Anthropometric data was entered into a separate database with descriptive statistics being calculated to provide a summary of the body dimensions of the subjects.

For all variables, descriptive statistics were computed providing means and standard deviations as a function of intervention and intervention by task condition interaction. Values were reported when statistical significance was found using the appropriate parametric or non-parametric statistical procedures. The continuous dependent variables were analyzed using a Split-plot Repeated Measures Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). For all significant independent variables, post-hoc analyses (Tukey multiple pairwise comparisons) were performed to determine the source of the significant effect(s) (p < 0.05). For perceived rating of exertion and subjective dependent variables, non-parametric statistical analyses were completed. A Kruskal–Wallis one-way Analysis of Variance by ranks procedure was utilized to determine significant main effects for intervention and task condition. Since the intervention main effect was the important effect and it only had two levels, no post hoc follow-up tests were necessary to determine the source of the significance.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results of the Analysis of Variance tests are shown in Table 1
                     . For the intervention main effect, several variables were found to be significant (p < 0.05) including maximum sagittal flexion, maximum right twist, maximum sagittal velocity, maximum twist velocity, static moment arm at destination, static trunk moment, and LBD risk index. The LBD risk index was the only task condition by intervention interaction that was found significant. Overall, almost all of the trunk kinematic variables and the load moment variable were significant (p < 0.0001) for the main effect of task condition (e.g. grocery product lifted). Since the differences between the conditions was expected and not the focus of this study, the results will be concentrated significant main effects of intervention and interaction effect with task condition (e.g., LBD risk index for the interaction).

The Adjustable Ergo Cart (intervention) resulted in significantly less sagittal flexion by approximately 7° (29° vs. 22.5°) but increased twisting position by 1.5° (6° vs. 7.5°) as compared to the traditional cart. Similar trends were found for sagittal and twist trunk velocity where there was a reduction of 4.5°/s (26°/s vs. 21.6°/s) for sagittal but an increase of 4°/s (33.6°/s vs. 37.4°/s) for twist.

As expected, the origin horizontal moment arm was not significantly influenced by the intervention cart (on average both carts produced a moment arm of approximately 43 cm). However, the horizontal moment arm at the destination was significantly reduced by the intervention—about 4 cm (52.3 cm vs. 48.6 cm). This difference in moment arm translated into a reduction in the static trunk load moment, by about 2 Nm (32.8 Nm vs. 30.7 Nm). Notice, the origin moment arm was measured at the start for all conditions whether it started on the shelf or on the cart with destination measured at the end of the lift.

Overall, the LBD risk index was reduced by 2.4% when the Adjustable Ergo Cart was used as compared to the traditional cart. However, the impact of the intervention depended upon the task condition (Fig. 2
                        ). The reduction in LBD risk index was isolated primarily to the 2-L bottles of soda (about 5.5%) and bags of dog food (about 5%). For the other two task conditions, there was no significant difference with less than 1% difference.

Overall, there was a significant reduction in the time to complete the lifting tasks when using the Adjustable Ergo Cart as compared to the traditional cart. The reduction was about 3-s for each task condition. Although this effect was not significant, likely due to the variability in how people utilized the cart, the differences would represent a potential for increased productivity.

The rating of perceived exertion (RPE) was significantly greater for the traditional cart as compared to the Adjustable Ergo Cart (a 1.8 point difference on the 6 to 20 point scale—10.6 vs. 8.8). Fig. 3
                         shows the interaction effect of the cart and lift condition where the Adjustable Ergo Cart had lower RPEs (approximately 2 points lower) for all the task conditions except for bags of dog food (around 0.5 points). After the completion of all task conditions, participants were asked two additional perception questions about the Adjustable Ergo Cart intervention. First, the participants rated the “Ease of use” for the Adjustable Ergo Cart with an average rating of 8.33 on a scale of 1–10 (Strong tendency toward “Very Easy to Use”). More telling results are the frequency of each response where 5 (out of 15) reported a “10” (or “very easy”), 6 reported a “9”, 2 reported “8” (or “easy”) while only 2 reported below “6” or “somewhat easy”. The participants as a whole rated the Adjustable Ergo Cart as allowing them to be more productive than normal (average rating of 7.47 on a 1 to 10 scale). Twelve of the 15 participants rated the Adjustable Ergo Cart as being “faster than normal” with a rating of 8 or above.

With only a few of the multipliers being impacted by the intervention cart, the lifting index was only marginally impacted by the use of the Adjustable Ergo Cart but it was significant at p = 0.002. The average CLI for the Ergo Cart was 1.43 as compared to the traditional cart at 1.62 (about 0.2 drop).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Overall, the Adjustable Ergo Cart was found to be only a marginally effective intervention for controlling the awkward postures and LBD risk associated with stocking groceries in a store. The Adjustable Ergo Cart reduced the sagittal trunk motion, static trunk load moment, LBD risk index, and NIOSH CLI but higher trunk twisting motion as compared to the traditional cart. This may have partially resulted by the size and maneuverability of the Adjustable Ergo Cart relative to the traditional cart. The smaller Adjustable Ergo Cart was able to be positioned closer to the shelves and have a slightly different stacking pattern. As a result, the stockers would pivot and twist rapidly when using the Adjustable Ergo Cart rather than taking a small step as was observed with the traditional cart. Better placement of the cart may reduce the twist motion, thus increasing the effectiveness of the intervention for grocery item selectors.

The trade-off between sagittal and twist was not exactly equal since when the overall trunk motion was taken into account in the LBD risk index, the Adjustable Ergo Cart reduced the LBD risk index (e.g. probability of high risk group membership) as compared to the traditional cart. But, the task condition had a role in the resulting LBD risk index where the Adjustable Ergo Cart was more effective for more bulky material such as 4-pack of 2-L bottles and medium bags of dog food. Based on known benchmarks for the LBD risk index (Marras et al., 1999a,b), the traditional cart with the medium bags of dog food would be considered a high risk job (approaching the 60% probability) but the Adjustable Ergo Cart resulted in a risk that was more than 5% lower, which would reduce the likelihood of being high risk. In fact, the number of individual lifts above the 60% LBD Risk level went from 53% for the traditional cart to 29% for the Adjustable Ergo Cart. For the 2-L bottles, the risk was also reduced by 5%, which represents a significant improvement and benefit. The percentage of individual lifts of 2-L bottles above the 60% level was 56% for the traditional cart and 2.2% for the Adjustable Ergo Cart. But, none of the lifting conditions when using either of the carts was low risk (less than 30%) based on the benchmarks set by Marras et al. (1999a,b).

One interesting trend in the LBD Risk was for the smaller items (6-packs of soda and 24-cans of soup) where the LBD risk was identical for both the Adjustable Ergo and traditional carts. While it is unclear the exact nature for the lack of a difference, a few potential concerns may have been the underlying factors: 1) smaller boxes may have required more precision to place, 2) lighter weights resulted in more of direct trade-off between sagittal and non-sagittal trunk motion, and 3) workers tended to remain bent over (flexed forward) during the entire condition for these two products.

The fact that the NIOSH CLI was only marginally improved (1.6–1.4) when using the Adjustable Ergo Cart was not a complete surprise as many of the multipliers were not affected by the intervention. The following multipliers were the same for both carts: lift frequency (assumed to be same), coupling (e.g. cart did not affect coupling), asymmetry (e.g. carts were placed in the approximate same position), and weight of the objects (e.g. same products were lifted for both carts). The horizontal distance—maximum of the moment arm at origin and destination, vertical distance at origin (limited to 12-pack of soda cans), and vertical travel distance were the only multipliers that varied between the two carts. As a result, the change in the CLI was minimally impacted.

The Adjustable Ergo Cart reduced the trunk flexion by eliminating low-level lifts at the cart, which have been found to be the most detrimental with regard to spine loads. Marras et al. (1997) reported that the middle to bottom levels of a pallet (e.g. below the waist and mid-thigh level) produced substantially greater three-dimensional loads on the spine. When the boxes were lifted from mid-thigh to waist level from the pallet, the loads were much closer to acceptable loads. Other researchers have also reported increased spine loads when lifting from low height shelves, particularly below knee height (Hoozemans et al., 2008; Kingma et al., 2004; Lavender et al., 2003). The adjustable cart intervention would be equivalent to lifting from the middle rows of a pallet (approximately at the height of the mid-thigh) at the cart position, likely reducing spine loads. However, the measured benefit of the cart was likely minimized due the focus on only one part of the transferring of the product including lifting from the low height shelving. Thus, the current intervention, Adjustable Ergo Cart, may have been marginally effective due to the cart being one component of the overall system. As such, the intervention does not address the one part of the transfer that has been identified as having high spine loads by the previous researchers.

Another positive result of using the Adjustable Ergo Cart was the stockers' perception of a lower required exertion level as well as increased usability and productivity. Thus, the subjective support the objective measures in that the Adjustable Ergo Cart provides a marginal benefit to the stockers. The results also indicate that the Adjustable Ergo Cart would be a viable intervention that workers would actually utilize and not collect dust in the corner. Anecdotal evidence of intervention buy-in was observed by the research team where stockers commented about how they could take ownership of the two carts provided the grocery store.

The use of the Adjustable Ergo Cart also reduced the time to complete the stocking tasks. The decrease in time to perform a stocking task would represent an improvement in productivity. However, a casual observation from comments from the stockers was that the shelf of the Adjustable Ergo Cart was too small and would increase the number of trips between warehouse and shelves in the store. On the other hand, observations of the stockers completing trips between the warehouse and shelves indicated that many of the trips had partially filled carts. As a result, the smaller surface area for the Adjustable Ergo Cart may not be a major issue with respect to additional trips but certainly influences the stacking pattern of the products (discussed below).

Several potential limitations need to be considered when interpreting the results. First, study conditions were determined by real situations rather than scientific control. The project was designed to be a demonstration project to investigate the utility of an adjustable height cart for stocking of groceries. Thus, several design issues were not controlled including the cart size, stacking patterns, shelf heights, and limited types of product. One of the major differences between the Traditional and Adjustable Ergo Cart is the size of the platform where the Adjustable Ergo Cart is dramatically different. The result of the size difference for the platform and lack of stacking directions was different patterns of stacking between the two carts. While other platforms sizes are available, the current version was selected prior to arriving at the study site and was selected for cost considerations (e.g. cheapest of the available models). As a result, part of the improvements may have been attributed to the difference in stacking that resulted. In an optimal world, the cart platforms would have been identical but the current cart is a viable and available cart, a key component of the project. Further, the grocery products selected may also contribute to the differences as they affected the stacking pattern on the carts as well as influenced the lifting movements. Other products need to be investigated with respect to the benefit of the adjustable cart. Further, products were lifted from and to the bottom shelves, representing the worse case scenario and thus influencing the outcome variables. In all, the study design was not optimal but provides a practical evaluation of the adjustable cart.

Second, the study was an observational study that was limited to a very short observation period (less than an hour for each cart). The long-term impact of the Adjustable Ergo Cart needs to be considered to obtain information of the reduction of injuries as well as compliance in using such an intervention. The current study was able to demonstrate the utility of the Adjustable Ergo Cart to eliminate the need to bend to place products below waist level.

Third, the Adjustable Ergo Cart represents one type of adjustable cart where other adjustable carts could produce different results, particularly given the previous size of the platform discussion. The major objective of the current study was to demonstrate the effectiveness of adjustable height cart in reducing the risk for low back injuries. As such, the concept of placing objects on the cart above the mid-thigh level was found to be a viable way to reduce awkward postures during grocery stocking. It would be expected that carts with similar height adjustability would be equally effective.

Fourth, the stockers in this study were all males and represented a sample of convenience. The participants represented the stockers who were available on the data collection dates. It is possible that females would have interacted with the Adjustable Ergo Cart, with different lifting technique. Future studies investigating adjustment height cart interventions need to evaluate female workers.

Fifth, the study quantified the trunk kinematics, LBD risk index, and the NIOSH cumulative lifting index during the lifting of the product. No assessment was made for the push force, which could have been different between the two carts, particularly given the age of the traditional carts and the smaller size of the Adjustable Ergo Cart. In order to understand whether the Adjustable Ergo Cart reduces the overall risk, an assessment of the push and pulling forces should be completed. Further, the assessment was comprehensive but lacked more concrete biomechanical assessments such as spine loading estimates. Spine loading could provide additional insight into changes in the mechanical loading that would be expected from the observed alterations in trunk motions. It would further account for potential muscle co-activation patterns that could be influenced by the lifting technique adopted by the workers.

Sixth, another consideration for the adoption of the Adjustable Ergo Cart as a viable intervention would be the usability of the cart, which was out of the scope of this project. One key situation that may influence the usability and effectiveness of the cart is when item selectors are stocking the lower shelf on their knees. Again, this technique was not observed and thus, the results cannot be extrapolated to using Adjustable Ergo Cart while kneeling.

Although these limitations need to be considered, the results of the study provided valuable documentation of the kinematic and subjective alterations that implementing an adjustable cart could have for the stocker in the grocery store. The bottom line was that the cart reduced the trunk flexion and reduced the static load moment, but slightly increased the twisting, resulting in a marginal decrease in LBD risk (risk index and NIOSH CLI). Given the positive subjective perceptions, the adjustable cart would also appear to be a viable intervention that would be routinely utilized in stocking activities in grocery stores.

Although the results of the current study are intriguing, the adjustable cart only addresses one aspect of the exposures for MSDs in grocery stores, particularly in small business locations like the ones visited in Puerto Rico. Further, interventions need to not only be effective but also cost efficient (e.g. low cost). An adjustable cart like the one evaluated in this study typically costs more than $800 (USD), which would be very prohibitive in many stores and businesses. In addition, interventions that reduce the weight of the product (e.g. smaller containers) and the number of repetitions need to be investigated. However, current profit margins and other industry economic concerns may limit the effectiveness of such interventions. Furthermore, the current intervention addresses the low heights at the cart and neglects lifts from low heights at the shelf. Additional interventions need to target lifting from and to low shelves in all areas of the grocery store, not eliminating these low shelves but developing specialized interventions that reduce the risk from lifting to and from the low shelves. The combination of interventions at the shelf and cart would likely lead to significant and meaningful reduction in LBD risk factors rather than the marginal reductions found for the Adjustable Ergo Cart only. Thus, the control of low back injuries and other MSDs in grocery stores and other retail businesses will need to be multifaceted and probably require more than one device or intervention.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

With many ergonomic exposures being identified for industries with the Wholesale, Retail and Trade sector, the need to identify effective interventions has become a priority—research to practice. The current study investigates one such intervention that targeted lifting to and from low heights at the cart in grocery store stocking tasks. The Adjustable Ergo Cart allowed the workers to place the products at mid-thigh height, thus reducing the need to lift from a forward flexed posture. The elimination of forward flexion would potentially reduce the risk of low back injuries, particularly for bulky and heavy products. However, based on the LBD risk index and NIOSH CLI, the Adjustable Ergo Cart was only a marginally effective intervention to eliminate risk to stockers. Future work needs to identify and investigate interventions that reduce the weight of products, reduce lifting from the low height shelves in the warehouse and store, and reduce the number of lifts per worker. The bottom line was that an adjustable height cart can only be minimally effective in reducing the detrimental exposures found in stocking of grocery products, given that the focus of the intervention is at the cart and neglects the shelving which is oftentimes at low levels.

No financial support was provided by the cart manufacturer with the Adjustable Ergo Cart being purchased from funds provided by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to acknowledge the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health for providing partial funding for this study. We would also like to thank the students who assisted in the data collection phase of the study, from the University of Cincinnati: Balaji Sharma, Donald Herrmann, and Anita Krishnan and from the University of Puerto Rico: Rafael J. Avilés, Joel Ramírez, Yadira Colón, Ana González, Linette Pruna, Nilda Morales, and Yadiel Vega.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

