@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Mapping the relationships between work and sustainability and the opportunities for ergonomic action

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Ergonomics can be actively influential within the organization on issues relating to work improvements, caused by sustainability policies.


                        
                        
                           
                           Into sustainability policies, ergonomics may boost integrated increases in the organization's performance and in workers' well-being.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ergonomics can provide support for changes and new sustainability-related work requirements to be considered.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ergonomics can contribute to the definition of the concept of work in a context of sustainable development.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Work

Sustainable development

Corporate sustainability

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A map was drawn up of the relationships between work (in its multiple interpretations) and sustainability (sustainable development and corporate sustainability) based on a bibliographic analysis of articles that discuss these themes jointly in the current academic literature. The position of the discipline of ergonomics focused on work was identified from this map and, based on its specific academic literature, it was possible to identify where this discipline could contribute so that work and workers can be included in the discourse of sustainable development and considered in corporate sustainability policies. Ergonomics can be actively influential within the organization on issues relating to work improvements; it may boost integrated increases in the organization's performance and in workers' well-being; it can provide support for changes and new (environmental) sustainability-related work requirements to be considered; and it can contribute to the definition of the concept of work in a context of sustainable development.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The main objective of this research was to find articles in the recent literature that discuss work (in its multiple interpretations) and sustainability (sustainable development and corporate sustainability) jointly, mapping the relationships between these themes. In addition, among the articles selected in this search, an analysis was made of those related to ergonomics in order to identify the current articles that link this discipline to the theme of sustainability and to discuss other possibilities (opportunities) for ergonomic actions to contribute toward sustainable work. As contribution of this study, we hope to provide a basis for reciprocal enrichment between ergonomic actions and sustainability policies.

The theme of sustainability was first addressed in a study published in 1713 by von Carlowitz (1732), which discussed the need to consider natural resource limitations (specifically in forestry) in the economic development of a region. Since then, the theme was addressed on other occasions and has been disseminated internationally, mainly in the last four decades, through the concept of sustainable development. This concept was formally introduced in the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972 (Dresner, 2012), and its most widely recognized definition is the one proposed in 1987 by the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED, 1987). By ensuring that the needs of the present generation are met without affecting the ability of future generations to meet their own, sustainable development can be achieved provided that environmental, social and economic aspects are dealt with jointly in the short, medium and long term.

This concept now permeates many spheres of society, and the intentions emerging from the theme of sustainable development have led to other correlated concepts. Assumptions about sustainability are increasingly being adjusted and applied by individual entities such as organizations (Figge and Hahn, 2004; Gladwin et al., 1995), which in this case is called corporate sustainability (Bansal, 2005; Montiel, 2008; Steurer et al., 2005; Van Marrewijk, 2003). Corporate sustainability (CS) is a concept that emerges in companies, leading them to adopt new ways of acting. Although the concept initially focused only on environmental issues, companies' actions today encompass the three dimensions (economic, social and environmental), as proposed by the Triple Bottom Line approach (Elkington, 1997, 1994). At the same time, several approaches to CS are identified in the literature. Montiel (2008) identifies an approach related to ecological sustainability and the environmental dimension of business and another approach referring to the definition proposed by the WCED, also discussed by Dyllick and Hockerts (2002), including the social and environmental dimensions in the approach of organizations (Cannon, 1994; Elkington, 2005, 2002; Hart, 1997; Lozano, 2012; Rondinelli and Berry, 2000). Currently, this concept is closely related to another, that of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), which usually covers similar issues (Ebner and Baumgartner, 2006; Kleine and von Hauff, 2009; Montiel, 2008; Steurer et al., 2005; Van Marrewijk, 2003). The distinction between these two concepts is not clearly defined; Kleine & von Hauff (2009) and Montiel (2008) propose that they converge to a certain extent, although they are not equivalent concepts. This deserves a deeper discussion, above all with regard to the analysis of corporate practices. This article does not analyze this distinction in depth; however, because the two concepts relate to internal issues of firms, the terms CS and CSR are used as equivalents in many passages.

Since the advent of the sustainable development concept, the issue of work, in its different interpretations, has been included among the aspects to be upheld by mankind. Even so, the theme of work has never been central to the debate on sustainability and the issues regarding the content and organization of work have rarely been discussed, except in a few references to working conditions and decent work. Since 1972, the United Nations documents that underpin the actions of companies in the area of sustainability (UN (United Nations), 2005, 2000, 1992, 1972; WCED, 1987) have addressed issues on the theme of work (e.g., job security and stability, aspects of work health and safety, and contents of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of the Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work). For example, the first and fifth principles of the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment proclaim that “man is both creature and molder of his environment, which gives him physical sustenance and affords him the opportunity for intellectual, moral, social and spiritual growth. […] Both aspects of man's environment, the natural and the man-made, are essential to his well-being and to the enjoyment of basic human rights, the right to life itself” and “of all things in the world, people are the most precious” (UN (United Nations), 1972), and twenty years later, the first principle of the Rio Declaration proclaims that ‘human beings are at the center of concerns for sustainable development. They are entitled to a healthy and productive life in harmony with nature’ (UN (United Nations), 1992). At the Rio 92 Earth Summit it was explicitly stated that the need to satisfy material desires should not come at the expense of generating negative impacts on health (Scott, 2008, p.498), which obviously also refers to humans in a work situations. More recently, the latest documents mention the concept of decent work, which involves the creation of employment for men and women; the extension of social protection; the promotion of social dialogue; and the Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work (Ghai, 2003). The introduction of this concept proved to be especially necessary to oppose poor working conditions, especially in developing countries. Sweatshops are notorious cases that led to the emergence of work monitoring systems and NGOs (e.g., Fair Labor Association, Social Accountability International, Worldwide Responsible Apparel Production, and Workers Rights Consortium) as a way of tackling issues related to poor working conditions (Block et al., 2001; Chan, 2001; O’Rourke, 2003).

However, the concept of corporate sustainability is still being defined according to multiple interpretations and approaches, some of which mention the theme of work and its issues explicitly (Epstein, 2008; Littig and Grießler, 2005; Lozano, 2013; Van Marrewijk and Werre, 2003). What currently emerges is the introduction into the routine of companies of sustainability guidelines that mention social issues (GRI, 2013; ISO, 2010; UN (United Nations), 2013) in which work-related aspects are addressed (e.g., employment and labor relations, working conditions and social protection, social dialogue, work health and safety, human development and job training, and issues related to human rights). Lozano (2013, p. 1) argues that “internally, leadership and the business case are the most important drivers, whilst the most important external drivers are reputation, customer demands and expectations, and regulation and legislation,” which reinforces the need to examine work and workers.

Because ergonomics is a discipline strictly related with the theme of work, it is also related with sustainability (be it sustainable development or corporate sustainability). In the words of Haslam and Waterson (2013, p. 343) “There exists, it would seem, a natural synergy between these areas [the sustainability ones] and ergonomics, with its goal of understanding and optimizing the outcomes of human–system interactions.” This discipline began to formally incorporate concerns about global issues of sustainability, starting in the 12th Triennial Congress of the International Ergonomics Association (IEA) in 1994 (Haslam and Waterson, 2013). Since then, the connections between these areas of knowledge have increased, and in 2008 the IEA established the Human Factors and Sustainable Development Technical Committee.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

In order to structure current knowledge linking the themes of sustainability and work, a bibliographic review of academic articles in the Scopus database on themes relating to sustainability, ergonomics and work was made in February 2012. The set of articles was created by means of a process comprising the following steps:
                           
                              •
                              Choice of keywords related to work and sustainability (Fig. 1
                                 ).

Retrieval of articles from the Scopus database by means of a structured search using the predefined keywords (Table 1
                                 ). Only publications such as articles, articles in press, reviews, books, and business articles in English were extracted. The search fields were “all fields,” except for those related exclusively to sustainability (S, SD and SR), to which the search for keywords was applied only in the fields of “title, abstract and keywords.”

The title, keywords and abstracts of identified papers were read. The articles were previously classified according to their pertinence to this study, resulting in the refinement of the literature base to a subset of 167 articles.

The remaining papers were read in full for subsequent refinement. Thus, the final literature base comprised 112 papers.

From the set of selected articles, each paper was read in full and classified by means of the following parameters:
                           
                              •
                              Job type, adapted from Westgaard and Winkel (2011).

Industrial sector, based on the “International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities” proposed by the UN (http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cr/registry/regcst.asp?Cl=27).

Concept of sustainability described in each articles, which could be one or more, among: Sustainable Development (SD), Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), Corporate Sustainability (CS), Triple Bottom Line (TBL), Environmental Sustainability (ES), Social Sustainability (SS), Economic Sustainability (ES), Stakeholder theory (STK), and Sustainability - Generic (S).

Classification 1, which divides articles among those that discuss: public policies and local development; theoretical; companies in the international supply chain; and the other companies. In the two latter cases, the articles were subclassified among the five corporate systems proposed by Lozano (2012).

Classification 2, which divides articles according to the issues they address about work in the context of CSR (ISO 26.000).

Abstract, the most significant sentence from the abstract of each article, preferably related with work and sustainability.

Study design, adapted from Westgaard and Winkel (2011).

The articles were classified using a system which grouped them by similarity. However, this analysis proved unsuitable for the structured classification of the results. Therefore, due to the difficulty of finding a univocal logic based on the classifications, each classification was defined at two levels, firstly by the theme of sustainability, with the papers divided between the ones closest to the theme of sustainable development (9 papers, one of which is a conceptual paper) and those closest to that of Corporate Sustainability (103 papers, 21 of which are conceptual papers); and secondly by the theme of work, using an ad hoc division based on the purpose of the article. This level of analysis was organized based on the question of how the authors proposed a relationship between work and sustainability, which was answered by considering the concepts they adopted, as well as the results obtained through empirical approaches. Lastly, the themes in which the subject of ergonomics are included were identified, which revealed four dimensions that contribute to sustainability.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Worldwide concern about the need to introduce a more sustainable model of development is addressed at both a theoretical level and in case studies based on experiences in certain communities, as well as with respect to public policies. Based on the contribution of nine articles, Fig. 2
                         summarizes the relationship between sustainable development and the theme of work. The latter plays an important role in the transition to new models of development: the worker's participation in defining sustainability policies (and that of communities) is essential for global sustainability (social, economic and environmental) resulting from the implementation of new policies (Reed, 2007), especially if his involvement begins in the planning phase (Nelsen et al., 2010).

The benefits, however, are reciprocal, since sustainability policies encourage the social inclusion of all types of workers, preventing some of them from being marginalized or discriminated against. The case of women is a relevant one, and reproductive work (invisible) is essential for the sustainability of the future workforce of the local community (Reed, 2007). The sustainable development of a region may also include new economic activities that have positive impacts in terms of employment and income in the region (Mesquita et al., 2010). Another possible benefit for the worker is the promotion of his health and safety, although decision makers of public policies generally considered this a luxury (Radon et al., 2010).

Moreover, another benefit refers to the encouragement of a new vision about work. Related to the concept of sustainable development and the social aspects of corporate sustainability, there are authors who seek to establish the concept of “sustainable work”. Littig and Grießler (2005) address work as an activity to satisfy human needs and, at the same time, as the main process of exchange between society and nature. Accordingly, they also claim that a sustainable working society requires: 1) the ecologization of existing jobs and the creation of new environmentally healthy jobs so as to ensure the rendering of environmentally, socially and health-friendly goods and services; 2) a redistribution of all the work that needs to be done in society considering gender, so that everyone can have a sufficient income from useful and publicly accepted work (for example, through shorter working hours, childcare, a work-life balance for men and women, etc.); and 3) freedom to choose, at any stage of life, between different forms of work (work arrangements, field of work) or lifestyles, always having the right to individual social security (Littig and Grießler, 2005). Another concept that directly connects work and sustainable development is developmental work. Hvid (2004) states that there is an interest in the relationship between developmental work and sustainable development, and proposes to unite creativity and workers' values toward a common goal: sustainability. Yet another proposed concept is green sustainable work, which is defined as “jobs that have a beneficial impact on the environment, provide a physically and psychosocially sound working environment and that generate a large enough revenue to cover salaries and social costs” (Klang et al., 2003, p.321).

However, sustainable development policies may have negative impacts on communities and working people if the focus of sustainability is limited, e.g., considering only aspects of the environmental dimension (Trauger, 2007). Good planning of sustainability policies cannot exclude the consideration of social aspects. The existence of negative social impacts (also in terms of inadequate working conditions and employment relationships) may lead the local population to feel aversion toward environmental issues, and hence, to oppose sustainability policies (Cao et al., 2010).

In addition to the discourse on sustainable development, papers associated with corporate sustainability policies are discussed. The 103 articles identified in the database were divided into three blocks (one article was included in more than one block), as shown in Fig. 3
                        . This figure illustrates the reasons why the issue of work is related to corporate responsibility policies; gaps and opportunities in the current scenario of work and CS policies; and the key influencers of the introduction of work-related CS policies in organizations.

The theme of work is included in the discourse of corporate sustainability motivated by different reasons. The following four reasons were extracted from the 60 articles related to the theme: effective interest in workers (19 articles), increase in the organization's performance (20 papers), control over workers' conduct and actions (six articles), improve the corporate image (11 articles), and work for sustainability (22 articles).

CS policies are aimed at introducing actions into organizations that jointly improve environmental, economic and social aspects. Among the latter, founded mainly upon the vision of the stakeholder theory, the worker assumes a relevant role as an internal stakeholder and his issues become more important (Bolton et al., 2011). Thus, together with and in addition to HR policies, the inclusion of direct benefits for workers can be found as a policy of responsibility of the company (Moon, 2007). This includes promoting better work-life balance (Moon, 2007), health and safety (Venverloh, 2007), the development of his character, skills, morality and values by means of, for example, volunteer work (Gray, 2010) and, more generally, the consideration of working conditions (Klang et al., 2003). In the workplace, the goal is to maximize people's well-being, involving workers in a man-centered CSR, fostering relationships that go beyond the financial relationship (Kimmet, 2007), and beyond the usual productivity goals (Bryer, 2010). In this context, the directors must change their attitude by shifting from a bureaucratic and procedural logic to an interpretive logic, thereby improving their relations with employees (Lehman, 2007). These aspects can be inserted by means of Management Systems that introduce actions of sustainability not only of an environmental nature in organizations (Klang et al., 2003; Venverloh, 2007), such as Human Resources Management based on the concept of sustainability (Schlotzhauer, 2011) or specific modules such as the Social Life Cycle Attribute (Andrews et al., 2009).

The worker's interest is also visible when one analyzes specific social aspects of sustainability. A case in point is the discussion about the issue of sustainability of organizations from the standpoint of the energy spent by the worker himself and the strategies he uses at work to keep up his energy (Fritz et al., 2011). These aspects can be considered by companies to help their employees maintain their own energy at work.

According to Manuaba (2007), ergonomics encourages global sustainability through the presence of more humane companies, i.e., healthier, safer, more comfortable and efficient, and the promotion of well-being at work is one of the goals of companies in the context of the discourse about sustainability (Randelin et al., 2011). Ergonomics acts in convergence with sustainability objectives, minimizing work-related stress and promoting the health and safety of workers (Jain et al., 2011; Metzner and Fischer, 2010; Purnawati, 2007; Wreder and Klefsjö, 2007; Wreder, 2007). Considering health in business policies makes it possible to ensure “sustainable production systems.” The latter is defined as “the joint consideration of competitive performance and working conditions in a long term perspective” (Westgaard and Winkel, 2011).

The goal of companies in the market is to maximize their own financial returns, and economic and financial sustainability is generally the most relevant dimension of CS. Based on this vision, the introduction of CS can be seen as an opportunity to further enhance the organization's performance (Sarkar, 2008). In this context, companies are also acting on the human “resource” for two main reasons:
                                 
                                    -
                                    
                                       Importance of benefits for workers. Many articles argue that the organization's performance can be boosted by adopting socially responsible behavior, for example, by improving working conditions and addressing human rights issues. According to Ogrin and Kralj (2009), work pleasant and stimulating environments, the promotion of relaxing activities, job satisfaction, transparency in communication, and satisfaction such as cooperation with coworkers, can lead to greater employee motivation and a consequent increase in the organization's performance. In this context, Kralj (2009) argues that system thinking can be deployed, creating a more open organizational culture focused on job satisfaction (with a pleasant and stimulating environment, with incentives for cooperation and more motivating activities) that enable the achievement of excellent performance. According to Pajo and Lee (2011), also promoting volunteerism within the context of corporate sustainability can lead to great advantages in the organization by creating a positive and pro-social corporate identity, with all the related benefits of greater altruism in the organization, ultimately motivating and engaging workers (Gray, 2010; Pajo and Lee, 2011). Liu et al. (2010), in turn, argue that creating conditions for workers to participate in decisions can help companies motivate employees, encourage group work, and promote productivity and innovation. Moreover, Jarventaus (2007) adds the possibility that these actions also lead to greater economic and environmental benefits. According to Ansett (2007), introducing corporate sustainability can help, for instance, to reduce costs, generate product, process and strategy innovations, obtain operating permits and reduce internal and external conflicts. With regard to the implementation of lean production (as a way of having more qualified and productive workers), Mefford (2011) identifies benefits such as higher quality and greater efficiency and a joint reduction of labor claims. According to Lehmann et al. (2010), CS enables the company to become more dynamic and innovative, particularly in changing contexts. Finally, in the specific case of the presence of impaired relationships within organizations, a board engaged in CS can prevent the organization's well-being and survival from being compromised (Lehman, 2007). The role of ergonomics in companies in the context of corporate sustainability can contribute to augment the organization's performance. A study involving ergonomics (Metzner and Fischer, 2010) highlighted how greater consideration of the opinions of workers in the planning and implementation of CSR-related projects can contribute to improve the organization's performance. Moreover, one of the possible benefits of introducing ergonomics into sustainability policies is the considerable reduction in health care costs and the retention of highly qualified workers (Genaidy et al., 2009a). Another concept associated with ergonomics is business sustainability, for which human performance is a critical factor to improve and maintain corporate health (Genaidy et al., 2010, 2009b). Other articles related to ergonomics and discussed in the previous section include, besides effective interest in the worker, the increase in the organization's performance as a motivator for the inclusion of attention to workers in corporate sustainability policies (Manuaba, 2007; Metzner and Fischer, 2010; Purnawati, 2007; Randelin et al., 2011; Westgaard and Winkel, 2011; Wreder and Klefsjö, 2007; Wreder, 2007).


                                       Control over workers' conduct and actions. One of the possible results of introducing CS in the company is that it allows for greater control over social aspects, particularly over workers, both positive and negative. Two types of control of workers' conduct and actions were identified: over the workers' representatives and over the conduct of workers. In the first case, the use of CS (particularly of codes of conduct and non-financial reports) may be aimed at building a relationship of trust between management and “the labor union movement” (Egels-Zandén, 2009a; Johansen, 2010). In the second case, a few cases were identified. The promotion of health (proposed in the CSR) may be closely tied to an idea of control over the conduct and actions of workers, which shapes the attitudes and behavior of workers according to the company's rules and values (Holmqvist, 2009). CS policies can help workers adopt a more positive attitude, e.g., to adverse changes such as the occurrence of downsizing and worker layoffs (Svensen et al., 2007). Codes of conduct (with ILO principles considered only marginally) are necessary for the company to ensure the application of principles that favor it and to protect its assets, ensuring that the knowledge of workers is fully incorporated by the company (Béthoux et al., 2007). Moreover, in case of permanent restructuring, the top-down introduction of CSR represented an ad hoc tool created to increase the dominant position of managers in imposing their will on other stakeholders (Bonvin, 2007).

Although the corporate image can be related with increased organizational performance, being a sustainable company allows it to gain greater approval from its stakeholders, thus achieving its economic goals more easily. Two groups of articles that discuss this topic were found.
                                 
                                    -
                                    Concern about the company image (potential and current) perceived by workers. CS policies have a positive impact, above all on the attraction and retention of the best workers (Ansett, 2007; Doh et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2010; Moon, 2007; Smith and Langford, 2011). Companies are increasingly aware that in their choices of jobs, people, particularly those with a higher educational level (postgraduates, for instance), consider the company's reputation relevant, including its social responsibility and its involvement in its own community (Moon, 2007).

Concern about the company image (potential and current) perceived by the community (especially customers). In this case, there are three possibilities. The first involves competitive advantage. When international brands are driven to adopt CSR policies in response to external pressures from consumers or organized movements, they manage to distance themselves from a history of irresponsibility and gain preference in purchasing by consumers who are becoming more aware. In general, workers benefit from this situation (Ansett, 2007; Bennett and Lagos, 2007; Doorey, 2011). Moreover, a more proactive stance by workers, resulting from their increased satisfaction due to the introduction of effective CSR policies, and greater participation in the organization's CSR decisions enables companies to gain legitimacy and to sustain their identity as a “good company” more effectively (Bolton et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2010; Moon, 2007). The second involves corporate irresponsibility. Companies can develop CSR programs aiming to conceal their real environmental and health costs from their clients. In such cases, the CSR projects produce very limited benefits that allow such companies essentially to continue engaging in their traditional practices (Otañez and Glantz, 2011). On the other hand, when the company introduces CSR actions to obtain marketing approval, it is difficult to convince the workers of the value and authenticity of such social alignment (Yang and Malone, 2008). The third is about shaping the meaning of a responsible company. In cases of adverse impacts on workers, such as worker layoffs, actions associated with CSR (e.g., offering training to laid-off workers to help them find a new job) can help an organization strengthen its position as a socially responsible company. Unlike the proposal of stakeholder theory, companies act from a privileged position, influencing, shaping and transforming the intentions of the stakeholders themselves, creating a network of actors loyal to the company's own definition of what it means to be socially responsible (Bergstrom and Diedrich, 2011).

Introducing sustainability at companies may mean that workers must change their own work or the way they work. Several points were identified:
                                 
                                    -
                                    
                                       Importance of workers in the implementation of sustainability (if solely environmental or global). Sustainability (or adequate management systems) cannot exist without workers that support it (Winter and Burn, 2010). In the implementation of organizational CSR processes, the growing involvement of workers over time can be a vital factor for success (Bolton et al., 2011; Zorpas, 2010).

Introducing CS can cause additional work. When Management Systems are introduced specifically to improve environmental aspects, the role of workers is to make significant efforts to develop the practices needed for these programs to permeate all the company's processes (Fricke, 2009; Van Calker et al., 2007). However, a similar case of such indicators may result in additional work for workers (Ogrin and Kralj, 2009).


                                       Change in work to support environmental sustainability. The work environment, workers, work and lifestyle will change in the future as a result of the shift toward greater sustainability (above all environmental) by companies. Workers will work more broadly, in different environments and for different purposes (Tomlinson, 2010).


                                       New competencies required of the worker. Workers will have to become innovative in the way they develop and manufacture products, provide services and conduct business (Arnaud and Williams, 2010; Vavik and Keitsch, 2010; Zorpas, 2010). They will have to increase their competencies and skills (McMahon and Bhamra, 2012), change their habits, knowledge, attitudes and social norms (Winter and Burn, 2010), and increase their mutual cooperation, facilitating the adoption of principles of environmental protection and preservation (Akiyama, 2010). Furthermore, companies will have to train workers and change the corporate culture in order to increase workers' involvement (Jarventaus, 2007).


                                       Creation of new types of work (or modifications in the scope of some types). Greater engagement in sustainability (particularly environmental) creates new types of work or modifies existing ones. The case of social work was found among the articles selected for this study. Before the advent of corporate sustainability, this is how organizations dealt with the issue of social responsibility without it leading to structural changes. One of the main reasons why Industrial Social Work failed was because value (“profit”) for corporations was not added (Sarkar, 2008). This problem was solved with the introduction of CSR, which companies use as a corporate strategy to gain reputation, reduce the pressures of civil society organizations, and conserve the barriers against the entry of others in a developing world market (Sarkar, 2008). This evolution has resulted in a change in the work of this type of worker (Sarkar, 2008). Social workers today may still play an important role, but their involvement in corporate sustainability policies is questionable (Boehm, 2009). Due to the characteristics of their profession (interdisciplinary), social workers can seek greater “environmental and social justice.” This requires a new form of action in the work of the social worker, and must interconnect concerns regarding the environment, human rights and justice, and quality of human life, and the issues of peace, war and natural disasters (Schmitz et al., 2012). Norton (2011) identifies the need for the social worker to consider social and environmental perspectives jointly, since both of them deal with justice and relationships. Social workers can play the role of facilitators (in multi-stakeholder training programs in the workplace) in the implementation of corporate codes (related to labor rights) and, hence, in the improvement of workers well-being (Ngai and Angelina, 2011).


                                       Workers help in the design of CS policies. Worker motivation is one of the main causes for the introduction of social responsibility, and there could be no efficient and authentic CSR without considering workers (Ligeti and Oravecz, 2009). Their participation, which is considered essential in the implementation of CSR policies, can be taken into consideration by the Corporate Board through trade unions and the HR department (Huse et al., 2009; Preuss et al., 2009). The involvement of these social actors, from the early stages of such initiatives, can lead to major advantages: on the one hand, it can enable the initiatives to reach a higher degree of sustainability (Levitt, 2007), and on the, it can shape the meaning, interpretation and implementation of CSR, since it is an emergent is not yet fully formed concept (Preuss et al., 2009). Before they can play an active role in CSR, however, they must gain internal legitimacy in the company (Preuss et al., 2009).

Corporate sustainability policies are not always effective on issues related to workers, presenting numerous gaps and/or opportunities. The following gaps and/or opportunities were found in the 37 articles in this block:
                              
                                 -
                                 Protection of the most vulnerable classes of workers. The current deregulation of the labor market, particularly at the level of international supply chains, is harming mainly the most vulnerable workforce categories, especially female (Pearson, 2007; Prieto-Carrón, 2008), informal (Barrientos, 2008) and foreigner workers (Crinis, 2010). It is advisable for society and the corporations that employ such workers to also extend their protection to these categories.


                                    Limited applications of sustainability can have negative effects on workers. When companies focus on greener operations, it is possible that work health and safety indicators and working conditions worsen or fail to be considered, as in the case of green building (Rajendran et al., 2009), organic cotton farming (Bitzer and Glasbergen, 2010), car dismantling (Kazmierczak et al., 2005) and more sustainable (Pilgeram, 2011; Trauger, 2007) or local agriculture (Cross et al., 2009). There are also cases of professions whose work involves achieving greater environmental sustainability, but which do not gain any social status or recognition by society, receiving only negative impacts on their health and that of their work environment, e.g., trash scavengers (Deb and Welling, 2010) and waste management and recycling workers (Klang et al., 2003). This can also be the case if the focus is exclusively on financial sustainability. Cases of financial restructuring can lead to a decline in employee benefits, wage freezes, increased working hours, use of part-time workers, expansion of work tasks, encouragement of older employees to retire, and cooperation with other agencies to share employees (Buehler and Pucher, 2011), creating negative externalities even for outside workers and the local community (Demaria, 2010). Lastly, there is a similar risk when companies focus only on certain aspects of social sustainability (Kira and Van Eijnatten, 2010, 2008), since the decision to ensure the improvement of societal aspects may, for instance, result in an increased workload on the workers involved (Van Calker et al., 2007).

There are transnational governance issues that must be solved. In the context of international supply chains (ISCs) there is a problem of Transnational Governance of Workers' Rights. Due to the emergence of transnational corporations, it is no longer as effective to have collective bargaining and industrial agreements between companies and unions, in the specific context of each national government and of hard law based on international labor regulations (Tsogas, 2009). The governance of labor relations is weakening in favor of such corporations (Egels-Zandén, 2009a). According to Tsogas (2009), other strategies besides hard laws, such as the soft regulatory approach and CSR, are still ambiguous and must overcome many challenges to become effective. To achieve consolidated improvements, it is necessary for multinational companies, along with the governments of host countries, industry associations, trade unions, NGOs and local businesses, to improve the institutional environment of each emerging market, including its legal and ethical framework (Tan, 2009; Tsogas, 2009).


                                    Cultural aspects and business strategies must be considered. Improving work related aspects also involves being knowledgeable about the social aspects of each culture (Vachon, 2010) and the strategies of each company, which differ (Park and Dickson, 2008).


                                    Health & safety policies should be improved. One of the shortcomings found in the CSR policies inherent to the improvement of workers conditions is the deepening of the link between CSR (which is strategic) and the management of psychosocial risks (Jain et al., 2011), health and job security (Sarkis et al., 2010).

Weakness of business instruments for work sustainability. The introduction of CSR policies, particularly those related to work, in the ISC context, clearly shows some limitations (Frynas, 2008). Dispelling some myths, Lund-Thomsen (2008) argues that CSR policies are not widespread in developing countries, and few global sourcing companies and their suppliers are engaged and prioritize them. Moreover, it is a fallacy to assume that if suppliers in developing countries comply with codes of conduct, they will improve workers' conditions and reduce environmental pollution. Lastly, audit actions and the exclusion of suppliers that fail to comply with CSR policies do not always help to improve worker conditions and respect for the environment. Frynas (2008) also points out four main criticisms of CSR: (1) lack of empirical evidence, (2) presence of analytical limitations of CSR, (3) cases of business constraints in the implementation of CSR, and (4) unresolved governance issues. An important aspect to be considered which limits the effectiveness of CSR policies (including especially the codes of conduct) is its top-down and unilateral vision (Béthoux et al., 2007; Egels-Zandén, 2009b; Johansen, 2010; Merk, 2009). In addition to the criticism of the voluntariness of such programs, which per se already constitutes a structural constraint (Blowfield and Dolan, 2010, 2008), there is a gap between ethical intentions (imposed mainly by Western culture) and the realities and needs of the beneficiaries (in this case, their workers). One criticism in particular is directed at the indicators, which have not been defined in theory or in practice, and are still disconnected from one another (Kleine and von Hauff, 2009). For workers, institutional arrangements established in the workplace are more important and effective than non-financial reports (such as those on sustainability) as a way to demand, receive and develop accountability regarding organizational issues (Johansen, 2010; Turker, 2009). One of the keys to effective CSR as a tool for labor market regulation is to extend negotiation power to all stakeholders of the company, among which the workers are to be considered. They can enrich these policies (Lund, 2004), and be a critical factor for their effective implementation (Bonvin, 2007; Ligeti and Oravecz, 2009).

Companies may decide to introduce CS actions based on internal policies, but also in response to the influence of an external stakeholder (as mentioned earlier in the discussion about the four motivators). This block comprised 14 articles. Starting from an overview, Park-Poaps and Rees (2010) studied four types of stakeholders (consumers, regulation, industry and media) and their impact in providing fair working conditions. Regulatory forces, through national laws, for instance, did not prove to be a significant variable in the improvement of working conditions.

Going into detail, some contributions were found about three groups of stakeholders:
                              
                                 -
                                 
                                    Transactional networking, NGOs and trade unions. With respect to three types of monitoring of working conditions and labor rights in developing countries, Wells (2007) discusses the major flaws and structural limitations in regulations centered on recommendations from NGOs (soft law). Even so, the political economy of labor comprising labor struggles in their political and historical context must be considered for the actions of trade unions, NGOs and corporate interventions to be successful (Neve, 2008). Because companies have taken advantage of the possibility of spatially increasing outsourcing and of outsourcing their production (which has undermined the traditional strategies that work has used to protect itself against exploitation), there could also be a great opportunity for workers to achieve their own rights in the expansion of their struggle to a broader (in space), even international level (Merk, 2009). Coordinated transnational projects may offer a great potential for change in the working conditions of whole groups of workers, such as the defense of women's rights (Hale and Wills, 2007). Although transnational networking has been encouraged, top-down actions should not be introduced. If one considers that the presence of external pressures is necessary for better labor standards, one must also consider the independence and centrality of local institutions of the sector and of local collective actions in the implementation of CSR policies, particularly in less visible supply chains whose brands are little known internationally (Lund-thomsen and Nadvi, 2010).


                                    Industry peer – supplier behavior. In discussions about the international supply chain, one of the thorniest issues is the definition of the corporate responsibilities of multinationals for the actions of their partners (Mares, 2010). There are misguided economic incentives for international suppliers to reduce their compliance with work-related CSR codes while maintaining a semblance of compliance. The workers themselves have economic incentives and a punitive system that drives them to accept such practices (Egels-Zandén, 2007). Some solutions are: to establish respect for codes of conduct as a minimum requirement in purchase decisions, build closer relationships with suppliers, and change the monitoring of suppliers, increasing employee participation in monitoring codes of conduct (Egels-Zandén, 2007). For Boyd et al. (2007), CSR initiatives should not be imposed on the supply chain itself or controlled by large-scale monitoring. Trust and transparency should be built to improve supplier compliance and to avoid endangering buyer-supplier relationships. The costs of improving labor standards should be shared among the main actors in the global supply chain to preclude the emergence of harmful cases. If the costs are not shared, suppliers without bargaining power may be forced to impose more high-paced work on the workers themselves, and at lower wages, in order to generate a higher profit margin (Yu, 2008). As discussed at the macro level (Vachon, 2010), the cultural aspect must also be taken into account. Companies with inventory control, image differentiation and emphasis on strategic product development have been more engaged in partnerships with companies and well developed CSR policies, while companies that emphasize lower prices are less engaged in partnership relations (Park and Dickson, 2008).


                                    Media. 
                                    Islam (2010) demonstrates that large multinational companies with supply chains linked to developing countries seem to respond to the adverse attention of the media, producing greater positive social impacts, especially on issues that attract the highest negative media attention, such as precarious work conditions.


                                    Internal influencers. People and departments inside organizations can motivate the introduction of principles of sustainability in the company's policies. This may be the case of ergonomics, which, by upholding sustainability policies, helps reverse the current situation characterized by global inequality (Scott, 2008).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The relationships between the themes of sustainability and work are mapped in Fig. 4
                     , based on the analysis of the results of the literature search. In this figure, simplified Fig. 2 was introduced at the intersection between SD and work, and simplified Fig. 3 at the intersection between CS and work. “Gaps and Opportunities” were considered to underpin the discussion about the relationship between work and sustainability. Within the ambit of sustainability, according to the classification established in this study, discourses on sustainable development and corporate sustainability (including CSR) were distinguished, considering CS as an application of SD inside organizations. CS may consist of the realization and inclusion of SD concepts in organizations, but it may also consist of functional appropriations (e.g., partial) of the needs of organizations, far removed from the original discourse of SD (for this reason, we believe that CS is not contained in its entirety in SD, as shown in Fig. 4). SD and CS include issues other than work, and vice versa.

The relationship between sustainable development and work is one of mutual benefits. Sustainable development includes social aspects among its goals, and work and the worker are fundamental. Likewise, work can also benefit sustainable development, since workers are active agents in society. Therefore, a real implementation of sustainable development will also include work-related issues and the changes in work for the world's entire population.

Looking at a broader context, it is necessary to identify the specific needs of each region of the globe to identify social and environmental issues that are seriously impacted while simultaneously impacting the way work is done. In extreme conditions, e.g., conditions of poverty and hunger, this situation must be dealt with in an integrated manner, avoiding work in precarious conditions and that disrespect human rights, and that generate significant negative environmental impacts resulting from extractivism, which is generally the form of subsistence of these populations. It is a complex issue, since this situation is related directly or indirectly to an international supply chain that often takes advantage of it, at least from the financial standpoint.

Another element to be considered is the groups of workers without representation, who are generally marginalized or forgotten. Once can cite the case of domestic workers, particularly in developing countries, who are at the mercy of moral and sexual harassment, long working hours, and lack of formal employment (and therefore the right to social security).

Moreover, the decision for new production sites should also be considered in the light of concepts of sustainable development. Although it generates significant economic development in the region, there are social issues that should not be ignored, such as the quality of workers' housing and support structures offered (for recreation and social interaction), attention to work-life balance (by providing periodic opportunities to return to their families), not to mention avoiding the encouragement of more perverse social issues such as people trafficking for forced labor in conditions similar to slavery. The challenge is to consider all these issues, which, in a context of sustainable development, can no longer be ignored.

With regard to corporate sustainability (and CSR), work is one of the key issues, driven mainly by two aspects. The first aspect derives from the fact that the main goal of CS is to introduce the discourse of sustainable development in the corporate environment, where the shift toward greater care of workers is gaining strength. In addition to complying with national labor laws, companies are expected to proactively introduce voluntary policies to further improve work practices and to permanently eliminate threats to workers' rights. Since this is an expectation of society, those who can influence the effective introduction of CS policies are, above all, actors external to companies, but also internal actors.

The second aspect has to do with the tendency, in recent years, for companies to take better care of workers. People and their work are fundamental to the success or failure of the economic activities of organizations; hence, relations with them should be managed and improved. With this vision, in the introduction of CS in corporate policies, efforts are made to align the discourse of sustainability with the companies' own motivations. This may lead to corporate sustainability actions that are inconsistent with the aims of sustainable development, as when sustainability is used for functional purposes, maximizing exclusively the company's economic aspects (e.g., control of workers' conduct and actions and concealment of cases of non-sustainability or negative externalities caused by partial sustainability). In Fig. 4, we consider the action of corporate sustainability not fully included in the discourse of sustainable development. The introduction of CS in organizations is often strictly linked to economic motivations, and sustainable development goals are shaped according to business objectives. This is also the case of the subject of “work”: some elements exist (e.g., increased control of worker conduct and actions and partially improvement of the corporate image) that consider only the economic goal, in detriment to the objectives of the social and environmental dimensions. In addition, gaps and opportunities were identified that should be considered to enable the achievement of shared benefits in the relationship between SD and work, and also to ensure that work is effectively addressed in CS policies.

In this context, there is ample space for ergonomics to contribute actively to the discourse of sustainability with respect to the theme of work. During the literature review, the theme of sustainability appeared in some issues. In addition to the articles that used the term sustainability to indicate the need for this discipline to continue contributing through actions aimed at promoting health in organizations (Caple, 2010; Punnett et al., 2009; Scott, 2008), which were excluded from the final selection because they do not explicitly discuss the sustainability-work relationship, the topic of ergonomics was identified in three places:
                           
                              –
                              As an ally to achieve positive benefits for workers' well-being.

As an ally to achieve the goal of enhancing the performance of organizations.

As one of the possible influencers for work to be considered in corporate sustainability policies.

The structured analysis of the texts and places where ergonomics was found may allow for the definition of four possible fields of action of ergonomics within the discourse of sustainability related with work (Fig. 5
                        ):
                           
                              –
                              
                                 Definition of the concept of sustainable work. Making working conditions evolve so that they are adaptable to individuals throughout their life is a question of both sustainability and ergonomics. It is necessary to address the causes of the most prevalent issues, avoiding mitigative actions. Of course health and well-being programs are necessary and positive, e.g., encouraging physical exercise (Bridger et al., 2013), but these programs should also include aspects directly related to work content. The same applies to work and worker-related issues, in which organizational performance should be evenly balanced with the health and well-being of workers in a broader sense (Dul et al., 2012). In addition to physical demands involving disorders and diseases of the body, there are also psychological demands, for which the content of the task, definition of the pace of production, the division of tasks, the goals to be achieved, and other organizational aspects also are crucial, especially for building health. One could also include the impact of the work environment on creativity (Lukersmith and Burgess-Limerick, 2013). In the corporate environment (offices), for instance, despite adequate environmental characteristics (temperature, noise, anthropometry and biomechanics), an increasing number of people suffer from mental disorders (Harnois and Gabriel, 2000; Houtman and Kompier, 2011). However, in these environments there are also psychosomatic disorders, i.e., pathologically unrelated to physical causes. Health is tied to cognitive demands (Falzon, 2004; Hollnagel, 1997; Montmollin, 1990) or even to organizational constraints (Westgaard and Winkel, 2011). This fact makes it a challenge for ergonomics to shed light on the relationship between cause and effect, since these relationships are becoming increasingly qualitative and subtle (e.g., a reduction in absenteeism cannot be positive) (Kleine and von Hauff, 2009). In addition, there is the challenge of measuring the cost benefit of action in ergonomics (Beevis and Slade, 2003), especially in this context. Many of these elements are generally invisible, and as such, are disregarded by management and treated as externalities (Hubault and Tertre du, 2008). In addition, the fact that the definition of criteria for social sustainability is not yet firmly established (Hasle and Jensen, 2012) clearly indicates the complexity and the need for a broader vision about health and quality of life (Dekker et al., 2013). Ergonomics can provide supporting evidence on issues of the internal social dimension of corporate sustainability, mainly as it pertains to decisions that impact the organization of work (e.g., division of tasks, content, pace, goals, evaluation), pinpointing the factors that lead to an integrated vision of performance and health from a long-term perspective, which goes beyond legal issues and benefits not only management but also workers, and hence, society (Zink, 2006). From the perspective of designing sustainable work systems (Zink, 2013), a reality of work from the standpoint of sustainability must recognize and avoid pressures and constraints that are harmful to the health (physical and mental) of a team, an area or even an organization. With regard to mental health, the most recent contributions of the psychodynamics of work have brought new concepts and perspectives for action with regard to improvements in work organization (Dejours, 2009; Lancman et al., 2007).


                                 Joint increase in organizational performance and worker well-being. Although there are different definitions of ergonomics (Wogalter et al., 1998), which often overlap (Wilson, 2000), some of its aspects are more emphasized. Ergonomics is considered a multidisciplinary field of science (Westgaard and Winkel, 1997), which seeks knowledge about human characteristics for the design of systems (Parsons, 2000), focusing on human-machine systems (Beevis and Slade, 2003), analyzing a variety of demands or specializations such as physical, cognitive and organizational requirements (Karwowski, 2005), considering both physical and psychological human aspects (Dul and Neumann, 2009) in order to enable productive, safe, comfortable, and effective human use (Chapanis, 1995) in a holistic approach (Wilson, 2013). The International Ergonomics Association defines ergonomics (or human factors) as “the scientific discipline concerned with the understanding of the interactions among humans and other elements of a system, and the profession that applies theoretical principles, data and methods to design in order to optimize human well being and overall system performance” (IEA_Council, 2000). Therefore, positive results must be achieved in two main spheres (Daniellou, 1996; Falzon, 2004): one centered on the organization and its performance (productivity, efficiency, reliability, quality, etc.), and the other on people (safety, health, comfort, ease of use, well-being, etc.). These two goals are in tension, and the role of ergonomics is to counterbalance them, since prioritizing only productivity (and efficiency) as the main objective may have negative impacts on the other sphere (Iida, 1990). Thus, ergonomics emerges as a vital discipline for jointly augmenting the organization's performance and worker well-being from the standpoint of corporate sustainability, particularly when one considers that the production system (subsystem) must ensure the overall sustainability of the larger system (Fischer and Zink, 2012). Even in situations of partial corporate sustainability (economic), the consideration of work issues leads to win–win situations, because better conditions for workers later gives rise to economic benefits (Dul and Neumann, 2009; Hendrick, 2003; Iida, 1990). However, as Hasle and Jensen (2012) argue, a global supply chain makes it very difficult to implement what is already recognized in the context of ergonomics, i.e., to protect workers from occupational hazards and ensure their right to experience well-being at work. Moreover and increasingly, there are issues that need to be addressed which have always been part of the concerns of ergonomics, such as the adequacy of work to widely diverse populations, including the issue of aging and sex, and the inclusion of people with special needs in the world of work (Béguin, 2006; Carayon, 2006; Imada, 2005; Kogi, 2006; Rabardel and Beguin, 2005). In particular, activity-centered ergonomics (Daniellou and Rabardel, 2005; Daniellou, 2005), through ergonomic analysis (F. Guérin et al., 2001; Wisner, 1995a, 1995b), meets this dual objective (organization and people), considering health in a broader sense as a dynamic process (Dejours, 1986). As a contribution to corporate sustainability, the concepts of activity-centered ergonomics, particularly because it considers human work activity as one of the cornerstones of any project, especially those focused on sustainability, allows for work (in the sense of action) not to be an adjustment variable to be considered only when virtually everything is already defined (Guérin et al., 2001; Hubault, 2005; Noulin, 1992; Terssac and Maggi, 1996).


                                 Support for work-related changes and new needs arising from sustainability. The introduction of sustainability in organizations, especially environmental ones, implies changes in processes (goods or service), and hence, in work (Horberry et al., 2013). In this context, in activity-centered ergonomics, work is the protagonist of production and is an essential element to be considered in the analysis of the production process, from the standpoint of sustainability. New processes are created or adapted for better environmental performance (e.g., reduced resource consumption and waste minimization, etc.). A new way of measuring work is needed, which may even render it more complex through the introduction of new technologies (Rasmussen, 2000), such as green technology, for example. Regardless of the characteristics that will be optimized, and however automated the new process may be, there will always be new work to be done, with new content, challenges and constraints, which the worker must deal with and to which he will have to give his all. These changes involve not only physical ones, generating more or fewer movements and efforts, but also cognitive changes, since new information is required for the decision-making process so that production can proceed with the expected efficiency and effectiveness (Marmaras and Kontogiannis, 2001; Marmaras and Pavard, 1999), including the requirements for new competencies (Montmollin, 1990). It is therefore important to consider activity-centered ergonomics as an agent, as the protagonist of action. Hence, to ensure a condition of corporate sustainability, it is of utmost importance to ascertain whether an environmentally or economically sustainable process causes an impact on the workers, and to determine what the worker must do to make this process possible. This analysis benefits greatly from the contributions of ergonomics (Hanson, 2013; Ryan and Wilson, 2013) – even in situations of environmental sustainability (Thatcher, 2013), which could further broaden the concept of sustainability (Zink and Fischer, 2013).


                                 Active influencer within the organization concerning work improvement issues. The field of action of ergonomics is in companies, and it can be described as a proactive discipline in the introduction and discussion of work-related sustainability policies. Ergonomics acts not only in solving specific problems in defined situations but can also be used as a tool to achieve the organizational goals discussed in the previous section throughout the organization. Macroergonomics, in particular, encompasses broader aspects based on the idea that changes in organizational aspects, especially at the strategic level, also have a strong impact on specific work situations (Zink, 2000). Hendrick (1991) and Hendrick and Kleiner (2001) define macroergonomics as a top-down socio-technical approach to the design of work systems, aligning microsystem interfaces with macrosystem interfaces. Its field of action is in the design and optimization of work systems focusing on the interaction between organization, technology and work system (Kleiner, 2004). Macroergonomics applications can be of different types, such as introducing cognitive mapping (Village et al., 2013), ergonomics committee (Acosta and Morales, 2008; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007), intervention programs (Herrera and Huatuco, 2011), etc. Because its goals are aligned with those of the social dimension of work sustainability in organizations, the actions of macroergonomics (through different types of applications) developed in close contact with the strategic summit of organizations can align the organization's strategic objectives with those of ergonomics, and hence, with those of sustainability. Employee participation can be strong point for the issues they experience to be incorporated into the decision-making process and into the definition of sustainability policies directed at them. At this point it is worth noting that this discipline can also contribute through the application of participatory ergonomics. Included in the macroergonomic perspective, participatory ergonomics incorporates the concern for employees to be involved so that they become co-producers of solutions (Hendrick and Kleiner, 2001). In addition to enabling companies to achieve their desired goals based on the knowledge and power of workers (Wilson and Haines, 1997), they can be considered agents of improved working conditions (Zalk, 2001). Based on these premises, macroergonomics and participatory ergonomics, if applied at the strategic level, could contribute pro-actively to help the company achieve real goals of sustainability. It should be noted that the benefits of involving ergonomics in corporate sustainability strategies may be reciprocal (Zink and Fischer, 2013). On the side of ergonomics, it would be possible to overcome some limitations encountered by some authors, such as the continual need for management support and involvement (Driessen et al., 2010) and the need to convince or “sell” ergonomic improvements through promises of injury reduction or cost-benefit studies (Goggins et al., 2008).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Enabling ergonomics to deal with work-related aspects in the context of sustainability can contribute to the later alignment of CS to SD objectives. In a context characterized by concern for environment-related aspects, the dual goal of ergonomics (to adapt work to the psychophysiological characteristics of workers and to increase the organization's performance) can help go beyond visions that are almost exclusively economic in companies where the theme of sustainable development is applied inappropriately (exclusively to marketing). In this context, ergonomics would help to avoid issues that are not aligned with the vision of decent work and to propose sustainable work in CS programs. A case in point is the introduction of work-related aspects in sustainability policies with the sole purpose of shaping the conduct of workers or of maximizing the promotion of the corporate image (without engaging in truly responsible social and environmental actions). In other words, returning to Fig. 5, ergonomics can help place the action of CS squarely within the vision of sustainable development, at least from the standpoint of its internal social dimension.

In the discussion of sustainability, ergonomics can contribute elements and shape transformations that go beyond the mitigative. In this context, sustainable work is believed to be that which improves the organization's performance and promotes professional development as well as workers' health broadly and positively (not limited to the absence of illness, but in the sense of building health) and well-being. Thus, it fosters respect for and the development of intelligence and creativity (as opposed to alienating work) by performing work that has meaning and significance, understanding the profound importance of physical, cognitive and organizational issues, and above all, the importance of work to the development of culture.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors wish to thank FAPESP (Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo) Grant number: 2011-139091 for its financial and administrative support for this project.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

