@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effect of user's perceived presence and promotion focus on usability for interacting in virtual environments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Involvement and promotion focus are driver factors for interacting in flow effect.


                        
                        
                           
                           An extended framework is proposed to examine usability in VR.


                        
                        
                           
                           Immersion of presence has not a significant influence on learning.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Presence

Promotion focus

Virtual reality

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Technological advance in human–computer interaction has attracted increasing research attention, especially in the field of virtual reality (VR). Prior research has focused on examining the effects of VR on various outcomes, for example, learning and health. However, which factors affect the final outcomes? That is, what kind of VR system design will achieve higher usability? This question remains largely. Furthermore, when we look at VR system deployment from a human–computer interaction (HCI) lens, does user's attitude play a role in achieving the final outcome? This study aims to understand the effect of immersion and involvement, as well as users' regulatory focus on usability for a somatosensory VR learning system. This study hypothesized that regulatory focus and presence can effectively enhance user's perceived usability. Survey data from 78 students in Taiwan indicated that promotion focus is positively related to user's perceived efficiency, whereas involvement and promotion focus are positively related to user's perceived effectiveness. Promotion focus also predicts user satisfaction and overall usability perception.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In 2010, Microsoft's market release of the XBOX Kinect ushered in a new stage in the development of virtual reality and the application of cognitive psychology, particularly with human–computer interaction (HCI). The realm of Virtual reality (VR) has captured considerable research attention (e.g., Wilson, 1999; Cobb, 1999; Duarte et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2015; Lawson et al., 2015; Kinateder et al., 2014). For example, Lawson et al. (2015) examined several methods combining virtual reality and physical tools within vehicle development to optimise ease of entry and exit. Kinateder et al. (2014) have found that in a virtual tunnel fire scenario, actions of a virtual agent affected participants' evacuation destination choice and travel paths. Chang et al. (2011) demonstrated that students were enthusiastic about a therapy system using Kinect with full-body control interaction and were willing to use it for physical therapy during experiments. Bruin et al. (2010) employed VR for a simulation that aided seniors in maintaining their balance, which allowed the seniors to stay healthy by avoiding accidents, reducing fatigue, and increasing happiness. Meanwhile, playing games in VR was found to be effective in encouraging participation in sports and developing team spirit. Pan et al. (2006) presented an in-depth discussion of VR in terms of its application and purpose in education, training, and entertainment, as well as how it can enhance the motivation for both traditional and digital learning. Yahaya (2005) discovered that VR learning significantly improves student achievement, enhances their problem-solving ability, and fosters interaction with peers. Vora et al. (2002) found that VR training system was preferred over PC based system for aircraft visual inspection training. Jackson and Fagan (2000) confirmed that VR can be successfully integrated into the school curriculum, enabling students to enhance their performance and learning ability.

Overall, prior research has focused on examining the effects of VR on various outcomes, for example, learning and health. It is clear from extant literature that VR systems are conducive in facilitating learning and maintaining physical health. However, which factors affect the final outcomes? That is, what kind of VR system design will achieve higher usability and help users to benefit most from the system? This question remains largely. Furthermore, when we look at VR system deployment from a human–computer interaction (HCI) lens, do users attitude play a role in achieving the final outcome? This research aims to answer the two questions. Based on presence theory (Lee, 2004; Vora et al., 2002), we identified immersion and involvement, two primary characteristics of presence, to be important system factors that will enhance user's experience in a VR environment. Presence captures the user's feeling of “existence” in a VR environment. Presence has two characteristics: immersion and involvement. Immersion plays an important role in a user's gaming playing experience (Brown and Carins, 2004). Immersion can also explain how students experience educational contexts and how this experience influence learning performance. Li (2009) proved that immersive digital learning can better motivate a student compared with traditional learning. Hanson and Shelton (2008) reported that in an immersive environment, users are motivated to be more proactive in constructing their own knowledge. Sherman and Craig (2003) reported that immersion in VR created a successful personal experience with the users' auditory, visual, and tactile experience or actions fully immersed in the VR environment. Brenton et al. (2007) proposed that VR technology that is interactive, immersive, and imaginative will characterize the next generation of medical instructional designs and VR learning systems. Involvement is an experience that describes an individual's personal psychological state, energy focus, and attention on their own set of stimuli (Witmer and Singer, 1998). Sylaiou et al. (2008) reported that the respondents in a virtual museum experiment correlate the degree of impact between involvement focus with the sense of time extended. Blascovich et al. (2002) proposed that in an immersive VR, sensory messages are more akin to psychological perception and experiences. Sylaiou et al. (2008) found that the sense of presence is a crucial issue in virtual environments and can enhance effectiveness and user engagement. Thus, we argue that the two presence factors, immersion and involvement, are positively related to usability.

Does user's attitude play a role in achieving final outcomes such of satisfaction, efficiency and effectiveness? Regulatory focus, a widely used theory in virtual environment-based, computer-mediated communication, has the potential to explain how user's attitudes affect system usage outcomes. Regulatory focus is considered to be one of the most important theories among manipulation approximation theories (Jin, 2011). Regulatory focus refers to people's tendencies in moving from their current state toward their desired state, as viewed through the perspective of self-regulation. There are two tendencies: “promotion focus” tendency focuses on the positive presence, whereas “prevention focus” tendency focuses on the negative presence (Higgins and Spiegel, 2004). Regulatory focus can apply not only to people's state of mind, but also to systems. For example, a system can be either promotion focus, with the goal being “enhancing your health”, or prevention focus, with the goal being “preventing disease”. Jin (2010) found that the fit between user's regulatory focus state and the goal of the system in computer-mediated communication (CMC) within 3D VR increases users' enjoyment, feelings of presence, and post experimental healthy eating intentions. Does regulatory focus fit, i.e., the alignment of a user's regulatory focus state and that of the system enhance user experience and performance in VR environment? This is what we would like to find out with this research.

To test theories of presence and regulatory focus, the present study designed a 3D VR digital learning system with tasks that are based on promotion focus. In the task planning scenario, the user's desire to succeed is emphasized upon, thus, the intrinsic cognitive state is a state of hope. The mission of this system is to develop the required knowledge the subject will need, comply with the ideal of the subject, enable the subject to acquire several skills, and demonstrate positive results. The subjects should be willing to assist the system in order to acquire knowledge or a skill. Success in the task results in feelings of joy, whereas failure results in frustration. As such, we predict that promotion focus, with aligns with the system goal, can drive users' learning usability. We further tested the effects of immersion and involvement, two important system characteristics, and examine their effects on VR system usability. Through extensive literature review, we summarized three most commonly used dimensions of usability: effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction. Efficiency refers to the learning curve of the subjects and the rate of incidence or error occurrence. Effectiveness is the decision of the subjects to complete the learning task or not, as well as whether the system meets their requirements. Satisfaction involves whether users enjoy using a somatosensory device to learn and whether somatosensory manipulation is conducive to learning, capable of kindling interest, and is convenient and satisfactory. To summarize, our hypotheses are: 
                        
                           H1: User's involvement is positively related to his/her perceived usability of the system

H2: User's immersion is positively related to his/her perceived usability of the system

H3: User's promotion focus is positively related to his/her perceived usability of the system


                     Fig. 1
                      below summarized our research model.

@&#METHODS@&#

Eight-four students from a university in Taiwan were recruited to participate in the experiment. A final usable data of 78 surveys were returned. The respondents comprised 42 males and 36 females. 71 respondents were undergraduate students, 7 were graduate students. As for the age of the respondents, 4 respondents were under 18 years old, 71 were from 18 to 24 years, and 3 were above 25 years old. The majority of the respondents have not had any simulated boxing experience (69) while 9 had boxing experience using Nitendo Wii. In terms of the control unit somatosensory experience, the majority of the users (50) had used somatosensory control devices, whereas others (28) had not used any. For the respondents who had used control unit somatosensory devices, the average usage time was more than two hours for 23 subjects, 1–2 hours for 18 subjects, and an hour or less for 9 subjects.

In this study, the experimental environment (boxing training) that was built on the computer's operating system is the Windows 7 32-bit version. We chose boxing training because it was a new sport for most people, thus making it easier to evaluate learning results. The computer must have OpenNI, Nite, Sensor Kinect, Ogre 3D, and other software, and a 32-inch LCD monitor. Given that Kinect requires the detection of an open space, the venue of the experiment was in our school. In the experimental part, mainly undergraduate students were invited to be the test subjects. The experimental procedure was divided into four stages.
                           
                              (1)
                              The subjects were taught how to operate the system (such as browser interface operations and game operations) to avoid any errors in the system use. When the subjects started the learning task, a dark-skinned virtual reality avatar with red shorts appeared on the left while a light-skinned trainer with blue shorts appeared on the right. The students needed only to imitate the coach, as shown in Fig. 2
                                 .

When the first stage was completed, the subjects were given an informative report on the step-by-step operation of boxing training, enabling them to learn the contents of the subject. In the experiments conducted, the tasks of the user were composed of three basic boxing moves, including a cross (a powerful straight punch thrown with the rear hand), a hook (a semicircular punch thrown with the lead hand to the side of the opponent's head), and an uppercut (a vertical rising punch thrown with the rear hand). Fig. 3
                                  shows the expanded diagram of the cross punch as an example.

Subsequently, each subject was given up to 10 minutes (the maximum single session length in the system) to perform system testing and learning as part of the experiment.

Finally, a questionnaire was administered to the subjects.

The questionnaire used in the study employed a 5-point Likert scale to facilitate statistical analysis, with strongly disagree given 1 point; disagree, 2 points; neutral, 3 points; agree, 4 points; and strongly agree, 5 points The involvement of presence can be categorized into involvement and immersion, with six questions. Five items were asked on immersion; the items were derived from Witmer and Singer (1998), Csikszentmihalyi (1975), Sylaiou et al. (2008), Sherman and Craig (2003) who explored the immersive experience. A total of 10 questions focus on usability, with several of the main items based on the questionnaire designed by ISO 9241-11 (1998) for the proposed modification and created to suit the learning system designed in this study, as well as the usability of the questionnaire. Regulatory focus construct comprised eight questions in the questionnaire; the questions were mainly based on Higgins (1997), Idson et al. (2000), Aaker and Lee (2006). Reverse coded questions were calculated by subtracting the original answer from 6. One item each was deleted from the immersion and involvement factor due to low factor loading.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The mean and standard deviation of each measurement item, as well as construct reliability was reported in Table 1
                         below.

Reliability gauged by Cronbach's α was reported in Table 1. As we can see from Table 1, most constructs achieved satisfactory reliability. Although involvement has a slightly lower reliability index, the value of 0.58 still falls into a range that is considered acceptable (Nunnally, 1978). Discriminant validity was assessed by examining the correlation coefficients between constructs (Kline, 1998). Correlations should be no greater than 0.85 to represent good discriminate validity. Table 2
                         below presented the bi-variate correlations between constructs. From Table 2 we see that no correlation was greater than 0.85 among constructs, thereby exhibiting good discriminant validity.

Chi-square test was used to determine whether previous experience in boxing has an influence on the results. We found no significant differences from prior experiences except for that people with prior experience tend to be more promotion focused.

We first evaluated the measurement model fit and received acceptable results: χ2 = 1.91, RMSEA (Root Mean Square Error of Approximation) = 0.1, GFI (Goodness of Fit Index) = 0.74, PGFI (Parsimony Goodness of Fit Index) = 0.57. We then proceeded to model testing using SEM (Structural Equation Modeling), and specifically, the AMOS software package. The results are summarized in Table 3
                         below. The results show that promotion focus is positively related to user's perceived efficiency, whereas involvement and promotion focus are positively related to user's perceived effectiveness. Promotion focus also predicts user satisfaction and overall usability perception.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION@&#

This research aimed to find out 1) what types of VR systems (i.e., immersive, involving) will lead to higher usability results? And 2) does user attitude, such as regulatory focus, affect the final usability outcome? Our results show promotion focus is positively related to user's perceived efficiency, whereas involvement and promotion focus are positively related to user's perceived effectiveness. Promotion focus also predicts user satisfaction and overall usability perception. In addition, past experience in the subject of the experimental task was also useful in facilitating their learning, including effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction.

For overall usability, involvement, immersion, and promotion focus were found to have a positive influence on usability, with the impact level of promotion focus (β = 0.68) as the largest factor compared with those of involvement focus (β = 0.19), immersion (β = 0.10), and usability, with an adjusted 
                        
                           
                              R
                              2
                           
                        
                      of 23%. Exploring the usability of the three dependent variables (efficiency, effectiveness, and satisfaction), involvement was found to have a significant effect on efficiency (β = 0. 35); promotion focus has effects on efficiency (β = 0.69); and satisfaction (β = 0.86). The adjusted 
                        
                           
                              R
                              2
                           
                        
                      for efficiency, effectiveness, and satisfaction were 9%, 36%, and 58%, respectively. In terms of promotion focus, this study observed through the users' basic maneuvers in boxing training that the system can equip a user with the necessary knowledge and skills. Moreover, once the training is finished, the system will have a positive effect on the user as well. Once users discover their interest and gain motivation in using the system, the latter will allow the users to be more immersed in the learning process. As Boliger and Wasilik (2009) found for the aspect of learning satisfaction, during the process of learning, the learner fulfills personal learning requirements, thereby producing a positive feeling and attitude, a finding confirmed in the literature review and method of the present study. Arbaugh (2000) considered using digital learning to improve learning satisfaction, particularly through the development of a digital environment that includes interactive learning through school textbooks. This setup affects learning satisfaction, and should thus be taken into consideration when designing teaching materials. Therefore, content with promotion focus is among the factors that are useful in virtual reality learning.

A significant effect on performance can be achieved in terms of the presence aspect of the user, which involves focusing on the parts in the dependent variables of individual efficiency, effectiveness, and satisfaction analysis. During the experiment, the system provided visual and auditory cues so that the users can more easily adapt to learning in virtual reality. The user only needs to use their body to manipulate the virtual reality avatars. Sherman and Craig (2003) discussed the effectiveness of using the body to learn, which allows more focus and more impression on the memory, compared with the traditional way of learning (IJsselsteijn et al., 2008). Therefore, somatosensory control of a maneuver training system in virtual reality provides users with involvement focus and presence toward a more effective learning with significant effects. However, efficiency does not significantly affect usability and satisfaction.

With regard to user immersion, the dependent variables of individual efficiency, effectiveness, and satisfaction did not significantly affect analysis. One of the reasons could be that during the experiment, each subject only had about 5–10 minutes, and thus the subjects' operating time was not enough. Thus, the user was unable to integrate into the learning environment. Moreover, the experiment environment employed desktop monitors, whereas numerous researchers utilized displays that were immersive for the user, such as Krijin et al. (2004) and Juan and Perez (2009), who used the immersive virtual device CAVE systems with head-mounted displays for the treatment of acrophobia. CAVE immersive display device with mounted display was relatively high compared to the effect, and thus the use of different displays resulted in somewhat different experiences in the users' sense of reality. Each method has its unique advantages and disadvantages. In the present study, a desktop monitor was used for the experiment, which is advantageous for its low cost. Likewise, the venue has no size limit, which has no effect on the study. According to literature, however, desktop monitors are vulnerable to external factors and interferences, resulting in an inferior immersive experience compared with that delivered by HMD and CAVE, which provide users with a better immersion experience. In the present study, due to limitations of the training program, the experimental procedure for subjects in a virtual reality training system for maneuver takes only up to 10 minutes. Thus, the subject's sense of immersion in the process of cognitive development focused only on the initial stage, and the subject did not reach complete immersion. For VR based learning to be immersive, longer sessions may help users to feel immersed in the training. During the experiment, after users utilized somatosensory controls to learn, most proposed further interaction. For example, the users made mistakes when a window prompt appeared to inform the user of an incorrect action. Hence, future researchers may enhance the matching techniques of the system development framework to identify subjects who have similar actions to the virtual coaches, which may be used to provide prompt action in errors for an objective evaluation of the learning performance.

Perhaps the most interesting finding from this research is that promotion focus, i.e., user's positive attitude and expectations about using the system, has a significant impact on every aspect of usability. Users that see the system as positive and beneficial for their learning actually learn more effectively, efficiently, and are more satisfied. This finding has important implications for VR system designers. Regulatory focus, like other attitudes, can be manipulated and changed (Kirmani and Zhu, 2007). Thus, for a system to achieve more satisfactory outcomes, it is important not to put a lot of effort into designing immersive and involving system, but also to advertise the system from a regulatory focus that is aligned with the goal of the system. For a promotion focused system (i.e. enhancing health, promoting learning), educate your users about your system, let them know what good the system can bring, and build their expectations on the system. By doing these things, users are primed to be promotion focused, which eventually leads to higher usability results.

This study contains several limitations. First, the present study only considered one VR system in our survey. Therefore, generalizability to other types of VR systems is limited. It is possible that other systems will longer session time and different types of display methods may see different results from immersion and involvement. Second, this research was limited by time, space and resources; the number of samples collected was less than 200 copies, with only 78 valid questionnaires collected. In addition, we only investigated the promotion regulatory focus of the task, other aspects of regulatory focus, such as general regulatory focus, regulatory focus on VR based training etc were not explored. Thus, the difference between the two types of focus could not be controlled. In this regard, future research can examine the situational prevention focus on the task in virtual reality training activities. Finally, the factors that influence sensory immersive, virtual reality movement training systems can also be combined with various other displays, such as head-mounted 3D display devices.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

The authors would like to thank our Editor, Prof. Patrick Waterson and two anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions to improve the quality of the manuscript. Prof. Sun thanks the support by Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan (Grant No.: NSC 102-2410-H-309-14). Dr. Hsiao thanks the support by Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan (Grant No: MOST 103-2410-H-309-005-MY3)

@&#REFERENCES@&#

