@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Influence of affective states on comprehension and hazard perception of warning pictorials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Affective state influenced hazard perception of warning signs but not comprehension.


                        
                        
                           
                           People in the positive affect condition perceived greater hazard from warning signs.


                        
                        
                           
                           International Affective Picture System (IAPS) was used for affect manipulation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Affective state declines over time and have tendency to neutral state.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Affective

Hazard perception

Warning pictorial

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The purpose of the present study was to examine the effect of positive and negative affective states on comprehension and hazard perception of warning pictorials. The International Affective Picture System (IAPS) was used to manipulate the affective states of sixty male undergraduate and graduate student participants. We used sixteen standard industrial warning pictorials, which were representative of a variety of industries, to assess changes in comprehension and hazard perception. Participants in the positive affect condition perceived greater hazards from the warning signs than those in the neutral affect condition or the negative affect condition. Post-hoc analyses confirmed this finding. We discuss implications for warning pictorials and future research.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Warning effectiveness is critical in warning pictorial design, as it relates to the safety value of the message. Rogers et al. (2000) expanded the factors contributing to warning pictorial efficacy to include not only the characteristics of the warning itself, but also the context and recipients of the warning. Despite a focus on personal characteristics, the affective state of the recipient has so far been overlooked as a potential influence on comprehension and hazard perception of warning pictorial. In psychology, the term ‘affect’ refers to emotion or subjectively experienced feelings, such as happiness or fear. In this study, affect encompasses emotions, mood, and feelings.

It is conceivable that people who are experiencing positive affect may show improved comprehension of warning pictorials as a factor of improved productivity. For instance, Isen and colleagues reported that when people felt good, their thinking became more creative, integrative, and flexible, and they became more receptive (Isen, 1987). Positive affect can influence people to think, feel, and act in a productive way (Lyubomirsky et al., 2005).

Conversely, Schwarz et al. (1991) has shown that negative emotions tend to encourage people to be more careful when processing messages. Negative emotions have an intuitively obvious adaptive value to cognitive processes, in that they narrow our thought-action repertories to those that best promoted the survival of our ancestors in life-threatening situations (Fredrickson, 2003). In the case of warning signs, which are intended to communicate information about safety issues or risks, negative affect might promote cognitive processes that facilitate hazard perception.

Several studies have confirmed that affective state plays an important role in risk perception (Solvic and Peters, 2006). While positive affect is associated with a greater inclination for risk-taking, when the potential for loss is salient, individuals who are feeling good tend to have a greater concern about such loss (Isen, 1987). On the other hand, several studies have argued that negative emotion plays a powerful role in risk perception. For example, Clore and Palmer (2009) found that negative mood, such as fear, tends to focus one's attention towards relevant perceptual details.

The effect of affective states on the comprehension and hazard perception of warning pictorials is unclear. If the perception and processing of warning pictorials varies according to affective state, the design and tests of such signs should reflect this information. Thus, the purpose of the present study was to examine the effects of positive and negative affective states on the comprehension and hazard perception of warning pictorials. It can be assumed that focused attention and cognitive processing are more important than productivity for the perception of hazards and comprehension of warning pictorials. Thus we hypothesized that negative affect would improve the comprehension and hazard perception of warning pictorials.

@&#METHODS@&#

Sixty undergraduate and graduate students from an engineering school, ranging in age from 20 to 25 years (M = 22.0, SD = 1.3), participated in this experiment. Only males participated because the population had few females. Participants were randomly assigned into either the positive (twenty-one), neutral (nineteen), or negative (twenty) affect group. There were a maximum of five participants in each experimental session.

Thirty pictures were selected from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS) based on the published arousal and valence ratings for males (Lang et al., 2005). The valence ratings of the images ranged from 1: unpleasant, to 9: pleasant (M = 4.8, SD = 0.3 for ten neutral, M = 7.4, SD = 0.6 for ten positive, and M = 3.1, SD = 0.8 for ten negative images). The arousal ratings of the images ranged from 1: calm, to 9: excited (M = 2.9, SD = 0.5 for ten neutral, M = 5.1, SD = 1.1 for ten positive, and M = 5.5, SD = 1.0 for ten negative images). For ethical reasons, pictures of mutilation and erotic imagery were excluded.

Sixteen warning pictorials (Fig. 1
                           ) were selected from the Pictorial Database (Association of Equipment Manufacturers, 2009), which is a voluntary collection of standard industrial safety signs and symbols. These warning pictorials were representative of a variety of industries, such as chemical (e.g. corrosion), and electrical (e.g. electrical hazard). All warning pictorials complied with American National Standards Institute (ANSI), American Society of Association Executives (ASAE), Society of Automotive Engineering (SAE), and International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards.

All affective stimulus pictures were presented using a laptop computer, projector, and projection screen. Microsoft PowerPoint was used to control the stimulus presentation. The size of the image projected onto the screen was standardized at approximately 1.2 × 1.5 m.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Prior to beginning the experiment, participants were asked to read and sign an informed consent form. Participants were then given brief verbal and written instructions outlining of the purpose of the research, and were informed that the purpose of viewing the images was to manipulate their emotions.

Ten pictures containing positive, neutral, or negative content were each presented for 6 s, with a 2-s interval between pictures. After viewing the 10 pictures, participants were asked to complete the Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) questionnaire (Morris, 1995) to rate their present emotional valence and arousal (SAM I).

This was followed by a comprehension questionnaire. Participants were given brief verbal instructions and shown an example pictorial for practice, which was supplemented by written instructions. Participants were asked to provide precise written descriptions for all of the warning pictorials. After completing the comprehension questionnaire, participants were asked to fill out a demographic questionnaire.

The participants were then given a hazard perception questionnaire. Participants were given brief verbal instructions and shown an example for practice, which were supplemented by written instructions. Participants were asked to rate the hazard level for all of the pictorial concepts. Finally, participants were asked to complete the SAM (SAM II).

The SAM (Morris, 1995) was used to assess the emotional valence and affective arousal of the participants prior to the comprehension test (SAM I) and following the hazard perception assessment (SAM II). Affective valence ranged from 1: unpleasant, to 9: pleasant. Affective arousal ranged from 1: calm, to 9: excited.

We administered a comprehension test to assess participant understanding of warning pictorials in the absence of context, although we acknowledge that the lack of context could produce more conservative comprehension scores.

The open-ended comprehension test is a common and valid method for evaluating the comprehensibility of warning pictorials (Wolf and Wogalter, 1998). Four warning pictorials, approximately 4 × 4 cm in size, were color printed on each page.

In order to assess reliability, three independent evaluators scored each open-ended answer. Table 1
                         shows the five criteria that were used to score the open-ended questionnaire (Duarte and Rebelo, 2005). Cronbach's alpha value was 0.963, suggesting high inter-rater reliability. The final scores were judged according to the ISO 9186:2001 standard. The scores obtained through this process were used as the comprehension scores for each pictorial in further analysis.

We next tested the hazard perception of warning pictorial concepts by measuring the level of hazard perception reported after viewing each warning pictorial together with its meaning on a 5-point scale from 1: none, to 5: extreme. This scale was adopted from Kalsher et al. (1995). This questionnaire contained the 16 warning pictorials from the comprehension test. Four warning pictorials, approximately 4 × 4 cm in size, were color printed on each page. Average hazard perception scores were computed across participants.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A total of nine participants, five from the positive affect group and four from the negative affect group, were identified as outliers from the set range of the comprehension scores (M ± 3 SD) or as cases of unsuccessful affect manipulation (i.e. participant reported positive affect following negative affect manipulation) and were thus excluded from analysis.

We used a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test the influence of affect condition (positive, neutral, and negative) on the SAM scores. For the SAM I rating, the main effect of affect condition was significant for both the valence score (F (2,816) = 1647.47, p < .001) and the arousal score (F (2,816) = 145.30, p < .001). Post hoc analyses revealed that participants in the positive affect condition (M = 6.81, SD = 0.73) had significantly higher valence rating scores than those in the neutral affect condition (M = 5.16, SD = 0.37, p < .001) and the negative affect condition (M = 3.06, SD = 1.03, p < .001). Participants in the neutral affect condition had significantly higher valence rating scores than those in the negative affect condition (p < .001). Conversely, participants in the negative affect condition (M = 5.38, SD = 1.69) had significantly higher arousal scores than those in the positive affect condition (M = 3.94, SD = 1.64, p < .001) and the neutral affect condition (M = 3.11, SD = 1.41, p < .001). Participants in the positive affect condition had significantly higher arousal rating scores than those in the neutral affect condition (p < .001). These results confirmed successful affect manipulation via the IAPS.

For the SAM II rating, the main effect of affect condition was significant for the valence scores (F (2,816) = 20.84, p < .001). Post hoc analyses revealed that participants in the positive affect condition (M = 4.81, SD = 0.81) showed significantly higher valence rating scores than those in the neutral affect condition (M = 4.37, SD = 0.84, p < .001). Finally, participants in the negative affect condition (M = 4.69, SD = 0.85) had significantly higher valence rating scores than those in the neutral affect condition (p < .001).

We conducted a multivariate analysis of variance with two factors: affect condition (positive, neutral, and negative) and warning pictorial (1–16), on the comprehension scores and hazard perception scores. Warning pictorial was included as an independent variable to remove the effect of this variable on the results of the analysis. The main effects of the multivariate analysis were significant for affect condition (F (4,1536) = 2.80, p < .05, η
                        2 = 0.007) and warning pictorial (F (30,1536) = 62.68, p < .001, η
                        2 = 0.550). These results indicate that affect condition significantly influenced comprehension and hazard perception of warning pictorials in our participant group.

We found a significant main effect of affect condition on hazard perception score (F (2,816) = 3.97, p < .05). Post hoc analyses revealed that participants in the positive affect condition (M = 3.54, SD = 1.25) perceived greater hazards from the warning pictorials than those in the neutral affect condition (M = 3.34, SD = 1.16, p < .05) or negative affect condition (M = 3.37, SD = 1.24, p < .05). This result did not support the hypothesis that negative affect promotes warning pictorial comprehension and hazard perception.

We found warning pictorials to have a significant main effect on both comprehension score (F (15,816) = 78.59, p < .001) and hazard perception (F (15,816) = 54.38, p < .001).

Although the multivariate interaction between affect condition and warning pictorial was not significant, for some pictorials there was a tendency for hazard perception levels to be higher in the positive affect condition and lower in the negative affect condition, as shown in Fig. 2
                        . Post hoc analyses revealed that for warning pictorial number 6, participants in the positive affect condition perceived a greater hazard than those in the negative affect condition (p < .05). The averaged comprehension score for this pictorial was 0.31 (SD = 0.44) in the positive affect condition and 0.19 (SD = 0.40) in the negative affect condition. For warning pictorial number 7, participants in the positive affect condition perceived a greater hazard than those in the negative affect condition (p < .05). The averaged comprehension score for this pictorial was 0.55 (SD = 0.46) in the positive affect condition and 0.56 (SD = 0.46) in the negative affect condition. For warning pictorial number 8, participants in the neutral affect condition perceived a greater hazard than those in the negative affect condition (p < .05). The averaged comprehension score for this pictorial was 0.13 (SD = 0.33) in the neutral affect condition and 0.11 (SD = 0.24) in the negative affect condition. Finally, for warning pictorial number 16, participants in the positive affect condition perceived a greater hazard than people in the neutral affect condition (p < .05). The averaged comprehension score for this pictorial was 0.11 (SD = 0.30) in the positive affect condition and 0.21 (SD = 0.42) in the neutral affect condition.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Our results suggest that participants in the positive affect condition perceived warning pictorials as more hazardous than those in the neutral or negative affect conditions, although significant differences were seen only for four pictorials. On the other hand, participants obtained only moderate comprehension scores for these four pictorials. Thus, the level of familiarity with a specific warning pictorial may be a key factor in interpreting our results.

The perception of hazards associated with warning pictorial concepts that had high comprehension scores might not have varied with affect because of high levels of familiarity. On the other hand, low scores of comprehension might have been associated with less familiar or more easily misunderstood warning pictorials. It might have been difficult for participants to appropriately perceive hazards when viewing these warning pictorial concepts. Although participants might have been unfamiliar with pictorials that produced mid-range comprehension scores, they might have been able to guess the meaning based on some of the images. Lyubomirsky et al. (2005) suggested that positive moods and emotions lead people to think, feel, and act in ways that promote creativity. When participants in the positive affect condition rated the hazard perception of these warning pictorial concepts, they might have developed creative ideas about possible risks. As discussed above, when the potential for loss is salient, individuals with a positive affect tend to have a greater concern about such loss (Isen, 1987). This might explain why participants in the positive affect condition perceived some of the warning pictorials as signifying a greater hazard than participants in the neutral affect or negative affect conditions.

Although the results of this study indicate that participants in the positive affect condition perceived warning pictorials as more hazardous, increased hazard perception is not necessarily improved hazard perception. For instance, hazard perception can be inappropriately high, e.g., perceived riskiness of air travel, but we would agree that most of the time people's hazard perceptions are too low.

The methods used to manipulate affect in this study may have some implications for warning sign research. All affect conditions involved the presentation of affective imagery with the intention of introducing the concept of affective elements of pictorials contained in warning signs. However, if the warning pictorials themselves were designed to induce a positive affect in the recipient, this could potentially improve hazard perception. For example, a sign meant to communicate a risk of car accidents could depict a lively animal or a warm family picture instead of serious injury or death. This could be called a positively affective warning pictorial, and might have useful applications in the design of warning pictorials. Future studies could assess potentially affective characteristics of existing warning pictorials to determine whether deliberately designed affective warning pictorials might be efficacious.

Additionally, this study provokes questions about the design of environments wherein warning signs are exposed. For example, specific environments may have affective qualities, which could alter comprehension and perception of hazards. The potential characteristics of affective environments should be investigated to potentially develop guidelines for designing optimal contexts for warning sign exposure.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The present study aimed to identify potential factors that could influence the effectiveness of warning pictorials, with the goal of informing warning pictorial design and placement in terms of comprehension and hazard perception. We found that affective state influenced hazard perception of warning signs but not comprehension. People in the positive affect condition perceived warning pictorial concepts as indicating a greater hazard than those in the neutral and negative affect conditions.

There are several limitations of our study. Firstly, the results of the SAM indicated that the affective state of the participants changed over time. In future studies where affective state is controlled, it may be necessary to check whether the altered affective states are stable throughout the experiment. Second, as warning pictorials are expected to be comprehensive across broad audiences, further study with a broad range of individuals with varying genders, age groups, nationalities, and cultures is necessary.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

