@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#What roles do team climate, roster control, and work life conflict play in shiftworkers' fatigue longitudinally?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study highlights the value and difficulties of longitudinal nursing research.


                        
                        
                           
                           Control over shift scheduling can have significant effects on fatigue for both two-shift and three-shift workers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Fatigue increased over time when there was a lack of control over rosters.


                        
                        
                           
                           A positive team climate reduces fatigue for 2-shift but not 3-shift workers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Work life conflict was the strongest predictor of concurrent fatigue, but not over time.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Shiftwork

Fatigue

Nursing

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The study aimed to examine shiftworkers fatigue and the longitudinal relationships that impact on fatigue such as team climate, work life conflict, control of shifts and shift type in shift working nurses. We used a quantitative survey methodology and analysed data with a moderated hierarchical multiple regression. After matching across two time periods 18 months apart, the sample consisted of 166 nurses from one Australian hospital. Of these nurses, 61 worked two rotating day shifts (morning & afternoon/evening) and 105 were rotating shiftworkers who worked three shifts (morning afternoon/evening and nights). The findings suggest that control over shift scheduling can have significant effects on fatigue for both two-shift and three-shift workers. A significant negative relationship between positive team climate and fatigue was moderated by shift type. At both Time 1 and Time 2, work life conflict was the strongest predictor of concurrent fatigue, but over time it was not.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

There is a considerable body of shiftwork research that examines the relationships between fatigue, work life conflict, control of shifts and shift type (AHR Committee, 2000; Duxbury, 2003; NCEPH, 2003; Winwood et al., 2006). However, many of these studies are cross-sectional and fail to examine these relationships over time resulting in potentially elevated error risks (Huselid and Becker, 2008). There is also very little research that examines the role of team climate in mitigating the negative impact of shift work (Pisarski et al., 2006). The aim of this study is to examine shiftworkers fatigue and the longitudinal relationships that impact on fatigue such as team climate, work life conflict, control of shifts and shift type in hospital based nurses.

Most shiftwork researchers consider shiftwork to mean a formal work arrangement that involves at least two teams or shifts relieving each other on a regular basis (Akerstedt et al., 1989). Fatigue is generally defined as a decline in physical and/or mental performance as a result of sleep disturbances, disruption to the biological clock and prolonged exertion often related to complex, monotonous work and actual workload (Moore-Ede, 1995; Williamson et al., 2011). Work life conflict is generally defined in the literature as occurring when the emotional and behavioural demands of work/non-work roles are incompatible, such that participation in one role is made more difficult by virtue of participation in the other (Pisarski and Loudoun, 2007). Team climate is the atmosphere or dynamics that exist within a team and contains elements of trust, cohesiveness and supportiveness (Adams and Galanes, 2000).

Harrington identified in a 2001 study that shiftwork involves over 20% of the labour force in developed countries and an even greater percentage in less developed countries (Harrington, 2001). This statistic has not changed, for example, in the United States in 2010, 29% of people work shiftwork (NHIS–OHS, 2013) and 16% of Australians were shiftworkers (ABS, 2009). The health and safety of shiftworkers is of vital concern because of the high cost to individuals, organisations and society when these concerns are overlooked (Pisarski and Loudoun, 2007). Managing shiftwork requires a thorough understanding of what shiftwork involves, the hazards associated with it, how these risks can minimised, and the control mechanisms monitored. Shiftworker fatigue increases the risks of health effects (Pisarski et al., 2006; Williamson et al., 2011) and the risk of accidents and disasters occurring (Folkard and Lombardi, 2006).

It has been well noted that many highly publicised disasters such as Chernobyl, Three Mile Island, Bhopal, Exxon Valdez and the Estonia Ferry disasters occurred in the early hours of the morning. Investigations of these disasters concluded that one common contributing factor was human fatigue (Folkard and Lombardi, 2006). More recently, in Queensland, Australia, the investigation into the grounding of the Shen Neng 1 on the Great Barrier Reef in 2010 found that fatigue was a major contributor to the accident (Australian Transport Safety Bureau, 2011).

Although it should be noted that there is some confusion about how fatigue is identified and measured, studies have found that shiftwork and associated fatigue have a negative effect on performance, alertness and safety (Dorrian et al., 2011; Williamson et al., 2011; Yuan et al., 2011). Fatigue is an industrial issue, occupational health and safety issue and, at times, an environmental issue. Individuals and organisations that fail to manage human fatigue sensibly, risk having or creating injury and error risk with a broad range of damaging and enduring consequences (Williamson et al., 2011). Williamson et al., (2011) for example identified two major causes of fatigue, sleep homeostasis factors and the nature of the task such as tasks requiring continuous attention or monotonous tasks linked to safety and performance. Williamson et al. (2011) also identified that too few studies have been done on circadian influences to strongly suggest their impact on fatigue.

In healthcare settings, as many as 25% of shiftworkers complain of chronic fatigue (for example, Costa, 2003; Geiger-Brown, 2011; Hossain et al., 2003). Common complaints centre on inadequate sleep and poor quality sleep. Disrupted or deficient sleep is often associated with tension, psychological depression, anxiety, psychosomatic symptoms, persistent fatigue and impaired performance (Shen et al., 2006). Barker and Nussbaum (2011) found that longer shift lengths and increased hours worked per week were associated with higher levels of physical and total fatigue, and also acute and chronic fatigue. In an Australian study of 846 nurses, Winwood et al. (2006) found rotating shiftwork, particularly shifts schedules that included night shifts, was strongly associated with the development of ill health as a result of fatigue. Yuan et al. (2011), in a comparison of nurses who worked only day shifts and those who worked rotating shifts that included regular night shifts, found significantly higher levels of fatigue in the night shift workers. Geiger-Brown et al. (2011) in a study of nurses working 12 h shifts, found adverse work schedules combined with high work demands negatively impact sleep quality and duration leading to increased safety risks. In a follow up study Geiger-Brown et al. (2012) concluded that nurses accrue a significant sleep debt resulting in significant attention lapses. Advances in shiftwork research have also led to a growing awareness of the relationship between work and non-work roles and the impact of conflict between these roles on shiftwork tolerance.

Multiple roles can result in increased self-esteem, better health and a more structured life. Conflict between these roles, however, can result in increased stress at home or work, a desynchronisation between work and socially valuable time, negative impacts on health, higher staff turnover and absenteeism, lowered job satisfaction and less organisational commitment (Pisarski et al., 2006; Duxbury, 2003; NCEPH, 2003; Wirtz et al., 2011). Duxbury (2003) found that work/non-work conflict affects workers' ability to enjoy and nurture their family, resulting in lower levels of family well-being and stability. The interplay between home and work factors and their impact on health was investigated in a study of 140 nurses working shiftwork by Peters et al., 2009. This study found that health variables were explained by work and home characteristics. The results showed that job demands contributed significantly to the health problems of nurses, and those respondents who experienced more demands at home reported more general fatigue. In contrast, those who reported more autonomy at home experienced less emotional exhaustion (Peters et al., 2009). Wirtz et al. (2011) found that working on socially valued days such as Sundays resulted in increased risk of occupational accidents and disrupted work life balance especially social wellbeing and the need to consider these factors when designing work schedules.

This literature leads to 
                           Hypothesis 1
                           There will be a significant positive relationship between work life conflict and fatigue.

One of the key elements in a supportive climate for shiftworkers is control over their work time such as the design of the shift system, starting times and the capacity to make adjustments to work rosters to accommodate other responsibilities and interests (Bacon et al., 2005). In a two part study of over 2000 shiftworkers, Bacon et al. (2005) found that those who were happier with their shift pattern saw this as compensation for the hard work required during a major change process. Nabe-Nielsen et al. (2011a,b), in a study of Danish social and health care workers, analysed the impact of working hours and work time influence on psychological well being. The data were collected at three points over a two year period and indicated that shiftworkers with high levels of control over their work times had higher levels of vitality and better mental health than those who worked only days. Conversely, the combination of shiftwork and low work time control was associated with worse psychological well being (Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2011b).


                        Brooks (2000) also argues in support of shift control, suggesting that team based, self-rostering processes for nursing staff are important in improving retention and minimising the negative impacts of shiftwork. This lack of roster control has been found to exacerbate physical and psychological ill health and increase sick leave and nurse turnover (Prescott and Bowen, 1987; Silvestro and Silvestro, 2000). A large empirical study of nurse retention in 90 patient care units in the U.S.A. (Prescott and Bowen, 1987) showed that staff scheduling problems is the most frequently cited reason for staff nurse resignations. Silvestro and Silvestro (2000) examined the efficacy of departmental, team and self-rostering practices in 50 wards in NHS hospitals in the United Kingdom. Their findings suggest that the choice of rostering system should be contingent upon ward size and rostering system complexity. The implication of this contingency approach to rostering is that, as wards grow in size, self-rostering and team rostering become more difficult, yet a move to departmental rostering can be perceived as retrograde, with staff relinquishing control (Silvestro and Silvestro, 2000). Bailyn et al. (2007) found that control over rosters can have positive results for nurses and benefit the nurse manager, providing nurses see this as not an individual entitlement but rather as a balance between individual and unit benefit. Nabe-Nielsen et al. (2011c) investigated the impact of flexibility, variability, regularity and predictability of working hours on shift workers in aged care settings. They found that workers influence over their shift schedules buffered the adverse effects of shift work and assisted individuals to have more control. Interestingly, however, this increased control over their individual shifts by staff decreased continuity of care for their aged patients and co-operation with colleagues (Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2011c). Control over rosters is a complex issue, and while it appears that control may alleviate fatigue, reduce sick leave and turnover, for individual shiftworkers its implementation may be problematic for continuity of care for patients and potentially create issues at the team level.

This leads to 
                           Hypothesis 2
                           There will be a significant negative relationship between roster control and fatigue.

What the self-rostering research suggests is that in order for control over rosters to be effective, nurses need to take a team view where everyone benefits, rather than an individual view. This process, of course, requires an understanding of the impact of team climate on nurses' fatigue, wellbeing and patient outcomes. For effective nursing, nurses need an ability to work as members of a team in a positive work climate (Cioffi and Ferguson, 2009; Pisarski et al., 2006). In a recent cross-sectional study, for example, nurses who perceived that they had high levels of supervisor support were found to appraise their work team climate more positively (Pisarski et al., 2006). Creating a positive team climate and giving shiftworkers more control over their work environment reduced time-based work life conflict and physical symptoms (Pisarski et al., 2006). Cioffi and Ferguson (2009) found team based nursing had positive patient outcomes and increased staff mentoring but a better understanding of gaining team satisfaction is needed. This leads to the following hypotheses:
                           Hypothesis 3
                           There will be a significant negative relationship between a positive team climate and fatigue.

If we combine scant current knowledge based on the work of researchers such as Cioffi and Ferguson (2009); Nabe-Nielsen et al. (2012); Pisarski et al. (2006) it suggests discussions with teams and the quality of those interactions expressed by team climate may play a role in alleviating fatigue and work life conflict and assist in improving work life balance. There is a gap in research evidence about the difference of the team climate experienced by people working three shifts which include night shifts where there may be fewer staff on duty. One study by Felicetti (1990) for example, found that night workers felt a strong sense of social isolation from colleagues. This sense of isolation may lead to three shift workers having a different perception of their team climate from those on day shifts. If this is the case we might expect night shift workers to experience greater levels of fatigue, work life conflict and desychronisation from a normal social environment. This leads to the following hypotheses:
                           Hypothesis 4
                           The negative relationship between positive team climate and fatigue will be moderated by shift type, such that this relationship will be stronger for two-shift workers (day shifts) than shiftwork that includes regular rotating night shifts (three-shift workers).

The negative relationship between roster control and fatigue will be moderated by shift type, such that this relationship will be stronger for shiftwork that includes regular rotating night shifts than those working day shifts.

The positive relationship between work life conflict and fatigue will be moderated by shift type, such that this relationship will be stronger for shiftwork that includes regular rotating night shifts than those that work only day shifts.

@&#METHOD@&#

The survey was administered to all nurses in a medium sized, Australian general hospital (n = 1584) at two time periods, 18 months apart. Data collection was conducted by university researchers, who held small group discussions with nursing staff in the hospital's wards and units to explain the study, answer questions, and encourage participation. An envelope, addressed to a central place in the hospital, was provided for respondents to seal and mail their anonymous and confidential questionnaires. This time interval was negotiated with the hospital's executive nurse manager as being the most suitable for the hospital. All survey measures were collected at both time points. Participants constructed an identity code used at both time periods. Completed questionnaires were returned by 931 nurses at Time 1 (51% response rate) and 679 nurses at Time 2 (42% response rate). Matching participants across surveys resulted in a final matched sample of 166 nurses. Of these 166 nurses, 61 worked two shift rotating rosters (8 h morning and afternoon/evening shifts) and 105 were three shift rotating shiftworkers who worked 8 h day, evening and night shifts.

In the final sample, 91% were female. The median age was 30–40 years, with most respondents under 40 years of age (67%). The majority of respondents were in a relationship (63%) and had no dependent children (65%). Almost all were permanent employees of the hospital (96%) and most worked full time hours (62%). The median organisational tenure was 6–10 years, with 76% of respondents having worked for the hospital for less than 10 years. By shift type, 37% of respondents worked two-shift rotating day shifts and 63% worked three-shift rotating rosters that included regular night shifts. Comparison to available organisational data indicated that the final sample demographics closely matched those of nurses in the sample organisation, and thus the sample was deemed representative.

A comparison of the demographic and job characteristics of two- and three-shift workers at Time 1 is presented in Table 1
                        . Chi-square tests were used to determine whether the demographic and job characteristics of two- and three-shift workers were significantly different. These tests revealed that two-shift and three-shift workers differed significantly by average age (two-shift workers older), relationship status (more two-shift workers in a relationship), organisational tenure (two-shift workers longer tenure), and percent with managerial responsibilities (more two-shift workers managers). These significant demographic and job characteristic differences were included in our analyses as control variables. These control variables were chosen as there is research evidence that suggests these demographics and job characteristics may impact the fatigue, wellbeing, and work life balance of shift working nurses with more negative outcomes for those working three shifts. Two- and three-shift workers in this sample however, did not differ significantly by gender, hours worked, employment status or dependent children which allowed us to examine the variables of interest free from the potential impact of these potential biases.

Team climate was measured by 10 items adapted from the Pisarski et al. (2006) dimensions of team climate scale, and demonstrated good internal consistency across both time points (Time 1 α = .85; Time 2 α = .81). This scale measures perceptions of team characteristics such as giving feedback, trust and collaboration within the team, understanding the objectives of the team, and the team's impact on individual performance and is measured on a 5-point scale (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree).

Control over shift allocations was measured by 2 items adapted from Pisarski and Bohle (2001) measured on a 5-point scale (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree). A sample item is “I have enough input and control over rosters”. The scale demonstrated acceptable internal consistency in both surveys (Time 1 α = .87; Time 2 α = .89).

Work-life conflict was measured by 6 items devised by Bohle and Tilley (1998). The scale examines conflict between the demands of an individual's job and the demands of the individual's family and friendship networks and is measured on a 5-point scale (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree). This scale achieved a satisfactory Cronbach's alpha across both time points (Time 1 α = .87; Time 2 α = .87).

Fatigue was measured by 2 items measured on a 5-point scale (1 = almost never, 5 = almost always) from the Standard Shiftwork Index (SSI); (Barton et al., 1995). In this study, the fatigue items demonstrated high internal consistency across both surveys (Time 1 α = .83; Time 2 α = .82).

The control variables of age, relationships status, organisational tenure and managerial status were included as control variables. Relationship status (0 = single, 1 = in a relationship) and managerial status (0 = not manager, 1 = manager) were both dummy coded. The proposed moderating variable of shift type (dummy coded as −1 = day shift, 1 = night shift) was also included.

Due to the relatively small number of matched surveys over time, we conducted analyses to determine whether there were any systematic differences between nurses who responded to both surveys (matched respondents) and those who only responded to the first survey (unmatched respondents). A MANOVA found no significant main effect of survey completion on the main study variables. Chi-square tests found no significant differences between matched and unmatched respondents on shift type, organisational tenure, managerial status, relationship status, or age. This suggests that systematic differences between our matched and unmatched respondents are unlikely to provide an alternative explanation for our results.

We used moderated hierarchical multiple regression to test our hypotheses. Following Aiken and West (1991), we mean centred our independent variables and used these centred variables to create interaction terms with shift type. In line with recommendations, shift type was dummy coded as −1 = day shift, 1 = night shift before creating these interaction terms. Independent variables were introduced into the regression equation in three steps. In Step 1, fatigue at Time 1 was entered as a control variable, along with the job and demographic characteristics of manager status (dummy coded as 1 = manager), organisational tenure, age, and relationship status (dummy coded as 1 = in a relationship). The proposed moderating variable, shift type (dummy coded as 1 = night shift), was also entered at the first step. At Step 2, the centred values of the three hypothesised predictors of team climate, roster control and work life conflict were entered. In the third step, the two-way interaction terms between shift type and the three independent variables were entered. At each step, the change in variance explained and significance of individual beta coefficients was inspected.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The means, standard deviations and intercorrelations between main study variables are presented in Table 2
                        . All three independent variables were significantly correlated with reported levels of fatigue 18 months later, and these correlations were all in the expected directions – team climate (r = −.20, p = .01), roster control (r = −.24, p = .001) and work life conflict (r = .27, p < .001).

The results of our regression analysis are presented in Table 3
                        . At Step 1, the variables collectively explained 27.2% of the variance in fatigue (F (6,159) = 9.88, p < .001). Prior levels of fatigue (as measured 18 months earlier) was a significant predictor of current fatigue (β = .43, p < .001). Age also emerged as a significant predictor (β = −.21, p = .01), such that younger nurses reported higher levels of fatigue. However, none of the other demographic and job characteristics, including shift type (β = .02, ns), were significant as predictors of fatigue.

Based on previous cross-sectional research findings, Hypotheses 1, 2 and 3 predicted that team climate, roster control and work life conflict would be significant predictors of fatigue over time. At Step 2, the addition of these three independent variables explained an additional 4.2% of the variance in fatigue (ΔF (3, 156) = 3.17, p = .03). However, of these three predictors, only roster control was significant as a predictor of fatigue over time (β = −.18, p = .03), such that having less control over roster scheduling predicted significantly higher fatigue 18 months later. Therefore, while Hypothesis 2 was supported, Hypothesis 1 and Hypothesis 3 were not.

Hypotheses 4, 5 and 6 predicted that shift type would moderate the relationships between team climate (H4), roster control (H5), work life conflict (H6) and fatigue, such that the relationship between team climate and fatigue would be stronger for nurses working two- shifts, while the relationships between roster control, work life conflict and fatigue would be stronger for nurses working three-shifts which included night shifts. In the third step, the addition of the interaction terms explained an additional 2.3% of the variance in fatigue. While this change was not a statistically significant improvement to the model (ΔF (3, 153) = 1.74, ns), this is above the 1% criterion specified by Aguinis (2004) as indicating a significant interaction effect exists in the model. We therefore inspected the significance of the individual interaction terms. Only the interaction term between shift type and team climate was significant (β = .16, p = .04). Simple slopes analysis was used to probe the significant interaction between team climate and shift type. In support of Hypothesis 4, team climate predicted fatigue for day-shift workers (β = −.36, t = −2.20, p = .03), such that two-shift working nurses who reported a more positive team climate reported significantly lower fatigue 18 months later. However, the relationship between team climate and fatigue was not significant for night-shift workers (β = .13, t = .78, p = .44). This interaction is presented in Fig. 1
                        . Neither Hypothesis 5 nor Hypothesis 6 was supported.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION@&#

The study aimed to examine the longitudinal relationships between fatigue, team climate, work life conflict, control of shifts and shift type. This study found that fatigue, roster control, shift type and team climate are very real but complex issues for shiftworking nurses. Shiftwork has profound effects on the health, well being and safety of workers, and therefore it is critical that these effects are examined using longitudinal designs. In longitudinal analyses, by identifying those observations that are measured on the same individuals, it is possible to focus on changes occurring within individuals and to make sample inferences that are not as sensitive to between subject variations.

In this study, we found that only two of the proposed six hypotheses were supported. For example, contrary to expectations, especially given previous cross-sectional research findings (Pisarski and Loudoun, 2007), work life conflict was not a significant predictor of fatigue over time. There was no significant positive relationship between work life conflict and fatigue as predicted in Hypothesis 1. The expected positive longitudinal relationship between work life conflict and fatigue was also not moderated by shift type, such that this relationship was not stronger for three-shift workers than two-shift workers as predicted in Hypothesis 6. At both Time 1 and Time 2, however, the strongest correlation was with work life conflict. So, at any point in time, work life conflict was the strongest predictor of concurrent fatigue, but over time it was not. So it could be that similar to age and fatigue, a survivor effect operates, whereby there is a critical point at which an individual's tolerance is exceeded and they respond to their high work life conflict and fatigue by changing some aspect of their work or life in order to create a more tolerable situation again. The fact that over just an 18 month period we could only find 166 matched participants from a sample of over 670 nurses may be an indicator of this survivor effect in operation. Unfortunately as surveys were anonymous we can only speculate whether the small matched sample is due to turnover, selection or some other mechanism. There were no major structural, strategy or cultural changes introduced in this hospital over this 18 month period that might provide more insight. Future research would need to consider trajectories of work life conflict and fatigue over time on larger matched samples to more fully investigate this issue.

The role that fatigue plays in both nurse and patient safety and, more broadly, in disaster management, makes it imperative that fatigue is examined longitudinally. As previously stated, when workers are fatigued they have difficulty concentrating, they are less alert, and reaction times are slower resulting in increased risk of error, accident or injury (Barker and Nussbaum, 2011; Fransen et al., 2006). This study found a significant negative relationship between roster control and fatigue supporting Hypothesis 2. For these 166 shiftworkers, fatigue increased over time when there was a lack of control over rosters. It supports the work of Pisarski et al. (2006) that found a relationship between control over work environments (including rosters) and physical health, and extends it to fatigue and a specific form of control, namely, control over rosters. The negative relationship between roster control and fatigue was not moderated by shift type (Hypothesis 5), such that this relationship was not stronger for shifts that include regular night shifts (3-shifts) as opposed to those working only day shifts (2-shifts). The lack of significant interaction between roster control and shift type suggests that control over shift scheduling can have significant effects on fatigue for both two-shift and three-shift workers. Although not found in this study the research of Yuan et al. (2011) and Geiger-Brown et al. (2011) suggests rotating three shift workers with a lack of roster control should have greater fatigue than two shift workers and suggests the need for further investigation, especially in relation to the role of team climate.

Interestingly, there was also no significant negative relationship between a positive team climate and fatigue over time generally as predicted in Hypothesis 3. However, we did find a significant negative relationship between positive team climate and fatigue moderated by shift type, such that this relationship was stronger for two-shift workers than three-shift workers as predicted in Hypothesis 4. This would indicate that a positive team climate reduces the level of fatigue for nurses working rotating day shifts but does not reduce fatigue for those on rotating shifts that include regular night shifts. Overall, the results suggest that fatigue in nurses can be reduced by having more control over rosters, and that a positive team climate will also further reduce fatigue for two-shift workers but does not mitigate fatigue for those working three shifts. This study, although longitudinal, did not examine effects at the team level, that is a measure of teams longitudinally and these results do suggest a need for further research to investigate the impact of this team variable at the team level of analysis.

Given the benefits of reduced fatigue, but also the issue of self interest interfering with effective self rostering, identified by Bailyn et al. (2007), our results indicate the importance of fostering a positive team climate for both two-shift workers and three shift workers. The fact that we did not find this relationship for those working three shifts warrants further investigation to ascertain whether working regular night shifts, as in the case with these workers, results in an accumulated sleep debt that cannot be mitigated or whether it is simply more difficult to build positive team climates and reduce three shift workers feelings of isolation, not just socially but from co-workers as well.

Fostering a positive team climate should not detract from a consideration of individual needs and should enhance the willingness of staff to consider the needs of the team or ward members. This should, in turn, improve compliance with the underlying assumption of self-rostering that it should benefit both the individual nurse as well as the team as can be inferred from the work of Cioffi and Ferguson (2009); Nabe-Nielsen et al. (2012) and Pisarski et al. (2006). For shift workers rotating between day and night shifts, control of rosters appears more important than team climate for reducing fatigue but warrants further investigation.

Overall, this study raises many questions and opportunities for future longitudinal shiftwork research. This study also demonstrates the benefits of longitudinal studies; however, one limitation of this research is sample size. Longitudinal research is best suited to large stable populations. The results demonstrate that the participants at this hospital were not stable over the 18 month period of study with only 166 people completing both the Time 1 and Time 2 surveys out of a possible sample of more than 670 participants, suggesting that nurse turnover, selection or some other mechanism may have been an issue in sampling longitudinally. This has implications for data collection, the method of analysis that can be utilised and the suitability of the industry. The recommendations for minimum sample size suggested it was inappropriate to use structural equation modelling for the present analyses (Kline, 2011). However, future research should aim to overcome limitations by collecting larger, non-self report, samples from more stable populations, over more time periods to enable theoretical models regarding shift work tolerance to be tested over time using cross-lagged panel designs.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

