@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Perspectives on recycling centres and future developments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Improvement of safety, economic and environmental performance is needed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Sorting quality influences working conditions, environment and system performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Future needs include industrialization, design and organization of recycling centres.


                        
                        
                           
                           System performance is obtained through a multidisciplinary approach.


                        
                        
                           
                           A checklist for planning/rebuilding recycling centres is included.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Environment

Sustainability

Waste

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The overall aim of this paper is to draw combined, all-embracing conclusions based on a long-term multidisciplinary research programme on recycling centres in Sweden, focussing on working conditions, environment and system performance. A second aim is to give recommendations for their development of new and existing recycling centres and to discuss implications for the future design and organisation. Several opportunities for improvement of recycling centres were identified, such as design, layout, ease with which users could sort their waste, the work environment, conflicting needs and goals within the industry, and industrialisation. Combining all results from the research, which consisted of different disciplinary aspects, made it possible to analyse and elucidate their interrelations. Waste sorting quality was recognized as the most prominent improvement field in the recycling centre system. The research identified the importance of involving stakeholders with different perspectives when planning a recycling centre in order to get functionality and high performance. Practical proposals of how to plan and build recycling centres are given in a detailed checklist.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The importance of a sustainable environment is generally recognized (McKinsey Global Institute, 2011; Radjiyev et al., 2014), considering ecological, economic and social aspects (Josimović et al., 2015). Swedish waste management has undergone radical changes during recent decades. The handling of waste is complex, with many different actors involved. New laws are regularly introduced regarding the treatment of waste; which products are to be recycled; how they should be transported; and who is responsible for collection and storage of the collected material (Schultz, 2000). This leads to ongoing changes in how waste is handled, and has increased the demand for alternatives to landfilling such as material recycling, biological treatment and incineration with heat recovery.

At present, most household waste is recycled in Sweden and the share being landfilled has decreased to 0.7% (Avfall Sverige, 2014), compared to 34% on average for EU (Eurostat, 2013). A growing volume of waste, nearly 185 kg per inhabitant per year, is collected at recycling centres. These are manned drop-off facilities, where the users can bring, sort and throw away items e.g. large-sized, hazardous, and electrical waste. The waste is placed in large containers, cages and small containers (Fig. 1
                     ). Kitchen waste is not allowed. Well performing recycling centres, being very early in the recycling chain, are key to the subsequent steps in waste processing (Engkvist et al., 2004; Woodard et al., 2004). However, their performance has scarcely been investigated. The rapid growth of recycling, hastened by several new laws (Government Bill, 1993; SFS, 2001; EU Directive, 2002/96, 2003; Eurostat, 2013; European Commission, 2012), has mostly focused on environmental factors, but rarely taken the work environment or economic aspects into consideration. Thus, the work environment has often been shaped without conscious planning, and workers have had to adjust to the situation (Alvarez de Davila and Antonsson, 2001). Sometimes a recycling centre is built in one corner of a landfill, or on a small area with a few containers and no possibilities to expand when needed, e.g. with new laws concerning recycling of products. Due to the rapid expansion of the recycling sector, there are challenges for the recycling system related to the following three fields: working conditions, environment and system performance. The research reported below has integrated social, economic and environmental aspects in order to make recommendations on sustainable systems for recycling in the future.

More detailed information about how recycling centres are organised in Sweden can be found in Engkvist (2010), Engkvist et al. (2011) and Sundin et al. (2011).

The overall aim of this paper is to draw combined all-embracing conclusions based on a long-term multidisciplinary research programme on recycling centres in Sweden, focussing on working conditions, environment and system performance. A second aim is to give recommendations for the development of new and existing recycling centres and to discuss implications for the future design and organisation.

@&#METHODS@&#

A multidisciplinary research programme focussing on recycling centres was organised by a research group representing the disciplines of ergonomics (J Eklund, Engkvist, Hemphälä), safety (Engkvist), environmental management (M Eklund, Krook) and manufacturing engineering (Björkman, Sundin). In addition, 10 PhD and Master students worked in the programme. In total, seven studies were performed over a 10 year period. The researchers took the initiative to the research, got research funding for, in total three projects by VINNOVA, a Swedish governmental research agency. The detailed research questions were specified in close co-operation with representatives from the waste and recycling branches, in particular when designing two new recycling centres. The research included studies regarding: 1) a problem and system overview; 2) reported occupational injuries; 3) field studies including observations; 4) questionnaires and interviews at recycling centres (Table 1
                     ); 5) interviews with downstream actors; 6) development of equipment; and 7) training material for the industry and design recommendations for new recycling centres.

The researchers collaborated in developing the research instruments in order to assure the multidisciplinary research approach. All questions from the four disciplines were brought together in one instrument addressed to each group of participants, making it possible to collect information from each individual on one occasion. In total 10 instruments were developed, in which 614 questions/aspects were covered. The development and conduct of the tests and experiences of the use of the instruments are described in detail in Engkvist et al. (2010). Validation tests along with the quality of the collected data, and experience from the data collection showed that the instruments and methodology used were suitable for their purpose. In total 868 datasets were collected by the 10 different instruments covering more than 433,000 responses. The data collection, target group, type of instrument, number of respondents among, employer, employees and users, and the response rate are shown in Table 1.

In study 1, semi-structured interviews were conducted covering the steps in the waste management chain from household waste to reuse, material recycling, incineration, or landfill. As recycling centres were identified as having a key role, they were the focus in the following research studies (Engkvist et al., 2004). Study 2 investigated reported occupational injuries among employees at recycling centres, based on official statistics (Engkvist et al., 2011).

In study 3, data were collected in field studies from employees, managers and users at 16 recycling centres, using both questionnaires and interviews. The 16 recycling centres visited were selected from different regions and catchment areas, their number of potential users and the year of their construction. These recycling centres were located across Sweden and they had their own unique layout and different sizes (Sundin et al., 2011). Data were collected from the employees concerning work tasks, physical and psychosocial working conditions and activities at recycling centres using questionnaires, followed by structured interviews to gain a deeper understanding of these aspects. The purpose of the data collection from users was to assess their activities and opinions about the recycling centres and characteristics of the waste brought. The users asked to participate were chosen at random before their arrival at the recycling centre. They were interviewed or asked to fill in a questionnaire after disposing of their waste but before leaving the recycling centre. Users were also observed, without disturbing or intruding on them, concerning their activities, behaviour and the characteristics of their waste (Engkvist et al., 2010). The number of employees and users who were interviewed, or who filled in a questionnaire in connection with the different studies is shown in Table 1. Data collected from managers assessed their practices and operational conditions, e.g. number of employees, training of personnel, information campaigns, opening hours, financial aspects, etc. All 16 managers were interviewed and all recycling centres were assessed for risks and hazards.

In study 4 the questionnaires for employees were expanded with questions concerning the plant and sent to 26 additional recycling centres, covering all counties in Sweden (Engkvist, 2010; Engkvist et al., 2010; Eklund et al., 2010). In study 5, nine downstream actors were interviewed who processed and treated the collected waste regarding their quality requirements and business interactions with recycling centres: five fuel suppliers of wood waste, two scrap metal merchants and two stakeholders of waste paper (Krook et al., 2008; Krook and Eklund, 2010b). Further, in study 6, a lack of equipment for the employees, e.g. a tool suitable for picking up incorrectly disposed waste was identified, and as a result, such a tool was developed (Sundin, 2009b).

During the study period the researchers cooperated with a municipality-owned company that was responsible for collecting and handling waste, reported in study 7. Two new recycling centres were planned and built, and consecutive results from the study were discussed and considered in the planning process. The second recycling centre is shown in Fig. 6
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     . These two new recycling centres were evaluated 20 and 12 months respectively after they had opened and compared with the recycling centres studied and also with one newly built external recycling centre in another county (Sundin et al., 2011; Hemphälä, 2014).

Frequency data was compiled as a part of the descriptive statistics. Statistical analyses of relationships were made to get a more solid basis for improvement proposals. When analysing dichotomous variables, Chi-square analyses were used. For continuous variables, t-tests were used. A significance level of 95% was chosen. The analyses were performed with SPSS. Open questions were categorised depending on type of response. When possible, a comparison was made with official statistics of all employees in Sweden (SCB, 2004).

@&#RESULTS@&#

An integrated analysis of findings from the total research programme of how to improve working conditions, environment and system performance was carried out conjointly. The analysis showed that there are many different improvement opportunities. There was also a substantial overlap between these improvement opportunities as several of them gave rise to the same outcomes. Independently from which discipline the recycling centres were studied, the most prominent improvement field both at the recycling centre and for the downstream actors was the waste sorting quality. In total, five main improvement fields were identified as being of high importance for promoting the development of recycling centres. Further, these were also related to and contributed to each other. These five improvement fields are:
                           
                              1)
                              Waste sorting quality

Physical and psychosocial work environment

Conflicting needs and goals within the industry

Ease of use for recycling centre users

Layout, design and organisation of recycling centres

The quality of waste sorting strongly influences costs, working conditions, environmental performance and efficiency for both recycling centres and downstream actors. Currently, incorrectly sorted waste is common at recycling centres. Poorly sorted waste affects several issues at the recycling centre, for the downstream actors, and also further on in the external environment due to contamination of materials. The quality of the sorted waste depends on several factors (Fig. 2). Products are generally not designed to be dismantled, and often consist of several materials, whose waste treatment methods are incompatible. Products of mixed materials make sorting difficult and confusing for the user.

Information is available in advance of a visit from brochures or via the Internet concerning the recycling centre's opening hours, position of the containers, and how to sort waste. At the recycling centre the most important sources of information to sort their waste are signs and employees. Signs are often neither legible nor easily understandable, and often do not give users sufficient guidance in sorting their waste. Downstream treatments vary between actors, e.g. those receiving the recycled materials; for this reason the nomenclature of the signs can vary for the same type of waste, e.g. clothes are labelled as combustible at one municipality's recycling centres and as non-combustible at another. This confuses the users and makes it difficult to sort correctly. Users' knowledge of sorting waste and their attitudes to environmental issues influence sorting quality; about half of the users claim that they recycle for environmental reasons. The employees' attitudes and knowledge also influence sorting quality.

The number of employees working at the recycling centres varied between 1 and 9 people. The majority of employees were men (90%). Working hours was normally day-time, often one evening per week and some hours on Saturdays. Opening times of facilities varied between 4 and 45 h per week. Work organisation varied, partly due to the size of the recycling centre. All employees' main work tasks consist of giving service to the users, such as informing and helping them to sort their waste, and guiding them to find the correct container. They also inform users who sort their waste incorrectly, pick up incorrectly sorted waste, sort chemicals, and manually stow some of the waste in special cages. They are also responsible for arranging containers for disposing different waste fractions, internal transports, maintenance work and administrative work. The distribution of work tasks for each employee differed depending on size and number of employees at the recycling centre.

Several work tasks at recycling centres were identified as risky, e.g. handling hazardous waste such as chemicals, frequent heavy lifting, and manually stowing electrical or electronic appliances or white goods in special cages/containers. Frequent lifting of misplaced waste from containers was judged by the employees to give the highest risk of injury (41%), leading to the most awkward and strenuous postures (53% and 41%, respectively). In the interviews it was also the work task that was least appreciated by the employees.

The frequency of accidents for recycling centre employees was more than seven times higher than other employees in Sweden (SCB, 2004). An accident leading to injury in the last 12 months was reported by 22% of the employees, mostly during manual handling. Minor accidents such as crush and cut injuries were reported by many employees (63%). Men reported more heavy lifting compared with women (p = 0.02), they rated their work to be more physically strenuous (p = 0.01) and also more often that they had too much to do (p = 0.01). Users more often tended to ask a male employee to help with a heavy lift. Carts and other handling aids that support the users also decreased employee work load. However, in most cases the recycling centres were poorly equipped with devices that could have reduced manual work e.g. tractors, cleaning machines, and also lifting/transfer equipment. Incorrectly sorted waste leads to deteriorating sorting quality unless the employees immediately correct this. To move misplaced waste to the correct container, the employees used different homemade tools. To respond to this identified need, a tool to pick up misplaced materials was developed and tested at a local municipality, with good effects (Fig. 3). A clean and tidy recycling centre tended to encourage users to keep it clean and tidy, using available shovels, brooms and dustbins.

The dominant sources of noise imposing a risk of hearing loss were driving heavy machines and impact noise e.g. from disposal of metal in a container. Noise was not perceived by employees as a major problem, and neither were air pollutions nor lighting. Low temperatures during winter time could be uncomfortable, but this could be dealt with by warm clothing and access to a warm office/personnel building.

In total, 70% of the employees reported that they were pleased, or very pleased with their job (4 or 5 on a five degree scale). Most employees (71%) reported positive user attitudes and that users frequently showed their appreciation, e.g. by giving presents. Many employees emphasised that this was a service job with the advantage of many social contacts during working days. The employees reported that the most important characteristics needed for doing the job were: being outgoing and cheerful, having a constructive attitude and being service-minded. At recycling centres where they had recruited and educated service minded personnel, as their recruitment criteria, the users rated the service highly and the employees were most often met with positive attitudes and were satisfied with their jobs. Many employers wished to focus more on giving good service, for the employees to be seen as “the public face of the municipality”, and also to increase the number of women working at recycling centres.

There are conflicting interests built into the employees' tasks. They are expected to give good service to the users, and at the same time, correct and check that the waste is placed into the intended container. It was found that the workers prioritised the service function. In the case of a non-cooperative user, instead of arguing, they often preferred to have the extra work of picking up the incorrectly sorted waste after the user had left. One third (32%) of the users expected help from employees with heavy lifting, which is not included in their work tasks. Many employees pointed out this conflicting issue as a major daily problem.

Conflicts of interest were observed within recycling centres, such as the more effort the employee puts into correcting miss-placed waste, the better it is for the environment with non-contaminated waste but the worse it is for the work environment of the employees at recycling centres with many and heavy lifts and risks for injuries.

No actor takes an active responsibility for overall coordination of the entire recycling chains. This lack of coordination leads to sub-optimisations for parts of these chains. Packing quality implies that containers and cages are packed with minimal empty space to minimise transport costs. When users are instructed to load their electronic equipment in cages, this reduces the employees' work at recycling centres, but leads to badly packed cages, higher transport costs and increased costs for unloading and sorting at the treatment facilities. A badly packed cage can take 10–12 times longer to unpack by the downstream actor. Manual packing of e.g. electrical and electronic waste at the recycling centres by the employees result in increased workload with many heavy lifts in awkward positions and risks of falls, crush and cut injuries (Fig. 4).

As much as 20% of waste is incorrectly sorted, causing downstream environmental implications. A lack of communication among the actors in the recycling chains leads to insufficient enforcement of stated quality requirements on how the waste should be sorted. As a consequence, most actors both at the recycling centres and at the downstream organisations do not feel incentives to make improvements.

Recycling centres are used by male and female adults of a range of physical capacity, recycling experience and command of the Swedish language. The typical user of a recycling centre is a man in his 50ś who lives in a house. He travels about 5 km in his own car and combines the visit with other activities. A median visit takes less than 5 min, and the user disposes of waste in 3 different waste fraction containers. A majority of users have not sorted their waste in the order in which the containers are placed at the recycling centre, and are therefore dependent on sufficient information given on site or knowledge from previous visits. They get the information by asking employees, looking at the signs, or looking at the waste already thrown into the containers. Despite opportunities, 89% of the users did not seek information prior to their visit. Users of recycling centres are exposed to risks of injury due to manual handling, falls, and crush and cut injuries, many examples of which were identified in the interviews with users and employees. There are also risks of being hit by cars or transport vehicles, sometimes reversing; the risks are higher on narrow ramps and/or at dark hours (Fig. 5).

In total, 87% of the users gave the service provided at the recycling centres a high rating (4 or 5 on a five degree scale), and many (64%) express their environmental concern and this is a strongly contributing factor as to why the users normally try to sort their waste as well as possible. Further, most users (80%) were positive about reusing products disposed of by others, and most (67%) were also willing to let others reuse their own disposed products.

Old recycling centres were often built at landfills in the outskirts of the towns. New recycling centres are often located in industrial suburban areas, near housing areas. Older recycling centres often lacked many characteristics that are referred to as modern industrialisation i.e. organised according to contemporary industrial principals. As they had often been developed from landfill facilities, they therefore had shortcomings in user focus. The old layout and organisation shown in Figs. 1 and 5 with narrow ramps, leads to bottlenecks and queues making throughput times unnecessarily long and waste sorting difficult for the users. Newer recycling centres had better layout and organisation. They more often had a large container area with natural and visible flows of materials and user vehicles, marked lanes, road marks and information signs. They also tended to be more tidy and clean and had organised designated places for the different waste fractions. This was not always the case with older facilities. One of the two recycling centres that were built in cooperation between the research team and the municipality based on the findings of this research programme is shown in Fig. 6
                     

More results from the total research programme can be found in (Engkvist et al., 2004, 2010; Engkvist, 2009
                        bib_Engkvist_et_al_2010; Engkvist, 2010; Engkvist et al., 2011; Eklund et al., 2010; Hemphälä, 2014; Jonsson, 2005; Krook and Eklund, 2010a,b; Sundin, 2009a,b; Sundin et al., 2011).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This paper supports that the overall goals of ergonomics to create healthy and comfortable conditions for people and system performance to a large extent are closely aligned with the goals of design for environmental sustainability (Thatcher, 2013). However, when building a new industry, such as recycling centres, ergonomic considerations may suffer since recycling centres have mainly been developed in order to meet the demand for disposal. The quality of waste sorting at the recycling centres is one key-factor for the environment, the work environment and costs at the recycling system. The importance of recycling centres as suppliers of raw-material and energy resources will probably increase in the future, which implies new challenges. The present economy favours the use of virgin resources over recycling and allows benefits from scale (Ayres, 1997).

Recycling is much more labour intensive and suffers from expensive labour, at least in Western economies. Huge amounts of material have been invested in our built environment e.g. metal, buildings, infrastructure and products (Moll et al., 2005; Wittmer and Lichtensteiger, 2007; Halada et al., 2009), while the reservoirs of many virgin resources are becoming scarcer and more expensive to extract (Eklund, 1995; Norrthon, 1996; Kapur, 2006). Applying eco-design on products aiming to decrease the mixture of materials and substitute hazardous substances will make them easier to dismantle and increase their potential to be recycled (McAloone, 2000; Gottberg et al., 2006; Sundin et al., 2012). However, very little influence on the producers has been seen to date, since the costs for handling products when becoming waste, have been passed on to the users, as the cost of recycling is already included in the purchase price.

Improved organisation and design of the recycling centres leads to a better and safer work environment and improved sorting quality. As the most important work task for the employees is to give information to the users, adequate number of employees and good face-to-face communication ability are important for sorting quality (Engkvist, 2010; Perrin and Barton, 2001; Williams and Taylor, 2004; Nixon and Saphores, 2009). The conflicting tasks of both giving good service and correcting users' errors in waste sorting, emphasize the importance of employing suitable service minded people for the job and giving them adequate training, e.g. to handle conflicts and challenging users. An improved understanding of the need for accurate sorting and its consequences could be reached by letting the employees visit downstream actors. This might strengthen cooperation and the relationships with the downstream actors. It might also improve awareness of how important their jobs at the recycling centres are, as being very early actors in an essential chain. Due to the high number of injuries during handling of chemicals, there is also a need for more training and education in this area (Engkvist, 2010).

Better equipment at the recycling centres could help make the tasks less strenuous. The amount of electrical and electronic waste has increased considerably in recent years (El-Kretsen, 2005, 2013) leading to increased workload for employees. It also means problems with aggressive users that want to pick things to reuse, gives an unsafe working environment due to burglaries (Avfall Sverige, 2014) and more extra work, due to cleaning and sorting of pulled out products, and therefore higher costs (RVF, 2005). Employees should not work alone at the recycling centres due to high risk of accidents and threats from users. To improve safety for the employees, security cameras, electric fences etc. have been installed (Avfall Sverige, 2014). A centrally placed office/personnel building allows the employees to get an overview of the area. Also, it is important in cold and wet weather conditions, and for storage of their personal protective equipment.

Waste management and recycling is a heterogenic line of business, involving multiple actors with varying, or even contradicting, incentives for sorting (Björklund and Finnveden, 2005; Krook et al., 2008). For some fractions the recycling centre has to pay a fee for contamination due to misplaced waste, directly leading to higher operational costs for recycling centres (Krook and Eklund, 2010b). Downstream actors could play an important role by stimulating improved sorting of waste at recycling centres through quality requirements of the waste composition (Kautto and Melanen, 2004). In fact, most of the downstream actors already have such requirements. At present, however, there is a lack of established procedures for communication and control of these requirements (Krook and Eklund, 2010b). Most recycling centres do not get any feedback from downstream actors and do therefore not recognise any strong pressure for improvement. One obvious reason for this is the contradicting incentives for sorting among involved actors discussed above. Continuous quality control of the waste at recycling centres and downstream actors is difficult due to a lack of affordable and reliable methods (Krook and Eklund, 2010b). Finally, there is a strong market demand for waste resources in Sweden, which makes downstream actors careful not to apply too strong pressures for improved sorting since the recycling centres then might choose to distribute their waste elsewhere.

Building recycling centres is one way to organise for a more environmentally sustainable society. Kerbside collection of household waste is another way, and both ways have advantages and disadvantages, influenced by e.g. population density, access to cars or other vehicles, distances and financing systems. This paper focuses on improvements of recycling centres, and different improvement opportunities for the future are discussed.

Several of the principles for industrialisation may be applied to recycling (e.g. Shingo, 1988; Liker, 2004). Future recycling centres should, according to one of the fundamental principles of Lean Production, aim at natural and visible flows of materials and vehicles. The major requirements when planning a recycling centre are: facilitating efficient and safe traffic and material flow, obtaining waste fractions with minimal contamination and creating a safe and efficient place to visit, use and to work at. The layout depends on the land available, and has to consider the local conditions, e.g. shape and size of the area, ground properties, access roads, and nature protection interests (Sundin et al., 2011). A recycling centre with a good overview through a large open container area (Fig. 6) together with large, visible and comprehensible signs (Hemphälä et al., 2010) makes it easier for users to orientate themselves and to find the correct container. This also shortens their visit.

For both users and employees, the design of the recycling centres should have a well-planned and intuitive layout, with enough space but compact enough for users to get an overview of the containers for the different waste fractions (Fig. 6). To optimise capacity, the traffic flow should be as natural and self-explanatory as possible and easy to understand. The lanes should not have crossing traffic and the centre design should allow for driving around the large container area a second time in order to avoid reversing vehicles. Walking distances should be minimised for the users. This may shorten lead times through a fast throughput of users. Bottlenecks should be avoided and internal transports should be minimised and separated. The speed of vehicles may be kept down by bends, bumps or colourful paving stones. However, in order to avoid queues, there needs to be enough space to accommodate many users at the same time (Sundin et al., 2011) (Fig. 6). Placing seasonal waste (e.g. garden waste) in a separate area will shorten the queues.

Since the recycling centre is also open during the hours of darkness, the lanes and area for users must be well lit for safety reasons. Sufficient lighting also makes sorting easier and decreases the risk of both materials handling accidents and traffic accidents for both users and employees (Hemphälä et al., 2010). Capacity flexibility is the ability to handle peaks in numbers of users. Flexibility also concerns varying flows of materials and ability to change layout easily. It should be possible to include new fractions, and if needed, to expand the size of the recycling centre. It is desired to control or influence what time users arrive at the recycling centres in order to smooth the flow of users. This may be done by many methods, e.g. adapt opening hours to user needs and provide information about expected times of rush hours so that users may avoid these times. Furthermore, a tidy and clean recycling centre with clear marks for all equipment and waste fraction containers makes work and user activities easier, and contributes to better sorting quality.

As users inform themselves by asking the employee, important requirements are thus available employee at the site, in clothes that are visible and signal “employees” to the users. Users find it difficult and confusing to understand labels for some waste fractions, since they refer to different treatment methods and different organizations responsible for the waste. It is easier for users to understand a nomenclature that refers to material or product instead of treatment method, as treatment methods is normally unknown to the users (Krook and Eklund, 2010a). Users need to be informed and motivated to sort and recycle their waste. Many information channels can be used in addition to service-minded personnel, such as pamphlets (Evison and Read, 2001), campaigns (Diaz et al., 2012), Internet websites, leaflets, telephone information, notice boards, signs and a display of physical product examples (Eklund et al., 2010). Signs, and in particular large signs, have been shown to contribute to desired behaviour change (Sussman and Gifford, 2012). Also, wayfinding aids and symbols are helpful for those who have limited ability to understand written language (Lee et al., 2014). Another example is that all 10-year-old children in a Swedish municipality are offered a study visit to a recycling centre with their school (Tekniska Verken, 2009). The intention is to plant a seed of understanding concerning recycling, in the hope that the children will act as intermediaries to their parents.

Users' knowledge, interest and attitudes influence sorting quality (Engkvist et al., 2004). Therefore, information concerning recycling may motivate waste sorting; e.g. that recycled PET bottles will become new PET bottles or fleece fabric; hard plastic could become a washing-up brush etc. Guidance and tools for the users to separate materials in a product from one another before it is disposed of, may improve sorting quality. Available equipment for handling heavy waste makes it easier for the user (Engkvist, 2010). The political intention to avoid recycling systems with employed manual waste sorters, leads to the development of technology in automated waste treatment, in combination with encouragement of the inhabitants to sort and discard their own waste. Probably, a combination of legal, financial and ethical arguments and incentives to control and direct the sorting behaviour of citizens is needed.

Recycling centres located close to housing areas, shopping centres and workplaces minimise travelling distances (Belton et al., 1994; Eklund et al., 2010; Mattsson and Berg, 2004). Recycling centres should be located to minimise travelling distances, avoiding consumption of fuel and thereby air pollution. The more opportunity users have to combine their visit with other activities, the more the environmental burden allocated to the recycling centre visit will be reduced.

At recycling centres where users can place clothes, furniture or other products in separate spaces, charity organisations collect and sell these items in specific shops. However, recycling centre employees have estimated that most of the given products are disposed of by the charity organisations at the recycling centre because being assessed to have no market value (Engkvist, 2009). At a few recycling centres the municipalities either have their own stores and sell given products with profit, or let non-profit organisations collect useable waste and run a business close to the recycling centre (Fig. 7
                           ). Reuse of products at recycling centres (highest level of the waste hierarchy) saves the environment, conserves the world's resources and is appreciated by the users. Disadvantages are increased work for the employees; increased risks due to handling of money, robbery and burglary; difficulties in deciding price levels; and increased risk of conflicts with users.

In order to get a recycling system to function well, the provision of good services is essential as well as acceptance and commitment from the users to participate in the sorting (Evison and Read, 2001; Price, 2001; Thomas, 2001). The sorting of waste should start in the homes (Perrin and Barton, 2001; Williams and Taylor, 2004), and it should be supported with relevant information in order to make the visit to the recycling centre more efficient.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Recycling centres face challenges regarding working conditions, environment and system performance. One key-factor for this is waste sorting quality, which may be improved in many ways. Layout, design and organisation of the recycling centre strongly influence users' ability to dispose of and sort waste correctly and consequently the working environment for the employees. Further, there are several contradictions between the different performance goals in the recycling chain. The industry has a potential to develop improved tools and equipment at the recycling centres. Industrialisation logic is needed for introducing more rational processes and making use of the potential economic value of the waste. The demands for future recycling centres will be both the primary task of waste disposal for protecting the environment and increased demands to supply materials for the industry. To fulfil these needs, it is necessary to improve efficiency through improvements to: quality of sorting, capacity and flexibility, working conditions for the employees and ease of use combined with safety for the users.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The Swedish Agency for Innovation Systems (VINNOVA) (1. Registration nr: 2002-02082, Project nr: 23284-1, Project leader: Inga-Lill Engkvist; 2. Registrationnr: 2003-00617, Project nr: 23284-2, Project leader: Inga-Lill Engkvist; 3. Registrationnr: 2005-02881, Projectnr: 23284-3, Project leader: Inga-Lill Engkvist) is gratefully acknowledged for financial support. We also acknowledge all PhD and Master students for their contributions to the programme; Tekniska Verken, Linköping who have cooperated in the research; and RVF, now Avfall Sverige, The Swedish Association of Waste Management, for supporting the research.


                           
                              
                                 •
                                 Number of users per year and a forecast for coming years?

Maximum number of users per hour?

Is there any space to expand in the future?

Which fractions of waste are needed?

Size and number of containers needed?

Are there any restrictions for entry and exit of the recycling centre?

Number of employees and office/personnel building?

How can disturbances to the surroundings be minimized?

Space for rain water purification?

Garage for work vehicles, equipment etc?


                           
                              
                                 •
                                 Sufficiently long entry road, so that queues do not reach the public road

Road coating of asphalt or concrete due to hazardous waste, oil spills, etc.

Parking lot at the entrance with an orientation plate, not disturbing incoming traffic

Garden waste may have a separate part of the site with its own driveway

Users should have the overview over the whole complex upon entering

Parking facilities for users close to office/personnel building

Beautiful plantings and flowers, to encourage order and tidiness


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Entrance gate should be located before the exit gate

Simple and clear flow of user vehicles in one direction

The traffic flow in the area shall be guided by marked lanes, signs, one-way road etc

Driving direction normally counter clockwise for avoidance of traffic intersection

Avoid intersecting roadways in the large container area

Heavy traffic should be separated from all other traffic

Orient the direction of containers so that glare of sunlight is avoided when reading the container signs

User vehicles should have opportunities to drive more laps, if necessary

The large container area entry may have speed reduction devices

Heavy traffic and container handling separate from users and user traffic


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    High fence (electric fence if necessary)

Office/personnel building should provide an overview of the area and theft-prone waste

Opportunities to lock in theft-prone waste during nights in containers


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    All types of household waste except food waste should be received

A separate area for garden waste and excavation materials

A place to leave chemical agents and hazardous waste

Containers for glass, paper and packaging

Trash bins for plastic bags and paper bags at strategic locations


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Users should place their own electrical and electronic waste in designated containers

Material handling aids should be provided for the employees


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    The large container area should be sufficiently broad, without steep entry and exit points

Avoid ramps for users and user' vehicles

If possible double set of containers for popular fractions

The container should preferably be accessible from the longest side

Newsprint and cardboard should be close and preferably before combustible

Electrical and electronics waste should be placed close to cardboard

Separate fractions for products with mixed materials, for example furniture

Wood and pressure impregnated wood should be next to each other

A metal fraction should be placed towards the end of the large container area


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    The office/personnel building should be centrally located within the large container area and if possible higher than user surfaces to allow overlooking users and containers

Good visibility from the office/personnel building over hazardous waste and electronics

Parking facilities for employees


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Containers upper edge height should be about 80 cm above ramp level

Container lids should be safe to open and close

Containers are placed near the ramp to prevent waste falling down to container level

Wood beams on the dockside cushion the shock when containers are put in place

Noise reducing mats in containers decrease impact noise, in particular for metal waste


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Sign size should be readable over the whole large container area

Letter height of 15 cm and 25 cm for readability at40 m and 80 m

Select lower case text and a font without serifs

Select light text on dark background

Use shape and colour to distinguish different types of signs

Use a frame around the signs

Present only the necessary information

Uniform and comprehensible nomenclature and signage

Avoid too much text/information on a sign

Avoid “not”-examples in signs

The signs must be placed so high that they are not obscured by other vehicles

Place the signs so that they are visible from several sides

Spread information so that all signs are placed where they are needed

Place the signs so that they are illuminated but without glare

The signs should be well lit in darkness

Avoid a cluttered background

Road signs are visible at long distance high up above the vehicles

It should be easy to change the container signs to “Closed off” if necessary


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Functional and highly visible clothing with reflectors to the employees

Good and functional personal protective equipment


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Lifting device to pick up misplaced heavy waste from the containers

Lifting device to pick up misplaced light waste from the containers

Appropriate lifting and handling devices for e.g. white goods

Avoid lampposts in the large container area for users and vehicles

Good colour rendering of light to improve sorting quality

Light road coating on the ground reduces the need of illuminance

Trees and shrubs can provide some protection against the wind

An office/personnel building provides opportunity for employees to keep heat balance


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Working alone should be avoided

The area should be kept clean of fragments of waste, especially glass or nails


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Handling chemicals/hazardous waste

Lifting and transfer technique

Reception of users

Managing threats and violence

Information about what happens to the waste in the next step in waste management


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Lifting devices for other heavy/bulky waste

Safe equipment for compression of waste in containers

User carts and other transport means for users


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    The area shall be easily cleaned without obstructions, e.g. snow removal and sweeping

It shall be possible to rinse the area with a hose

Brooms and dustpan placed on accessible locations for users


                              
                                 
                                    •
                                    Municipality information on opening hours and container placement by mail

Positioning of the containers, opening hours and location accessible via Internet

Sorting guide in brochures and via Internet

Brochure that describes further treatments of the waste collected

A home page on the Internet with full details

Information about number of users and queues via Internet

Information via employees, signs, information sheets and information leaflets

Invitation to the media to get out information to the public

Field trips from schools

@&#REFERENCES@&#

