@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Integration of human factors and ergonomics during medical device design and development: It's all about communication

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The aim was to understand the constraints under which medical device design and development take place.


                        
                        
                           
                           A thematic analysis was conducted based on 19 semi-structured interviews.


                        
                        
                           
                           Barriers to designing for safety and usability were identified. They included deficits in communication.


                        
                        
                           
                           The barriers to communication were both internal and external to the development process.


                        
                        
                           
                           We recommend the use of mediating representations such as personas and scenarios to address barriers to communication.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Interface

User computer

Multidisciplinary communication

Medical device design

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Manufacturers of interactive medical devices, such as infusion pumps, need to ensure that devices minimise the risk of unintended harm during use. However, development teams face challenges in incorporating Human Factors. The aim of the research reported here was to better understand the constraints under which medical device design and development take place. We report the results of a qualitative study based on 19 semi-structured interviews with professionals involved in the design, development and deployment of interactive medical devices. A thematic analysis was conducted. Multiple barriers to designing for safety and usability were identified. In particular, we identified barriers to communication both between the development organisation and the intended users and between different teams within the development organisation. We propose the use of mediating representations. Artefacts such as personas and scenarios, known to provide integration across multiple perspectives, are an essential component of designing for safety and usability.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Design can reduce the likelihood and consequences of error (Clarkson et al., 2004). Developing a system wide understanding of users, the tools that they use and the environments in which the live and work supports this approach (Carayon et al., 2006). For medical devices, such as infusion pumps, there are several examples of redesign that would reduce error rates (Lin et al., 1998; Thimbleby and Cairns, 2010). In these cases a valuable opportunity has been missed: once equipment has been deployed, it is difficult to update or modify it. There have been calls for an acceleration of the integration of Human Factors and ergonomics in patient safety, including the creation of “market forces for manufacturers to produce safer products that incorporate HFE [Human Factors Engineering] principles and techniques” (Gurses et al., 2012). HFE is a term applied to the application of theory, principles, data and methods to design in order to optimise human well-being and overall system performance. The European equivalent is Usability Engineering (UE), which is similar in principle. The aim of the work reported here is to better understand current practices in incorporating HFE into the design and development of interactive medical devices and, in particular, the challenges to doing so.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

In the European Union, the placing onto market of medical devices is governed by a number of European Council directives, implemented though national law. A medical device manufacturer is required to be: “reducing, as far as possible, the risk of use error due to the ergonomic features of the device and the environment in which the device is intended to be used.” They should provide: “consideration of the technical knowledge, experience, education and training and where applicable the medical and physical conditions of intended users” (EC, 1993).

Modular, open, voluntary and harmonised standards support compliance with these requirements. One of these standards, IEC 62366 (2007) details the application of UE/HFE to medical devices. These interactions are broadly defined and include (but are not limited to) transport, storage, installation, operation, maintenance, repair and disposal. There is a need to consult a broad range of specialists during the design and development process. Knowing which stakeholders to contact and when is often a thorny issue (Sharp et al., 1999). For example, communication can be within an organisation, between an organisation and suppliers, or out to regulators, users or research providers. Coordinating exchanges is not easy and barriers to communication can arise due to a lack of common understanding. For example, in many industries, people use tacit knowledge that is difficult to express or share and rely upon shared cultural references that are only understood by people aware of the origins (Eckert et al., 2001, 2004; Eckert and Stacey, 2000; Eckert and Stacey, 2003; Flanagan et al., 2007). For medical devices, communication deficits have been shown to result in the wrong device being developed or purchased. For example, in a study examining requirements elicitation for a medical imaging device, when the intended clinical population was surveyed, they expressed little need for the device (Hinrichs et al., 2010; Martin et al., 2012).

Given the need for a broad range of specialists to work together, it can help to establish common ground. This is where mutual knowledge, beliefs and assumptions are identified (Clark et al., 1983). The concept of grounding can be likened to playing a duet on a piano, where players synchronise intros and exits, volume, tempo and dynamics. They also develop a mutual understanding of terminology, turn taking and limitations regarding the medium of communication.

Recent studies examining the relationship between healthcare professionals and equipment providers have found several barriers to the formation of common ground. Money et al. (2011) found that UE/HFE practice is constrained by an over reliance on limited numbers of senior healthcare staff. They also found an avoidance of consultation with patients or less senior staff, and a tendency to make design modifications on the basis of intuition rather than the more formal approach of user testing. There were biases towards collecting measures of efficacy to meet the needs of purchasing or evaluation agencies. The study also found a lack of clarity regarding who the user was and barriers relating to ethical process. For the later point, manufacturers raised concerns regarding the time it took to gain approvals. When involving patients, there were limitations in what could be achieved, when.

For relationships internal to the design and development process, recent reports regarding the application of IEC 62366 to the development of ventilator systems call for a better definition of roles and responsibilities (van der Peijl et al., 2012). The authors suggest that UE/HFE should be defined as a sub-process of the wider product development process and there should be greater linkages between UE/HFE and risk management. Associated research has flagged difficulties in translating user requirements to systems requirements, knowing when and where to invest development effort and managing the documentation burden (Fitch, 2004; Subita, 2007). There are accounts of difficulties in knowing when UE/HFE techniques should be applied, who is responsible for them, and integrating UE/HFE within existing development practice (Gupta, 2007; Mehrfard et al., 2010; Samaras and Horst, 2005). Many of these issues are addressed in textbooks or guides (NPSA, 2010; Weinger et al., 2011; Wiklund et al., 2010), suggesting that although knowledge is available, practitioners may have difficulty in accessing, locating or assimilating it.

We wanted to explore the challenges faced by those internal to the design and development process, when implementing UE/HFE. In a preceding qualitative analysis, reported elsewhere, we identified a range of challenges relating to the application of UE/HFE. Analysis was based on a smaller number of datasets (11). Issues included effective collaborative working practices; understanding the user and their situation; providing adequate justification for the adoption of a user-centred approach; the provision of clear guidance and support (Vincent and Blandford, 2011a); standardizing across the industry and understanding the regulatory intent (Vincent and Blandford, 2011b). In the preceding analysis, topics relating to communication and collaboration emerged repeatedly. We collected further data on that theme in order to conduct a focussed investigation, involving a greater number of participants and depth of analysis.

The questions we focused on were, what are the challenges to communication and collaboration during UE/HFE activities, and how can they be addressed? This could be in terms of making UE/HFE guidance more accessible, or supporting integration between disciplines. In order to understand how best to do this, we continued to conduct a qualitative study based upon interviews with those involved in the design, development and deployment of medical equipment (generally infusion devices) (Vincent and Blandford, 2011a, 2011b). It involved eight additional sets of data, collected using a theoretical sample. We examined ways in which device developers were incorporating technical, environmental and social aspects into the device design. We used thematic analysis to explore many of these issues, using the regulation, development, manufacture and deployment of infusion devices as foci. Although we did not set out to explore aspects regarding common ground, we found the concept useful in explaining the behaviours that were described.

@&#METHODS@&#

We interviewed practitioners in order to build an understanding of current UE/HFE techniques and identify opportunities for support. Our definition of UE/HFE was not constrained by IEC 62366; rather, we allowed participants to define the terms as they wished. The topics for discussion are presented in Table 1
                        .

We interviewed a range of professionals. The majority had an interest in the interactive properties of infusion devices (Table 2
                        ). Where possible, interviews were audio recorded and transcribed for analysis. When interviews were recorded, the audio recorder was clearly visible to participants, who agreed to be audio recorded.

In cases where it was not possible to take a recording, extensive notes were taken. Data were transcribed and loaded into ATLAS Ti (Scientific Software Development GmbH). The first author conducted the interviews and performed the analysis, in discussion with the other authors, as described in more detail below. We made the final paper available to participants to check that their views were accurately represented.

The first author conducted a process of coding by defining chunks of data in a systematic fashion. Codes were abstracted to determine multiple overarching themes. As noted above, in previous publications (Vincent and Blandford, 2011a, 2011b), six themes were identified (Fig. 1
                        ). This paper focuses on particularly recurrent topics, relating to the first two themes, namely: shared ownership of the design space; and communication between disciplines.

We used thematic analysis to explore the topics presented in Table 1. Thematic analysis is a qualitative method designed to support the identification, analysis and reporting of themes (Braun and Clarke, 2006). We chose the method as it is independent of theory and epistemology and is compatible with essentialist and constructivist approaches.

Thematic analysis is different from Grounded Theory (GT), in that GT involves analysis that is directed towards theory development. This requires constant comparison and the interleaving of data gathering and analysis. Thematic analysis is more flexible, in that, as the method is quite loosely defined, emphasis is placed on describing what was done and making sure the analysis provides useful output. In conducting the analysis, we did not collect a measure of inter-rater reliability. This is because we were taking an interpretative approach. This is typical of many textbook methods (Smith, 2008).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

A high-level finding was that design and development was shared across multiple and sometimes independent functions. This resulted in challenges regarding shared ownership of the design space, and communication between disciplines. These themes are the focus for this paper. In the presentation of results below “#n” is used to indicate the use of evidence from participant n; where possible this is a direct quotation, but where it was not possible to audio-record the interview, the notes from the meeting are summarised.

When companies had multiple independent lines of development, it was not always clear who had ownership of the device User Interface (UI). Organisations structured product development across functional specialism, for example, clinical, design, marketing, post marketing surveillance (complaints), quality, R&D, regulation, safety and UE/HFE (#1). In a similar way, a usability engineer with additional responsibility for requirements engineering described three kinds of focus: mechanical design (the mechanical interface that allows insertion/removal of plastic tubing), industrial design (form/factor of the device) and software engineering (relating to the UI). Different bodies were responsible for varying types of requirement and there were concerns about grey areas where effort could be duplicated or missed.
                           
                              “I am concerned about the specific usability requirements that sometimes overlap with functional requirements… …when this happens and I think something is missing, I try to talk to first my team members, and then if we think something is really missing, and there is not a misunderstanding, we try to contact the customer.” (#7)
                        
                     

Multiple units needed data relating to the intended user and usage; however, different disciplines had different ways of collecting it. These included: contextual inquiry, (#9) direct observations, focus groups, (#18) or gathering input from device trainers (#5). If a study was commissioned by one function (e.g. marketing) the output was not always relevant for another (e.g. UE/HFE).
                           
                              “Quite often they also seek information about users but they seek different information and the information they collect isn't really too helpful for us.” (#8)
                        
                     

Different disciplines wanted different things from techniques, which influenced the resource spent, approach to data collection, and way in which requirements were presented (#7). Even when the requirement was clear, there was a need to communicate why a given change was necessary. Across the majority of participants based in the UK, anything other than a purely cosmetic change required a supporting business case (#3). At this point, justification required consideration of factors external to the development team. For example, if a customer wanted a change to the consumables or software used by a device, the manufacturer would need to balance the cost of deviating from a generic solution (including recertification) with the benefit of meeting the customer need. The situation was complex, as manufacturers needed to consider the cost of maintaining configuration differences in the future. For example, given a fictitious scenario of a product involving three parts (ABC), if a customer requested a variant (ABD), and the manufacturer then needed to upgrade part A, to A+, the number of configurations would increase rapidly (ABC, A+BC, ABD, A+BD). Each variant would require support relating to tracking, testing, traceability, repairs etc. This had cost implications as the number of regional/customer specific variations increased. The greater the number of product versions, the greater the overhead (#14).

There were therefore tensions between those generating business cases, and those involved in UE/HFE. This was because what saves money, might not be in the interests of the user (#2). For example, generic product lines reduce costs associated with support and equipment management (#3), however they can limit the extent to which products tailored for context can be supplied to a hospital (#12). This type of conflict came up in the relationship between UE/HFE and marketing (#7). Usability practitioners felt that products were being placed onto market without going through sufficient numbers of design iterations. They also felt design/development activities were overly focused on aesthetic properties (#1). For analysis relating to safety, there were similar, uneasy relationships between those involved, including compromises to be made between safety and user satisfaction (#8).

Within the EU, the primary responsibility for safety lies with the organisation putting a device onto the market. Participants who had this responsibility reported that it was necessary to show that their actions would not result in negative consequences:
                           “When you change something, what you actually change doesn't make things worse. That's the first thing isn't it? …the thing that you’ve actually changed to the negative may not be immediately obvious.” (#12)
                        
                     

Various proposals were made as to how this could be achieved, for example methodologies such as risk management or safety/assurance case production (#17). The problem was that combining the needs of multiple independent design and development functions, in the context of safety, required a shared assessment. It also required detachment from economic considerations (ISO 14971 (2012) p7, content deviation 3). Arguably, when usability is linked with a reduction in training needs or facilitation of uptake, safety and cost come into conflict. For example, the use of on-line training systems or assistance functions may limit training costs (#3). At the same time, this type of assistance may reduce the involvement with front line users, which in itself can be an opportunity to monitor and provide for safety in use (#5). Although standards like IEC 62366 present the conduct of usability engineering within the context of risk management (e.g. product safety), the combination of the two can help or hinder overall development (Gruchmann and Borgert, 2007; van der Peijl et al., 2012). On one hand, risk management will be improved through consideration of the rationale used to design the interactive properties of a device (and visa versa). On the other hand, if the conduct of usability engineering is inextricably linked with cost savings (#6), couching this rationale in the context of risk may be unacceptable.

Combining activities regarding safety and usability also limits the flexibility of the development process. For example, iterative design can be constrained due to the overhead of preparing supporting documentation. It can be impeded through the number of levels of approval required before design modifications are realised (#4), (#12). This highlights a challenge for our participants, in that it could take months or years to get design changes realised. Speedy and accurate communication of requirements was important, but at the same time integration meant that safety and usability came into conflict. Resolving these conflicts was necessary, but there was a lack of support in this area.

Given these complexities, we were interested in how multidisciplinary communication was occurring. Results showed that it was frequently the case that the design rationale was encapsulated within an individual or group and was inaccessible to outsiders. For UE/HFE practitioners, often placed in a mediation role, this was a challenge, and there was a balance to be achieved between maintaining focus and reaching out to other disciplines. For example, there were concerns regarding the tendency for UE/HFE work to focus on the UI in isolation:
                           
                              “Direct observations, interviews and focus groups, empirical usability tests, heuristic evaluations and the like. We do all of that stuff here, as I'm sure you do as well. But again, each of these approaches tends to focus on the UI of the device in isolation.” (#18)
                        
                     

Companies addressed these issues by embedding UE/HFE personnel in engineering teams. However, UE/HFE practitioners still reported discipline specific silos which could help or hinder necessary communication. For example, from the perspective of a usability engineer, talking about the stereotypes associated with their discipline:
                           
                              “Usability engineering is probably something rather exotic when you compare it to proper, very basic or very technical engineering.” (#7)
                        
                     

This impacted at multiple levels. Firstly, it was difficult to communicate UE/HFE results, the confidence associated with those results and the limitations of the methods to those external to the discipline. Secondly, there was a lack of information as a result of breakdowns in communication (#19). This was a recurrent topic. In many cases, the development landscape resembled multiple islands of individuals, maintaining they had little influence over the device UI, due to the lack of ability to persuade others to make a change (#10). For example, there were instances of UE/HFE practitioners being detached from user requirements generation and usurped by others who felt better placed to inform the interactive properties of a device:
                           
                              “They would still think that from a marketing perspective, they know all they need to know about how to design a pump.” (#7)
                        
                     

Similar barriers to communication existed when it came to considering external relationships with, for example, clinicians. In one case, an organisation was reluctant to consult with a particular type of professional user, due to fear of discrediting the product or receiving negative feedback. This was on the request of others within the development organisation.
                           
                              “The company are more reluctant to disclose the information to the professional users. Err, I think because the professionals, being professionals are more… well they give a lot heavier criticism.” (#8)
                        
                     

In the case of devices developed in the UK, another study provided an alternative account, of companies prioritising input from senior health service staff (Money et al., 2011). The reason for this may be that organisational structures in the UK health service are hierarchical in nature and purchasing power may reside at higher levels, even for equipment used by staff at junior levels. The combination of these findings with our own would suggest that if barriers relating to communication are overcome, companies might end up consulting with the wrong type of user.

Given challenges regarding differences in perspective and barriers to communication, one possibility is to reduce autonomy, and make design, development and deployment as systematic as possible. Approaches where the problem area is structured, solutions enumerated, and then chosen using optimisation criteria, suit well-defined and constrained problem areas (e.g. rocket science) (Zwicky, 1951). As the problem area is formalised, the need for dialogue is reduced and solutions chosen using objective criteria. We suggest that this type of approach is limited when it comes to integrating UE/HFE during medical device design and development. This is because although the engineering problem is well defined, characteristics of clinician, clinical practice and wider socio-technical systems are hard to anticipate, structure and specify:

[following a dialogue about epidural pumps]
                           
                              “You have to be very careful when you change a system or when you change a practice… an engineer might not understand what the clinicians are doing, and therefore might not foresee the things that are some of the things that we talked about before, like pressure, the very subtle things.” (#12) [similar to content in (#13)]
                        
                     

Another approach is to increase autonomy, but compensate for deficiencies in communication through the use of lightweight, adaptable, and flexible techniques. These get those from different disciplines talking to each other. We suggest that for medical device design, the problem area is sufficiently complex, that it is more feasible to get a cross section of stakeholders to inform the design rationale, than to adopt rigid and structured approaches. For example, mediating representations that allow the development community to come together and form a shared rationale don't always give rise to testable requirements, but suit complex problem areas where there is no single solution. These are typified by the type of wicked problem originally proposed by Rittel and Webber, (Rittel and Webber, 1973). We equate this type of problem to the task of medical device design, based upon the results of previous research (Westbrook et al., 2007) and our own observations.
                           
                              “So everything that fosters communication helps… and stuff that prevents communication doesn't. It is usually not so much about requirements and written documents but more about getting the right people talking to each other.” (#8)
                        
                     

We suggest the use of mediating representations, to support joint reflection during the decision making process. This is equivalent to the application of boundary objects; a way of presenting information that is sufficiently plastic to allow for adaptation to local need, but at the same time immutable and robust in order to maintain integrity across multiple perspectives. Boundary objects balance the need for invariance and specificity and promote common understanding and definition (Star and Griesemer, 1989). Boundary objects allow professionals to apply their own intuition, creativity, and craft skill to the problem area, rather than adopting a constrained and process heavy approach.

We suggest the use of two examples of boundary object: personas and scenarios. They are likely to be helpful as they can be used to communicate user needs and constraints to individuals from varying professional backgrounds. Personas provide ways of thinking about how users behave, think, what they want to accomplish and why. They are composite archetypes that stop developers falling into the trap of designing for themselves. Scenarios or narratives describe how users accomplish tasks. They encourage consideration of design possibilities and discussion of what products do and why. Scenarios support design problem fluidity, anchored discussion and description of experience that can help evoke joint reflection. They also allow the team to depict the product in use, taking into account environmental factors such as interruptions, multitasking, and conflicting demands (Carroll, 1995; Carroll and Rosson, 1992).
                           
                              “Scenarios are also a standard technique which we basically use every time, usually I try to develop scenarios within stakeholder workshops, trying to identify the main scenarios as well as the most critical ones…” (#7)
                        
                     

We suggest that personas and scenarios are appropriate as they have proved successful in other medical and non-medical domains, (Dong et al., 2007; Lerouge et al., 2011; Reeder and Turner, 2011; Shah et al., 2009; Sutcliffe et al., 2010; Wiklund, 2006) (Blandford et al., 2007; Dearden et al., 2000; Djajadiningrat et al., 2000; Randolph, 2004; Smith and Harrison, 2002; Sutcliffe, 2003). They can be used to address the disparate views that we observed, by providing a concrete representation of ground truth. They focus multiple stakeholders on a common objective. They also allow for the negotiation of interpretation by allowing multiple disciplines to flag up differences in perspective and negotiate a common understanding (Tedjasaputra et al., 2004). They support the concept of common ground that was outlined in the introduction. Added to this was the fact that in many cases, organisations were already using personas and scenarios, although not in a way that allowed them to become boundary objects. Participants also mentioned the use of related techniques such as the Delphi technique (#7), patient actors/role-play (#19), mock-ups/paper prototyping (#15#19) and/or task analysis (#15).

Given the barriers to communication between HF, marketing, safety and usability, there are questions regarding the effectiveness of the suggested techniques. For example, in one organisation, the results of UE/HFE investigation, sent to a local intermediary, didn't make it to the development team, located in a different country. It was only when the usability consultant contacted the development team that they found this out.
                           
                              “I didn't get that much communication with the development team… …I sent them the personas… …turned out that they didn't have them at all.” (#19)
                        
                     

Given the lack of dissemination, we would suggest ways to maximise potential; by securing buy in from senior levels of the business; adopting common repositories that are monitored, and opening up the results of efforts regarding safety and usability (e.g. to procurement bodies). We also need to consider the appropriateness of the techniques in the medical domain, where safety is critical. For example, if a technique is not contributing to safety focus then it may become compromised:
                           
                              “Well you know when you do a product, you try to be as good a possible, but it if it is not safety critical you can probably say that the driver is not that important.” (#8)
                        
                     

Both personas and scenarios have been used in safety critical applications and found to support the identification of safety requirements. Application has also been shown to address gaps that appear when multiple risk assessments occur in separate sub-projects. They therefore provide input to the formal risk assessment process (in combination with task analysis) (Björndal et al., 2011). That said, the issues surrounding the combination of views regarding safety and usability (outlined at the end of section 4.1) highlights the challenge in this area.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

We recognise several limitations to this exploratory study. Firstly, it is unlikely that our participants represented a plausible community of practice. The sampling method and breadth of organisations contacted made it difficult to match the skillsets to a typical development scenario. For example, we may have under-represented the role of project managers or designers. Conversely we may have over-represented views relating to HF or Usability. It was hard to pigeonhole those who we spoke to, given the multinational context that we were working in. It was interesting to consider how the views varied across similar roles in different development organisations. For example, for UE/HFE practitioners working in the US context, the FDA draft guidance (FDA, 2011) provided a stimulus to develop a relationship with the regulator to seek further guidance. The tacit understanding appeared to be that there is no one size fits all when it came to UE/HFE. The EU approach was more homogeneous, with limits to the extent to which Notified Body and UE/HFE practitioner could exchange information. One of the limitations of the study is therefore that we were dealing with two subtly different mechanisms of regulation, which are in constant flux and only partly harmonised. We also accept that the results express the opinions of those we worked with. Conversely, these opinions may not have been made available if the study had not been conducted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In this study, 19 interviews were conducted across a range of individuals involved in the design and development of medical equipment. We found there was a lack of common ground between disciplines, meaning that communication was impeded by gaps in mutual understanding or shared reference points. It was as if the range of stakeholders internal and external to the development process were residing within disciplinary silos or walled gardens. This had the effect of blocking exchanges relating to UE/HFE. Interaction design tools and techniques were being applied as interpreted by a given community, the results packaged up and, metaphorically speaking, lobbed over the walls. This was for use by others involved in development. When these packages were received it was often the case that the recipient had little or no use for the contents. We observed this in terms of overlapping or unclear UE/HFE roles and responsibilities, different interpretations of UE/HFE activities and a poor understanding of the needs and objectives of others.

Given the abundance of guidance and support for UE/HFE, and the need to work together, why was multidisciplinary communication so poor? Studies in other industries have shown that when information is passed across multiple organisational levels, intermediaries can distort the technical picture or omit critical data. Information can be oversimplified and assumptions communicated inadequately. There are personal or professional aspects that modulate the degree to which those from different backgrounds communicate effectively (Eckert et al., 2001). We saw this in a reluctance to consult with certain user groups, conflicts between UE/HFE practitioners and safety/marketing professionals, stereotypes regarding the role of UE/HFE and documentation not making its way to the intended recipient. We would have liked to measure the number of organisational levels, or the chain of communication that occurred, to get a more detailed account of where information was lost, distorted, detached or delayed; however, this remains a topic for future investigation.

In summary, we have conducted a broad study, consulting across medical device manufacturers in several countries, using an exemplar class of device as a way of providing focus. There were limits to the extent to which UE/HFE techniques could be applied effectively. We recommend the use of mediating representations or boundary objects to support effective communication. Without addressing barriers to communication, it is unlikely that the implementation of UE/HFE will realise essential benefits relating to safety and usability.

None.

This work is part of the CHI+MED: Multidisciplinary Computer-Human Interaction research for the design and safe use of interactive medical devices project, supported by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council [EP/G059063/1].

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We thank the participants and the reviewers for their input. The study obtained approval from the UCL research ethics committee.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

