@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Assessment of early onset of driver fatigue using multimodal fatigue measures in a static simulator

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Quantification and objective measurement of fatigue that driver experiences during prolonged driving.


                        
                        
                           
                           Simultaneous recording of multimodal fatigue outcome measures.


                        
                        
                           
                           Analyzed both physical and mental aspects of driver fatigue.


                        
                        
                           
                           Addressed human factors evaluation of drivers upon driving.


                        
                        
                           
                           Methodology detects early on-set of fatigue during simulated driving.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Driver fatigue

Multimodal fatigue measures

Static simulator

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Driver fatigue is an important contributor to road accidents. This paper reports a study that evaluated driver fatigue using multimodal fatigue measures, i.e., surface electromyography (sEMG), electroencephalography (EEG), seat interface pressure, blood pressure, heart rate and oxygen saturation level. Twenty male participants volunteered in this study by performing 60 min of driving on a static simulator. Results from sEMG showed significant physical fatigue (ρ < 0.05) in back and shoulder muscle groups. EEG showed significant (ρ < 0.05) increase of alpha and theta activities and a significant decrease of beta activity during monotonous driving. Results also showed significant change in bilateral pressure distribution on thigh and buttocks region during the study. These findings demonstrate the use of multimodal measures to assess early onset of fatigue. This will help us understand the influence of physical and mental fatigue on driver during monotonous driving.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the current globally networked economy more and more people tend work in multiple time zones resulting in almost 24 h running of organizations and increasingly longer “voluntary” working hours, which is akin to long-shift hours (Dorrian et al., 2011). In addition to this, mobility of human, goods and services is another implicit requirement to cater this growing global economy. Road transportation networks play as one of the critical facilitator for short and medium haul of people and goods thereby helping the mobility. However the down side of this mode of transportation is the number of accidents which appears as large owing to the volume of traffic.

India, a major emerging economy driven by this globalization, road networks are a key in-land linkage. According to a report by National Crime Records Bureau, road accidents in 2009 reported 35.5% death rate in India (Government of India, 2010). It is argued that up to 40% of the accidents in road transportation system worldwide is due to driver error which may be a result of fatigue (Connor et al., 2002; Horne and Reyner, 1995; Roads and Traffic Authority, NSW, 2011). The National Transportation Safety Board (2010) has reported driver fatigue as a probable cause for road accidents that result in financial losses, injuries and even fatalities.

It has been demonstrated that people engaged in long shift-work have a circadian disruption, i.e., changes in sleep patterns, which often leads to sleep deprivation and its associated ailments (Åkerstedt et al., 1987; Darwent et al., 2012; Rosekind et al., 1994). Disruptions in circadian rhythms and sleep pattern results in decreased alertness, impaired activity, tiredness and possibly fatigue (Bonnet, 1985). These impediments manifest itself broadly as fatigue disrupting several activities of daily living, one of which is for vehicle drivers.

Fatigue decreases an individual’s ability to operate vehicles safely and reduces situation alertness. There are many factors that may cause the driver to be fatigued. It results from the complex interaction of various factors (Kecklund and Åkerstedt, 1993; Young et al., 2006), of which mainly: 1. Environmental factors such as road surface irregularities, low density traffic, time of day, rain, fog, etc, 2. Biological factors such as inadequate sleep, circadian rhythms, health, age, etc, 3. Socio-economical activities such as long work-shifts, increased work load, alcohol, drugs, etc and 4. Vehicle factors such as noise, vibration and postural stress that are created by the vehicle itself, poor suspension, seat and vehicle design, demands on both physical and mental processes. Detection of driver fatigue is a major concern in vehicle design, road safety and transportation research. However a serious impediment to address driver fatigue is the difficulty and most times the inability to detect it.

Several papers have suggested methods for quantifying driver fatigue based on subjective and objective measurements. Subjective measurements are based on self-rating tests by means of questionnaires (Caldwell et al., 2003). One of the major drawbacks of this method is that it is either conducted before and/or after the event. This can probably lead to drivers forgetting important issues that they perceived or experienced during the course of driving. Objective measurements of driver fatigue are categorized as: vehicle parameters such as change in the steering wheel rotation, acceleration, speed of the vehicle, braking and lane tracking etc (Apostoloff and Zelinsky, 2003) and physical movements such as eye closure and blink rates, tracking of facial expression, etc by using video imaging techniques (Zhu and Ji, 2004). Major problems with these approaches are their sensitivity to external factors such as luminance and vibration that the driver experiences in the real driving scenario. Moreover, they could detect only the outcomes of fatigue and they do not predict the occurrence of fatigue before. There are some blood biochemical parameters that are also used for evaluating driver fatigue. However such testing often is invasive and disadvantageous in analysis. Similarly the disadvantage of psychological tests is that they often make heavy demands on the subjects, which will raise the level of cerebral activity. The above issues can be overcome by appropriate indices of driver fatigue which would be some sort of physiological measures to quantify both physical and mental skills associated with driving performance.

Different physiological and psychophysiological parameters are contributed for the fluctuations of alertness, activation and performance degradation. It is of particular importance to isolate them precisely in order to understand their contribution to human functioning system. To better understand the driver fatigue and train the key stakeholders in the road transportation, simulations and simulators are extensively used (Waller, 1992; Young et al., 2006). Several advantages like safety, security, exposure to high-hazard and cost-effectiveness are there in using simulators in lieu of on-road training. Increasingly, driving simulators that represent realistic environment with force feedback and motion platform are now popularly used to examine driver behaviour, performance and attention (Eoh et al., 2005; Land and Horwood, 1995).

The reliability of driving simulators coupled with ease of experimentation has prompted us to use a static simulator with force feedback in steering to study the physical and mental aspects of driver fatigue during monotonous driving. Since driver fatigue has multiple causal pathways and early symptoms, we decided to adopt a multimodal monitoring of the driver performance. We have used surface electromyography (sEMG) to understand the muscle activity, electroencephalogram (EEG) to understand brain activity, seat pressure distribution and other measures of physical exertion like blood pressure such as heart rate, oxygen saturation level to quantify driver fatigue during monotonous simulated driving. Hence a multimodal technique of detecting driver's status/condition can provide reliable results in terms of both physical and mental fatigue.

Twenty male participants volunteered for this study. Their mean age, weight, heights were 23 ± 4.40 years, 64.5 ± 10.70 kg and 1.76 ± 0.08 m respectively. All participants had light motor vehicle (LMV) license and had more than two years of driving experience. The study protocol was clearly explained to each participant and the possible risks associated with the study. A written informed consent was taken from the volunteers to enrol as participants in the study. All experimental procedures were performed using a static driving simulator in a controlled environment of the laboratory.

The static driving simulator comprises of steering wheel with force feedback, gear shift lever, foot pedals and a projection of the driving environment for visual feedback (Fig. 1
                        ). A commercially available (‘Need for Speed’, Electronic Arts 2010) driving environment was used for the study. The driving environment selected for this study was a highway with low traffic density. All participants were allowed approximately 30 min of driving practice session to get accustomed to the controls used in the simulator. After the practice session, participants were given a break of 20 min away from the simulator and were allowed to have unconstrained movement within the laboratory. Participants were then required to sit on the driver's seat in their comfortable driving postures. The angle between the thigh and the trunk was between 110° to 120°. Then they commenced their 60 min of testing after a quick check of all instrumentation.

It was found essential to determine both physical and mental aspects of fatigue in order to accurately validate the driver's level of alertness. Hence, simultaneous recording of the following multimodal signals were obtained during the monotonous driving session.

Extensor carpi radialis (ECR), biceps brachii (BB), medial deltoid (MD), trapezius medial (TM), sternocleldomastoid (S), latissimus dorsi medial (LDM) and erector spinae (ES) muscle-groups were evaluated bilaterally for this study. Muscle-groups were chosen based on preliminary studies for implication in driving, intensity of signal generated and accessibility of muscle for electrode application. Before placing the measurement electrodes, the placement site were identified, shaved, and cleaned with ethanol to avoid impedance mismatch and movement artifacts. sEMG signals were acquired using 16 channel EMG machine (Wireless Myomonitor IV, Delsys Inc., Boston, MA) at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz. Raw sEMG signals were filtered using 20–450 Hz band pass filter and 47–51 Hz band stop filter. The filtered signals were windowed for 30 s each at an interval of 5 min and then archived for subsequent analysis.

It is reported that the increase in power of sEMG signal in the frequency band of 15–30 Hz is a reliable index of fatigue when compared to the median frequency, total power or peak amplitude (Sparto et al., 2000). Wavelet analysis was performed to decompose the sEMG signal into its component scales with corresponding frequency bands. Daubechies 4 (db4) wavelet was chosen as the mother wavelet and detailed wavelet coefficients were obtained in the frequency band of 15.6–31.3 Hz after sixth level of decomposition (Balasubramanian and Adalarasu, 2007). As the wavelet coefficients themselves can only be qualitative characteristics of given potential frequency band, root mean square (RMS) analysis of these coefficients was performed to quantify the spectral changes due to fatigue (Vukova et al., 2008). Hence, RMS analysis was used to evaluate numerically the changes in wavelet coefficients in the selected frequency band. During fatigue development, the wavelets coefficient values in this frequency band decreased which reflected the decrease of the high frequencies in the potential spectrum.

Driving involves various functionalities that are brought about by activities in different lobes of the brain. Frontal lobe is associated with movement, planning, emotion and problem solving. The parietal lobe is associated with recognition and perception of stimuli. The temporal lobe is related to memory, auditory and speech whereas occipital lobe is associated with vision responses (Kar et al., 2010). In this study, EEGs were recorded using Mitsar-EEG-201 machine based on 21 EEG and 4 poly channel EEG amplifier (Mitsar Co. Ltd., Russia Federation) at 500 Hz sampling frequency from the frontal (F3, F4), parietal (P3, P4), temporal (T3, T4) and occipital (O1, O2) lobe as per the 10–20 lead system for EEG. The raw signals were first processed using band pass filter with cutoff frequencies of 0.5 Hz and 30 Hz. Wavelet packet decomposition analysis of EEG data was performed on 30 s of data for every 5 min. Daubechies 10 (db10) family was adopted as the mother wavelet in this case. After 7 levels of decomposition, the EEG components of theta (θ: 4–7 Hz), alpha (α: 8–12 Hz), and beta (β: 13–30 Hz) frequency bands were obtained. The ratio between slow and fast wave activities ((α + θ)/β) were investigated. Relative wavelet packet coefficient energy indices for all EEG data segments in these frequency bands were calculated.

Body pressure measurement system (Tekscan Inc., South Boston, MA) was used to capture the seat interface pressure. A thin flexible resistance based sensor pad featuring a 42 × 48 array of 103 sq.mm pressure-sensing elements was used to obtain pressure maps. The pressure map, an instantaneous distribution of pressure in the matrix of sensing elements, was captured at 8 frames per second. The captured data was post-processed to calculate seat interface pressure parameters such as pressure change rate and contact area, which is simply the total area of cells in the average pressure map. The percentage of dynamic seat pressure distribution was examined to determine the ability of the driver seat cushion to maintain uniform pressure.

Heart rate and oxygen saturation levels were monitored using Model 900 Pulse Oximeter (Mediaid Inc., USA) during the course of driving. Systolic and diastolic blood pressures were measured before and after the test period.

A self administered questionnaire study was conducted among all participants to quantify the overall discomfort levels at neck, shoulders, arms, hands, back, bums and legs, immediately after the end of motorcycle riding. It is a five point grading system in which best score of “0” represents no pain/discomfort and a score of “5” represents severe pain (Balasubramanian et al., 2014).

All multimodal signals were analysed using Matlab™ 2007b (Mathworks, Inc., USA) after which statistical analysis on extracted features were performed. When a normality test was performed on the extracted features from fatigue outcome measures (sEMG: RMS values of sixth decomposition level of detailed wavelet coefficients; seat pressure indices, relative wavelet packet energy indices of EEG signal, heart rate and blood pressures), it was found that the data were not normally distributed. Hence, a non-parametric test, Friedman test was performed on the sEMG and the seat pressure features for testing the level of statistical significance exists during the course of 60 min of driving (5th, 30th and 60th min). A linear regression analysis was also performed to determine trends of fatigue during 60 min of simulated driving task. Wilcoxon-signed rank test was carried out to determine the significant differences of relative wavelet packet energy indices of EEG signal, heart rate and blood pressure values between pre-driving session and post-driving session. Another justification for the use of non-parametric methods is due both to this simplicity and to their greater robustness even though these tests have less power, which requires a larger sample size to draw conclusions with the same degree of confidence. Post-hoc analysis was performed using the Tukey's Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) test at a significance level of ρ < 0.05. All statistical testing was carried out using the statistical package for social sciences (SPSS v10.0.1).

@&#RESULTS@&#

As indicated in Fig. 2
                     , significant differences (ρ < 0.05) were observed in the mean RMS values of sixth level wavelet coefficients from the decomposed sEMG signals across the trapezius medial, latissimus dorsi medial and the erector spinae muscles bilaterally during the course of monotonous driving. Post-hoc Tukey's HSD analysis was performed to identify the exact driving periods at which these significant differences were present. Significant differences (ρ < 0.05) were found in the TM, LDM and ES muscle groups between initial the driving period and latter periods of driving. No such significant differences were observed in the other muscle-groups.

EEG results show the relative wavelet packet coefficient energy of alpha, beta and theta bands across the frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital lobes. Fig. 3
                      indicates the relative wavelet packet coefficient energy of alpha band on four lobes of brain plotted between pre-driving session and post-driving session. There was a significant increase of alpha activity on temporal and occipital lobes between pre-driving and post-driving. There was a significant decrease of relative wavelet packet coefficient energy of beta band on frontal, temporal and occipital lobes between pre-driving and post-driving (Fig. 4
                     ). Fig. 5
                      shows the relative wavelet packet coefficient energy of theta band on four lobes of brain plotted between pre-study and post-study. There is a significant increase of theta activity on temporal and occipital lobes between pre-driving and post-driving.

The ratio index (α + θ)/β showed that there was a increase in relative wavelet energies in low frequency bands (alpha and theta) and a simultaneous decrease in relative wavelet energy in high frequency band (beta). In the frontal and temporal lobes, the ratio index was significantly increased between pre-driving and post-driving.

Results for seat pressure parameters revealed several significant differences. Figs. 6 and 7
                     
                      show that seat pressure distribution and root mean square values of the pressure change rate, increase significantly (ρ < 0.05) with time during monotonous driving, whereas the mean contact area decreases gradually during the same period (Fig. 8
                     ).

Heart rate decreased significantly from 76.6 to 69.2 beats per minute during the course of driving. Systolic pressure was observed to have been lowered from 107.4 mmHg before driving to 103.1 mmHg after driving. The diastolic pressure was also lowered from 72 mmHg to 68.6 mmHg due to driving. The oxygen saturation level varied between 96% and 99% throughout the study and there were no significant changes observed. The drivers' subjective feel showed a significantly higher level of discomfort in the shoulder, mid back and low back muscle groups.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study has attempted to establish multimodal approach for assessing a driver's physical and mental activity during a simulated driving session. To objectively observe driving-induced fatigue, we have quantified drivers' electrophysiological and cardiovascular parameters and seat interface pressure parameters. A highway scenario was chosen with the intent of simulating monotonous driving. Monotonous driving presents a demanding circumstance when the drivers are unable to be alert to make appropriate decisions and control their vehicle safely. It has been suggested that driver's perception of situation awareness is clearly of great relevance to automobile driving (Horswill and McKenna, 2004).

Drivers are exposed to both static and dynamic muscular work. For example, while driving steadily, the driver needs to be attentive all the time. To retain this constrained driving posture, shoulder, neck, back, and lower extremities muscles are in a continuous contractile state for a sustained period of time. This static muscular work exerts load on muscle-groups, which may be continuously overloaded through prolonged activation of muscle fibres without intermittent relaxation (Stock, 1991). In this study, the sustained muscle activity during driving was assessed using surface electromyography. This provides insight into fatigue induced changes such as shift of the power spectral density of sEMG signal towards low-frequency range (De Luca, 1984; Hägg and Kadefors, 1996). Wavelet analysis was used for processing the frequency changes in the obtained sEMG signals. Findings show that the RMS analysis of wavelet coefficients demonstrated increase low frequency content considerably in the power spectrum during the course of driving.

Driving for a long duration has physical demands on the driver like maintaining a near static head and neck posture (Balasubramanian et al., 2011a). Sommerich et al. (2000) have described that sternocleidomastoid is a predominant neck muscle-group in maintaining the head in a prone position. Hence we expected the neck posture to have an impact on driver fatigue based on the sternocleidomastoid muscle-group and duration of driving. However we did not observe any significant effect on this muscle group across participants for the duration of driving that we had considered in this study.

The gripping action on steering wheel is expected to engage upper extremity and shoulder muscle-groups. Hence changes in the muscle activity of shoulder and biceps brachii were observed. Semi-static and task rotation activities such as driving, often involves repetitive movements of upper extremities (Keir et al., 2011). In addition, hand and arm vibrations while driving can also result in substantial trapezius activation (Mathiassen et al., 1995). Therefore we focused our attention on the trapezius muscle-group activity during this study. This study also confirmed that arm position influences the relative engagement of trapezius during steering wheel rotation. Results demonstrate the significant muscle fatigue in the bilateral trapezius muscle-group across participants during 60 min of driving. Interestingly, we observed that the large upper extremity muscle-groups (e.g., biceps brachii and deltoid) did not seem to be involved in the steering activity as much as the shoulder muscles based on their fatigue rate. This could possibly be explained by the choice of the steering effort, which was minimal as found in modern automobile and the elimination of road input (vibration) through the steering wheel in the static simulator.

Prolonged sitting while driving imposes the driver to be more restricted and have been associated with an increased risk of low back pain (Andersson, 1981; Balasubramanian and Prasad, 2007; Chaffin et al., 2006; Hosea et al., 1986). Present study shows that there is a significant change in postural muscle-groups such as latissimus dorsi medial and erector spinae during monotonous driving. Subjective evaluation of fatigue also showed physical discomfort among drivers at the end of 60 min of driving, especially in shoulders and back muscle groups. This is because the back muscle groups need to support the body to maintain its posture during driving. The near static seated posture while driving causes high intramuscular pressure due to driver's body weight. This leads to an elevated exertion of force on the muscles that are working in an anaerobic environment. This compressive force at the driver-seat interface tend to occludes blood flow through the large vessels to the lower extremity thereby resulting in oxygen deficiency, which is manifested as discomfort and fatigue (Gross et al., 1994; Yamazaki, 1992). Ng et al. (1995) suggested that an adequate driver-seat support can reduce tensions in muscle-groups of back, buttocks, and legs resulting from prolonged seated activities like driving. For this reason, pressure distribution at the driver-seat interface was incorporated as one of the multimodal fatigue measures. This study shows that the distribution of pressure over seat was influenced by the duration of driving and increases with the driving period. These uneven pressure distributions observed over driver seat are expected to result in driving-induced fatigue. In this study, participants shifted their buttocks more frequently during the course of driving which was observed by the increased seat interface pressure change rate. The contact area between driver buttocks and seat surface is closely associated with pressure distribution.

In this study, the seat contact area was calculated as the area represented by pressure sensors with a threshold pressure value of 0.43 kN/m2 to reduce signal noise. Studies in literature have suggested that the entire area of contact should be used to carry load, so that the overall seat interface pressure is maintained low (Motavalli and Ahmad, 1993). In the present study, significant decrease in time trace of contact area was observed in all participants. This reduction results in greater exposure to high-pressure regions across the seated area. These results lend support to the prospect of using seat interface parameters as a tool to objectively quantify driver fatigue.

Driving-induced mental fatigue is a complicated phenomenon that may result from monotonous driving. In this study we investigated EEG activity in frequency bands such as alpha, beta, theta and its combinations, in four brain lobes. Temporal lobe showed significant differences for all EEG activities during the entire duration of driving when compared to the start time. Relative wavelet packet energy of alpha band showed significant changes at occipital lobe. Beta and theta bands relative energy showed significant differences in the frontal and occipital lobes. The ratio between slow waves and fast wave, (α + θ)/β EEG activity showed significant differences at the frontal lobe. This ratio index showed an increasing slope during the test period.

It is also observed that relative wavelet packet energy of beta wave drops significantly towards the end of 60 min of monotonous driving. On the other hand, alpha and theta energies increase gradually throughout the driving session. Hence, this illustrates the increasing trend in the ratio index. Findings from this study are corroborated with other research studies (Åkerstedt and Gillberg, 1990; Balasubramanian et al., 2011b; Kecklund and Åkerstedt, 1993). According to Belyavin and Wright (1987), the most constructive indicator for reduced attention is the decrease in beta activity, which was also revealed in the findings of the present study. During driving-induced mental fatigue, activities such as head movement or listening to music may affect changes in energies of individual EEG components (Åkerstedt et al., 1991). Hence, the ratio index, i.e., combination of slow and fast waves was used to ensure reliability of the present fatigue detection technique. By analysing the EEG composite index, the rising trend shows drivers have fatigued during the course of driving.

Several studies have investigated the effect of simulated environment on physiological parameters (Jorna, 1993). In this study, we monitored heart rate, blood pressures (systolic and diastolic) and oxygen saturation level to evaluate driving-induced fatigue. Heart rate was found to decrease significantly (ρ < 0.05) while performing monotonous driving. This is in concurrence with other indoor driving studies (Lal and Craig, 2001; Li et al., 2004), where the heart rate was observed to decrease as well.

Significant differences (ρ < 0.05) were observed in both systolic and diastolic blood pressures before and after driving with a marked fall in blood pressure after the driving session. Our findings showed an opposite trend when compared to the study by Fumio et al. (2002), where the blood pressure had an increasing pattern in taxi drivers measured during on-road driving in city traffic. This demonstrates a subtle difference between driving in the city and highway environment. The traffic conditions were neither intricate nor driver intervention demanding. Hence, this driving normally would not cause any high degree of nervousness or anxiety in drivers. An additional difference could be explained from the nature of the test design where in simulator gives a sense of security thereby reducing stress when compared to on-road driving (Li et al., 2004). Further body movement is restricted during simulated driving and is almost static. This prolonged lower body immobilization could cause poor systematic circulation. As a combined result, the blood pressures could be lowered during the course of driving. This significant change in heart rate and blood pressures at the end of the driving session indicated that variation in cardiovascular parameters could be used as merely a predictor for a close examination of other parameters.

The above said parameters can also affect the oxygen saturation levels. Normal blood oxygen saturation is maintained at over 95% measured in the atmosphere at the sea level altitude (Sung et al., 2005). The oxygen saturation level is known to decrease with the onset of fatigue (Schutz, 2001). However, in this study, the oxygen saturation level remained fairly constant during the driving session. This suggests that our multimodal methodology to detect driver fatigue has shown some parameters that are more sensitive and can detect changes at early onset of fatigue in simulated driving when compared to others.

As driving-induced fatigue progresses, major disruption in the homeostasis occurs. The results of this study indicate that driver fatigue can be tracked better using multiple measures simultaneously. Significant deviation of these measures from initial or alert baseline should be observed as a symptom of early onset of fatigue. This information can be used in designing safety systems for automobiles.

When the operating complexity of the vehicle system increases, where the driver requires a wide variety of physical and mental skills, the multimodal measures are essential to address the driver fatigue in terms of both physical and mental aspects. In this study, factors such as vehicle design parameters, roadway design, training, experience and time of day were considered to be fixed in all experiments. Hence, this comprehensive multimodal fatigue measures are likely to be used as a tool in vehicle design and developing sophisticated driver alertness systems. The experimental design for driver fatigue measurement was made in the driving simulator instead of a real car, due to the safety concerns of the driver and the automobile. Moreover, in this study, the measurements were made using multiple commercial devices. This requires multiple softwares from different vendors to extract the parameters, which is difficult to synchronize such devices for monitoring the driver fatigue in real-time.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Driving is a complex activity that demands both physical and mental effort. In this study, a comprehensive multimodal fatigue measurement methodology for driving in a simulated environment is described. The static simulated driving study showed there was a clear indication of physical fatigue in the postural muscle groups at post-driving condition, as measured by the sEMG. There is a close relationship between the driving physical fatigue and the subjective assessment from the participant responses to questionnaire. The pressure-related discomfort measures has identified the occurrence of sustained pressure peaks at the driver-seat interface which results considerable seating discomfort during the course of driving. The relative wavelet packet coefficient energy of different EEG rhythms has shown significant difference (ρ < 0.05) between the pre-study and the post-study, which indicates the state of mental fatigue. It was clearly demonstrated from the multimodal measures that driving-induced fatigue is found to increase during the course of a monotonous simulated driving.

The proposed multimodal measures help in reliable analysis of driver fatigue status as they encompass both physical and mental aspects of fatigue. The multimodal method is sensitive and can detect early onset of fatigue when compared to other measures. Further studies under on-road driving conditions are required for validation of this multimodal fatigue measure analysis system. This methodology can also be extensively used in vehicle design and developing comprehensive driver assistant systems. These can eventually help in preventing fatigue-related accidents thereby increasing transportation safety.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The cooperation rendered by all the participants by volunteering for this study and providing extensive feedback during the study are deeply appreciated. The authors sincerely thank all members of the Rehabilitation Bioengineering Group at IIT Madras for their valuable contribution to this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

