@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Center of pressure and total force analyses for amputees walking with a backpack load over four surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Examined amputee gait with and without a backpack load, over multiple surfaces.


                        
                        
                           
                           COP and total force were similar when walking with and without a backpack load.


                        
                        
                           
                           Transtibial amputees had more deviations in COP on the intact limb.


                        
                        
                           
                           High functioning amputees are not limited by a backpack load on the tested tasks.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Center of pressure

Backpack

Load carriage

Amputee

F-Scan

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Understanding how load carriage affects walking is important for people with a lower extremity amputation who may use different strategies to accommodate to the additional weight. Nine unilateral traumatic transtibial amputees (K4-level) walked over four surfaces (level-ground, uneven ground, incline, decline) with and without a 24.5 kg backpack. Center of pressure (COP) and total force were analyzed from F-Scan insole pressure sensor data. COP parameters were greater on the intact limb than on the prosthetic limb, which was likely a compensation for the loss of ankle control. Double support time (DST) was greater when walking with a backpack. Although longer DST is often considered a strategy to enhance stability and/or reduce loading forces, changes in DST were only moderately correlated with changes in peak force. High functioning transtibial amputees were able to accommodate to a standard backpack load and to maintain COP progression, even when walking over different surfaces.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

People in professional, military, and recreational settings often carry a weighted backpack; however, the additional weight can result in injuries such as stress fractures, knee pain, and lower back pain (Knapik et al., 1996). Understanding how load carriage affects locomotion is important, especially for people with disabilities who may use different walking strategies to accommodate to the extra weight.

Previous research has shown that weighted backpack loads affect level-ground walking kinematics and kinetics in able-bodied populations. Load carriage increased double support time (Birrell and Haslam, 2009; Castro et al., 2013; Harman et al., 2000; Simpson et al., 2012); increased ankle, knee, and hip flexion during stance (Birrell and Haslam, 2009; Polcyn et al., 2002; Simpson et al., 2012); decreased pelvic rotation (LaFiandra et al., 2003); increased forward trunk lean (Caron et al., 2013; Polcyn et al., 2002); increased head lean (Attwells et al., 2006; Caron et al., 2013); and increased peak vertical and anterior–posterior ground reaction forces (GRFs). Many gait studies on backpack loads reported absolute GRF or “GRF normalized to bodyweight” (not including the backpack) (Birrell et al., 2007; Tilbury-Davis and Hooper, 1999; Wang et al., 2012). Some of these studies suggested that GRF increases were proportional to increases in backpack load (Birrell et al., 2007; Tilbury-Davis and Hooper, 1999; Wang et al., 2012); however, other studies did not find this GRF-load relationship (Castro et al., 2013; Harman et al., 2000; Simpson et al., 2012). For some studies, medial–lateral GRF did not change as backpack load increased (Harman et al., 2000; Lloyd and Cooke, 2000; Polcyn et al., 2002), but others observed an increase in medial–lateral GRF, suggesting that individuals were less stable while carrying a load (Birrell et al., 2007). Supporting this idea, Qu (2013) reported increased medial–lateral instability, indicated by larger local divergence exponents, when walking with a backpack load on a treadmill.

Center of pressure (COP) has been used to examine postural stability (Moghadam et al., 2011; Roerdink et al., 2011; Ruhe et al., 2011) and walking stability (Chisholm et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2011; Kendell et al., 2010; Lemaire et al., 2006; Pascolo and Marini, 2006; Schmid et al., 2005). In able-bodied gait, the COP begins at the heel and smoothly progresses anteriorly and laterally until mid-stance, before progressing anteriorly and medially during push-off. Any additional directional changes in the medial–lateral or anterior–posterior COP trajectory may indicate that an individual is less stable (Kendell et al., 2010; Lemaire et al., 2006; Schmid et al., 2005).

Many devices can record COP progression, including force plates, pressure mats, and insole sensors. Force plates and pressure mats are typically constrained to a level laboratory walking surface. A grid of insole pressure sensors can be secured inside the shoe, providing a plantar pressure profile that can be used to calculate COP and total force from any walking surface. To characterize COP progression from insole sensors, six parameters (Table 1
                     ) can be extracted to quantify the smoothness or stability of stance phase during walking (Lemaire et al., 2006). Previous research demonstrated that these COP parameters for people with a transtibial amputation were generally greater (less stable) on their intact limb while walking over level ground, uneven ground, slopes, and stairs, and were least stable while walking up stairs (Kendell et al., 2010).

Individuals with transtibial amputation display asymmetries and compensations while walking over a variety of surfaces; including, level-ground (Kovac et al., 2010; Vanicek et al., 2009), uneven ground (Curtze et al., 2011; Gates et al., 2012), and slopes (Fradet et al., 2010; Vickers et al., 2008). Carrying a backpack load may magnify these compensations and increase the risk of injury (Knapik et al., 2012). Previous research demonstrated that individuals with transtibial amputations walking with a backpack load over level ground make similar temporal-spatial gait parameter alterations as able-bodied individuals (Doyle et al., 2014; Schnall et al., 2014). Prosthetic limb knee and hip joint flexion increased during weight acceptance and greater prosthetic ankle dorsiflexion was found when walking with a backpack load (Doyle et al., 2014). Schnall et al. (2014) reported individuals with transtibial amputation exhibited similar kinematic compensations as able-bodied when carrying loads, but individuals with a transtibial amputation had greater ankle dorsiflexion on the prosthetic limb and forward trunk lean/excursion. However, the amputee load carriage literature has focused on level ground walking.

The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of a backpack load on transtibial amputee gait while walking over level ground, uneven ground, and slopes. This paper focuses on insole plantar pressure analysis, including quantifying the smoothness or stability of the COP path and pressure profile, temporal spatial parameters, and total force. An increase in COP parameters and asymmetries between intact and prosthetic limbs were expected while walking with a backpack load.

@&#METHODS@&#

Nine males with unilateral transtibial traumatic amputation were recruited through The Ottawa Hospital Rehabilitation Centre and the Canadian Forces Health Service (age: 36 ± 10 years, weight: 92.1 ± 13.4 kg, height: 1.78 ± 0.08 m; Table 2
                        ). Study participants used a prosthesis for at least one year and were at a K-4 functional level (ability or potential for prosthetic ambulation that exceeds basic ambulation skills, exhibiting high impact, stress, or energy levels). All participants provided written informed consent and the study was approved by the Ottawa Health Science Network Research Ethics Board.

F-Scan plantar pressure sensors (Tekscan Inc., Boston, MA) were trimmed and secured to the participant's insole. This system has a maximum of 960 pressure cells per sensor (4 sensors/cm2) and a thickness of 0.2–0.4 mm. At the start of the test session, the step-calibration method was used to calibrate each sensor (Tekscan Inc, 2010).

Plantar pressure distributions were sampled at 50 Hz while participants walked at a self-selected pace over four walking surfaces: Level ground (LG) – level 8 m walkway; Uneven ground (UN) – level 8 m walkway covered with 4 m of medium density foam mats with a maximum compression of 8 cm (data was only analyzed for strides on mats); Ramp-up (RU) – ramp with a 7° incline; Ramp-down (RD) – ramp with a 7° decline.

Participants walked with no backpack (NP) and with a 24.5 kg weighted backpack (WP), as defined in the Canadian Special Operations Regiment Pre-Screening Physical Fitness Test (Jaenen et al., 2007). All participants used the backpack's chest and waist straps. Five trials were completed for each backpack condition and walking surface (total of 40 trials). Walking velocity was determined by tracking a marker attached to the trunk using an 8-camera motion capture system (Vicon, Oxford, UK). Walking surface order was randomized for each individual. Before testing, all participants were able to acclimate to the weighted backpack within 20 min.

Plantar pressure and total force data were exported from the F-Scan Research v6.51 software (Tekscan Inc, Boston, MA). Plantar pressure distributions were analyzed using custom software to calculate parameters that quantify COP progression smoothness and key temporal parameters. These parameters include: number of directional changes in anterior/posterior COP (AP), number of directional changes in medial/lateral COP (ML), number of sensors that record directional changes in force (CellTrig), maximum lateral COP excursion (MaxLat), stride time (ST), and double support time (DST) (Table 1). Intact DST was defined from initial contact on the prosthetic limb to toe-off on the intact limb and prosthetic DST was defined from initial contact on the intact limb to toe-off on the prosthetic limb. Total force was the sum of forces from all F-Scan cells, for each data frame. Total force measured from insole pressure sensors is not a true vertical GRF, but rather a force normal to the surface inside the shoe, whereas a vertical ground reaction force is normal to the horizontal surface (Chen and Bates, 2000; Debbi et al., 2012). Total force data were used to extract peak forces (F1, F2, and F3) and loading rate (Table 1). Total force was normalized to bodyweight (BW) in order to compare results to previously published literature (Birrell et al., 2007; Castro et al., 2013; Harman et al., 2000; Lloyd and Cooke, 2000; Simpson et al., 2012; Tilbury-Davis and Hooper, 1999). For the WP condition, total force was also normalized to total weight (TW = BW + backpack weight).

The COP parameters, temporal-spatial parameters, and peak forces were averaged over each set of five trials. Separate three factor (limb, backpack, surface) within subjects repeated measures ANOVAs were performed for each dependent measure using SPSS 18 (SPSS Inc., Chicago). The p-values were adjusted based on Mauchly's Test for Sphericity. Significant main effects and interactions were examined using paired t-tests with a Bonferroni correction. Person correlations were performed to examine the relationship between total force curve shapes. For all comparisons, a p < 0.05 was considered significant. Detailed statistical comparisons can be found in the Supplemental Material associated with this manuscript.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Participants walked slower when carrying a backpack load (Table 3
                        ) for all walking surfaces, but walking velocity was only significantly slower when walking up a ramp (p < 0.001). Participants also increased double support time when carrying a backpack load for all surfaces (p < 0.05; Fig. 1
                        ), with the exception of prosthetic limb double support time when walking up a ramp. The COP trajectory shape was similar between backpack conditions (Fig. 2
                        ). When walking up a ramp, CellTrig was significantly greater (p < 0.01) and MaxLat was significantly smaller (p < 0.01) for the intact limb when walking with a backpack load, compared to no backpack (Table 4
                        ). No significant differences were found between backpack conditions for AP, ML, and stride time parameters.

As expected, peak forces (F1, F2, and F3) were significantly greater when walking with a backpack load (p < 0.05) when normalizing force to bodyweight (Fig. 3
                         and Table 5
                        ). Since peak forces were larger, the loading rate also increased, with significant differences for level, uneven, and ramp-up on the intact limb (p < 0.05), and level and uneven surfaces on the prosthetic limb (p < 0.05). After normalizing total force to total weight, no statistical significance was observed for peak forces (Table 6
                        ). Furthermore, the total force curve shapes were similar between backpack conditions (Fig. 3), with Pearson correlations between 0.87 and 0.99 for all surfaces. Loading rate was generally slower (normalized to total weight) when walking with a backpack load (Table 5). The loading rate was 25% slower on the intact limb and 19% slower on the prosthetic limb (p < 0.05) when walking down a ramp with the backpack (Fig. 1). Loading rate was also significantly slower when walking on the uneven surface on the intact limb (p < 0.05).

When walking with no backpack, double support time and CellTrig were significantly larger on the intact limb than the prosthetic limb (p < 0.05; Table 4). However, when walking with a backpack load, double support time was only significantly longer on the intact limb than the prosthetic limb for level and ramp-up surfaces (p < 0.05). The COP trajectory shape was also similar between intact and prosthetic limbs (Fig. 2). COP parameters were generally larger on the intact limb, but differences in AP, ML, MaxLat, and stride time were not significant (Table 4).

Total force curve shapes were similar between limbs (Fig. 3), with Pearson correlations of approximately 0.92 for all surfaces except when walking up a ramp, which was 0.88 for both backpack conditions. Peak force during mid-stance (F2) was significantly larger on the prosthetic limb compared to the intact limb (p < 0.05; Table 5). Peak force during late stance (F3) was significantly smaller on the prosthetic limb when walking down a ramp (p < 0.05). No significant differences between limbs were found for loading rate.

Participants walked slower down a ramp (1.20 ± 0.20 m/s) compared to level (1.29 ± 0.13 m/s), with no backpack, and maintained speed for other surfaces (Table 3). With the backpack, participants walked slower for ramp-up (1.20 ± 0.10 m/s) and ramp-down (1.20 ± 0.10 m/s) compared to level (1.26 ± 0.13 m/s); however the difference in speed was not significant (Table 3). Stride time was significantly longer when walking over the uneven surface compared level ground (p < 0.05; Table 4). Double support time on the prosthetic limb was only significantly different for ramp-down compared to level ground (p < 0.01). CellTrig was slightly larger for level compared to ramp-up and ramp-down surfaces, on the intact limb (p < 0.05). MaxLat was also slightly larger (more lateral) when walking up the ramp compared to level ground (p < 0.05). No significant differences were found for AP and ML COP parameters.

The peak force during early stance (F1) was only significantly smaller when walking up a ramp on the prosthetic limb, without a backpack, normalized to bodyweight (p < 0.05). Peak force during mid-stance (F2) was significantly smaller for walking down a ramp compared to the level condition (Fig. 3 and Table 5) for all pack and limb conditions except for the prosthetic side with a backpack when normalized to bodyweight (p < 0.05). Peak force during late stance (F3) when walking up a ramp was significantly larger compared to level ground for the intact limb (p < 0.01). However, on the prosthetic side, peak force during late stance (F3) was smaller for ramp-up compared to level ground (p < 0.05). The loading rate only showed significant differences when walking down a ramp on the prosthetic limb without a backpack (p > 0.01).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

During gait, a smooth, stable progression produces few adjustments or corrections to the COP path (Lemaire et al., 2006). The addition of a weighted backpack moves the center of mass posteriorly, which can challenge an individual's stability during walking (Caron et al., 2013; Qu, 2013; Yen et al., 2011). To maintain balance, individuals make adaptations to control the added weight during locomotion (Caron et al., 2013; Schiffman et al., 2004). This study examined how people with transtibial amputations adapted when wearing a weighted backpack by investigating insole plantar pressure profiles over four common walking surfaces.

Few changes were observed in COP progression when walking with a backpack and the shape of the total force curves were similar, which suggests that our participants were able to maintain stable COP progression. A common characteristic observed when walking with a backpack load is increased forward trunk lean (Attwells et al., 2006; Caron et al., 2013; Doyle et al., 2014; Polcyn et al., 2002; Schnall et al., 2014). A recent study examined the angle between the center of mass and the ankle and knee (referenced to vertical) and demonstrated that these angles did not change with increasing load (Caron et al., 2013). They suggested the compensatory trunk lean positioned the center of mass over the limb so that loading patterns would remain the same. This supports the consistency in COP progression observed in this study, even when walking with a backpack load.

When walking up a ramp, with a backpack load, COP progressed more medially (smaller MaxLat), but did not introduce more deviations in ML and AP COP parameters compared to walking with no backpack. Furthermore, Caron et al. (2013) also reported higher in-shoe pressures on the medial mid-foot when walking with a backpack load over level ground. In this study, changes in MaxLat were only observed when walking up a ramp.

Consistent with previous research on able-bodied participants (Birrell and Haslam, 2009; Castro et al., 2013; Harman et al., 2000; Simpson et al., 2012) and individuals with transtibial amputations (
                        Doyle et al., 2014; Schnall et al., 2014
                        ), double support time increased when walking with a backpack. Participants in this study also walked slower when carrying a backpack, which typically increases double support time (Kirtley et al., 1985). To investigate this further, we examined the relationship between double support time and walking speed. Changes in walking speed and double support time between backpack conditions were not correlated (−0.61 < r < 0.03; p > 0.08) and were likely a strategy to accommodate to the backpack load. While many studies controlled walking velocity, their subjects still made temporal-spatial changes to increase double support time (e.g., stride length and cadence) (Birrell and Haslam, 2009; Harman et al., 2000).

Biomechanics literature that examined backpack load effects on able-bodied gait typically reported absolute forces or forces normalized to bodyweight. These studies suggested that the changes in forces and loading rates were either a direct result of the added load or a change in walking strategy (Harman et al., 2000; Lloyd and Cooke, 2000; Simpson et al., 2012; Tilbury-Davis and Hooper, 1999). Therefore, we examined total force normalized to bodyweight and to total weight to test for changes in loading strategy. In this study, participants walking with a weighted backpack increased the forces and loading rate on the lower extremities. For all participants, the backpack weight ranged from 20 to 30% of bodyweight. Maximum force during early stance (F1), normalized to bodyweight, also increased by approximately 20% when walking with a backpack, for all walking surfaces. While increased double support time is considered a compensatory strategy to enhance stability and/or to reduce loading forces (Birrell and Haslam, 2009; Harman et al., 2000), we examined the relationship between changes in double support time and changes in peak force during early stance (F1) to determine if individuals with larger double support time also exhibited a larger reduction in peak force (smaller changes). Participants with smaller differences in peak force during early stance (F1), between backpack conditions, did not necessarily have larger differences in double support time. The change in F1 and the change in double support time, between backpack conditions, was only moderately correlated with the level surface (r = −0.56; p = 0.12). This finding supports that longer double support time is a strategy to maintain stable gait when carrying a backpack load rather than a strategy to reduce backpack loading effects.

After normalizing force to total weight, there were no significant differences in peak total forces between backpack conditions, indicating that participants were able to minimize the acceleration effects of the backpack load and maintain a consistent loading pattern (i.e., almost perfect correlations between total force curves). These results support outcomes from other studies, suggesting that ground reaction forces changed proportionally with a backpack load. However, loading rate decreased while walking down a ramp with the backpack. This decrease in loading rate could be to minimize forces due to the backpack load being accelerated during descent. Furthermore, these results demonstrated the importance of normalizing total force F-Scan data by total weight for many backpack load analyses.

Generally, COP parameters were greater on the intact limb than the prosthetic limb. This suggests that COP progression was more variable on the intact limb, likely compensating for the loss of ankle control on the prosthetic limb. These results support the previous findings in older individuals with transtibial amputations (Kendell et al., 2010).


                        Hof et al. (2007) also reported that intact limb COP was more variable than prosthetic limb COP. They suggested that, in addition to a stepping strategy (e.g. step width), lower limb muscles could actively provide stability adjustments once the foot was placed on the surface (lateral ankle strategy), which would result in COP trajectory deviations. In amputees, foot placement is important since minor corrections are more difficult to make once the prosthetic foot is on the ground due to limited range-of-motion in the prosthetic foot compared to the intact foot. Furthermore, double support time was significantly shorter on the prosthetic limb and longer on the intact limb, indicating that people transitioned quickly off their prosthetic limb and slowly off their intact limb (Table 4). As a result, these individuals had more time to control the transition onto the prosthetic limb and, if foot placement on the prosthetic limb was not optimal, their intact limb could make additional corrections.

The intact and prosthetic limb total force curves were similar (Fig. 2). The only significant difference between limbs was a greater prosthetic limb push-off force (F3) while walking down the ramp with no backpack. However, this significant difference was likely due to a smaller push-off force on the intact limb, which is a gait characteristic for downhill walking (Lay et al., 2006; Vickers et al., 2008) rather than an increase on the prosthetic side.

The unloading force during mid-stance (F2) on the prosthetic limb was greater than the intact limb over all surfaces except level ground when walking with no backpack. At foot contact in able-bodied gait, the knee flexes during early stance before extending during mid-stance (Hof et al., 2007). A larger unloading force (F2) during mid-stance may occur when walking with a more extended knee, as a result of limited prosthetic ankle dorsiflexion. As the person transitions over the prosthetic limb with a straighter knee, less vertical center of mass excursion occurs and unloading on the prosthetic side is less than the intact side.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Participant gait may have been affected by the various prosthetic feet used in this study; however, all participants wore an energy-storing-return foot designed for various terrains. An F-Scan sensor measures the total compressive force, in contrast to 3D force plate data. Since compressive force measurements are normal to sensor cells that follow the insole's contour, F-Scan total force does not measure shear forces when the cell is at an angle to the ground. Differences are expected between total force and vertical ground reaction force outcomes in the literature (Debbi et al., 2012). Chen and Bates (2000) reported that F-Scan data is most reliable between 21 and 90% of stance and the sensors drift over time. To help account for drift, we normalized total force to the force measured by the F-Scan sensors at the start each trial, when the participant was standing. Finally, the population sample was high functioning transtibial amputees (K-level 4); therefore, the outcomes may not be directly transferrable to amputees at a lower functional level.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study provided insight into how individuals with a transtibial amputation accommodated to a backpack load when walking over multiple surfaces. Consistent with our hypothesis, COP parameters on the intact limb were generally greater than the prosthetic limb, which demonstrated increased compensation for the loss of ankle control and propulsion on the prosthetic side. However, limb asymmetries were not greater when walking with a backpack load, compared to without a backpack. To improve walking performance and address long-term health issues related to overuse, gait training programs could focus on reducing limb asymmetries to minimize compensations observed on the intact side.

Our results did not strongly support the hypothesis that COP parameters would increase when walking with a backpack load. Few COP parameter changes were found when walking with a backpack, compared to no backpack, and the differences between backpack conditions were small for this high functioning amputee population (K-level 4). COP progression was similar between backpack conditions, suggesting participants were able to maintain smooth, stable progression with and without a backpack load. The data provided in this paper could be used as a baseline to assess amputee gait performance when carrying a backpack load.

The backpack load resulted in increased total force for all walking surfaces, which has implications for selecting an appropriate prosthetic foot to support the added weight. In this paper, a longer double support time was the primary strategy to maintain stable gait while carrying a backpack load.

Overall, the backpack load was not a limiting factor for performing these real-world activities. Study outcomes indicated that high functioning individuals with transtibial amputations are able to accommodate to a standard backpack load and maintain similar COP progression, even when walking on different surfaces.

The authors have no conflicts of interest to report.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors acknowledge the clinical and technical contributions of Captain Pauline Godsell, Shawn Millar, and Whitney Montgomery. This research was funded by the Canadian Forces, Surgeon General Health Research Project fund.

The following are the supplementary data related to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2015.07.014.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

