@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Application of a human factors classification framework for patient safety to identify precursor and contributing factors to adverse clinical incidents in hospital

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The HFCF for patient safety identified patterns in the causation of clinical incidents.


                        
                        
                           
                           Human error played a leading causal role in clinical incidents, with error type varying by type of action.


                        
                        
                           
                           Targeted approaches to prevention of incidents, based on an understanding of how and why they occur, are needed.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Patient safety

Clinical incident

Classification framework

Error

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study aimed to identify temporal precursor and associated contributing factors for adverse clinical incidents in a hospital setting using the Human Factors Classification Framework (HFCF) for patient safety. A random sample of 498 clinical incidents were reviewed. The framework identified key precursor events (PE), contributing factors (CF) and the prime causes of incidents. Descriptive statistics and correspondence analysis were used to examine incident characteristics. Staff action was the most common type of PE identified. Correspondence analysis for all PEs that involved staff action by error type showed that rule-based errors were strongly related to performing medical or monitoring tasks or the administration of medication. Skill-based errors were strongly related to misdiagnoses. Factors relating to the organisation (66.9%) or the patient (53.2%) were the most commonly identified CFs. The HFCF for patient safety was able to identify patterns of causation for the clinical incidents, highlighting the need for targeted preventive approaches, based on an understanding of how and why incidents occur.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

There are many diverse approaches that have been adopted to identify and investigate the causal and contributing factors surrounding adverse clinical events (i.e. clinical incidents) in health care settings. These have included human reliability techniques that focus on task analysis and examine the probability of the occurrence of clinical incidents (Lyons et al., 2004), critical incident techniques based on observations and interviews (Flanagan, 1954), root cause analyses (RCAs) that involve team-based retrospective analysis of what when wrong (Bagian et al., 2002), and variations on ‘human factors systems’ classification approaches to identify the causal factors involved in the incident, such as the Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS) (Shappell and Wiegmann, 2000), the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) (Chang et al., 2005), the System Error and Risk Analysis (SERA) (Hendy, 2007) and the Eindhoven (Van Vuuren and Van der Schaaf, 1997) classification frameworks. Several of these approaches were initially developed for use elsewhere, such as in aviation or industrial safety, and were later adapted for use in health care, such as HFACS (ElBardissi et al., 2007). None of the existing human factors classification taxonomies take into account the temporal sequence of events leading to the clinical incident. Being able to examine the causal sequence of events leading up to an clinical incident enables relationships between factors to be identified and can highlight common sequences of events that lead to the occurrence of an incident The consideration of a linear sequence of events, combined with the ability to identify contributing factors to any of the sequential events, could provide an in-depth causal description of clinical incidents. In addition, for existing taxonomies inter-rater reliability is not often assessed, or when assessed, is not high.

While the human factors taxonomies that have been used in health care are diverse in their structure, what is common across the literature is that human factors, particularly human error, plays a leading role in clinical incidents (Mitchell et al., 2014). Errors, defined as ‘the failure of a planned action to proceed as planned'(US Institute of Medicine, (2000)), have been retrospectively analysed in the health care setting, but studies differ in the way that medical errors are classified. Many analyses used job-related descriptions of the nature of errors. For example, in a study of errors in radiology, the error classification included ‘request for wrong patient’, ‘illegible request or duplicate request’(Martin, 2005) and, in a study of errors in otolaryngology, classification of errors included ‘errors in testing’ (e.g., specimen lost/test not done) and ‘technical errors’ (e.g., cranial or other nerves or endoscopic sinus surgery) (Shah et al., 2004). This type of approach is informative in providing direction in which task or job areas where errors are most likely to occur, but it is not descriptive in terms of the type of cognitive failure that explains why the particular error type occurred. Other analyses of medical errors have used cognitive failure classifications, such as errors of omission or commission (Tang et al., 2004). The obvious advantage of cognitive classifications of error is that they provide insight into the nature of error itself which is helpful in understanding why it occurred.

Despite the advantages of being able to examine human error and its role in the causation of clinical incidents, human error classifications were not included in the International Patient Safety Classification (IPSC) conceptual framework (World Health Organization, 2009). While the IPSC framework appears comprehensive as an informational model, its role as a classification taxonomy has been questioned (Schulz et al., 2009). In its current form, the IPSC does not provide unique identifiers nor definitions for each item, key ‘concepts’, ‘classes’ of items and hierarchical links and relationships between items in the IPSC are not clearly identified. Moreover not all of the classification categories in the IPSC are mutually exclusive or exhaustive, and the effectiveness of the framework to classify causal and contributing factors to clinical incidents is yet to be tested extensively in the field (Schulz et al., 2009; Feijter et al., 2012).

Within the public healthcare system in New South Wales (NSW) Australia, adverse clinical incidents involving patients that are categorised as serious, and are given a Severity Assessment Code (SAC) of 1, have an RCA investigation conducted by health care teams not involved in the occurrence of the incident. These SAC 1 events represent 0.04% of all clinical incident notifications in NSW (NSW Department of Health, (2011)) and include instances where a patient dies unrelated to the natural course of their illness or has an immediate differing outcome from what would otherwise be expected from patient management, or are nationally reportable sentinel events (NSW Health Department, 2007). While RCA investigations can be useful in identifying the causal factors of adverse clinical events, the experience of the team involved in the RCA, the quality of the analysis conducted, time pressures and resource availability can all have an effect on the quality of the investigation performed (Wu et al., 2008; Nicolini et al., 2011a,b). Each RCA investigation attempts to reconstruct the circumstances of an adverse clinical incident by reconstructing the temporal sequence of events (Nicolini et al., 2011a,b), yet, in NSW, when the analysis of the causal factors of the RCA are later reported by the RCA investigative team, the temporal sequence of events are often ignored. There is also a limited selection of possible factors recommended to an RCA investigative team in NSW for use in identifying the causal factors of a clinical incident (i.e. communication, knowledge, skills and competence, work environment/scheduling, patient factors, equipment, policies/procedures, safety mechanisms) (NSW Clinical Excellence Commission, 2015). In addition, the focus of RCA recommendations has often been on corrective actions to address local issues that could very well be useful to implement system-wide, if aggregated analysis of RCA findings and recommendations were conducted (Wu et al., 2008; Nicolini et al., 2011a,b).

The Human Factors Classification Framework (HFCF) for patient safety was adapted from an existing framework that was developed to identify the role of human factors in work-related fatalities, in terms of the type and nature of human factors involvement in safety-related incidents and how they interact with other causes (Williamson and Feyer, 1990, Feyer and Williamson, 1991). This framework classifies the temporal sequence of events leading to the incident, includes the identification of human error using a cognitive classification structure, has high reliability (Feyer and Williamson, 1991) and has also been successfully adapted to classify child driveway fatalities (Williamson et al., 2002b), aircraft maintenance errors (Hobbs and Williamson, 2003) and swimming pool drowning events involving young children (Williamson et al., 2002a). The aim of this research is to identify temporal precursor and associated contributing factors to clinical incidents in a hospital setting using the HFCF for patient safety.

@&#METHOD@&#

A random sample of 498 clinical incidents in 2009–2010 with a SAC 1 classification and an RCA investigation report were reviewed at the NSW Clinical Excellence Commission in Australia. To obtain the random sample of RCA reports, a random list of numbers was generated using SAS. Each random number generated corresponded to the number of an RCA report. The RCA reports were selected according to the random number list and each was read, coded and classified using a systematic coding framework described in Section 2.1. Two research assistants classified the 498 clinical incidents.

The HFCF for patient safety was developed to identify information from narrative reports of clinical incidents. The tool collects information for five content areas. These include: (i) a short text summary of the event; (ii) adverse event details, such as type of complication (i.e. operative, non-operative (Leape et al., 1991) or maternity); phase of care (World Health Organization, 2009); (iii) patient characteristics, including age, gender, comorbidities; (iv) the key causal or precursor events and the factors that contributed to the event; and (v) whether the event was detected during its occurrence.

The logical structure of the HFCF for patient safety (Fig. 1
                        ) involves the time course of the precursor events leading to the clinical incident, and any other factors thought to have played a role in causing the incident. Precursor events (PEs) leading to the clinical incident were defined as discrete events which played a role in the occurrence of the incident and were linked in time to the incident. While time separating the events is variable and may range from seconds to days, PE1 is always closest to the incident and PE2 occurs prior to PE1 in the temporal sequence and so on. The framework also incorporates any other factors that play a causal role. These are called contributing factors (CFs) and are defined as factors, circumstances, actions or conditions that pre-existed before the precursor event sequence began. CFs will have played a part in the origin or development of the incident or to an increased risk of the incident occurring (World Health Organization, 2009).

Each PE was coded into one of five categories then a number of subcategories (see Appendix 1), including: (i) Equipment - events that involved subcategories of equipment or device failures, breakages or malfunctions, lack of medical equipment and medical supplies; (ii) Work environment - events resulting from the location of the incident that could not have been changed by personnel at the time (Hobbs and Williamson, 2003). This includes subcategories relating to lighting, temperature, noise and physical layout; (iii) Staff action/communication – referred to as staff action events. These resulted from direct involvement by a staff member, including subcategories of communication failures and documentation issues, medical task failures, problems monitoring a patient's status, delays in patient treatment, misdiagnosis of a patient's health condition, and medication-related issues; (iv) Patient – events resulting from direct involvement by a patient that influenced the events; and (v) Other – additional events not elsewhere classified. The framework allows up to four precursor events leading to the adverse incident, but all may not be needed in every incident.

Contributing factors were classified into seven categories and a number of sub-categories (see Appendix 2). The seven categories consisted of the same five categories as the PEs with a focus on pre-existing conditions, and two additional categories. These were: Organisational factors – organisational aspects that directly or indirectly influenced safety and quality of medical and nursing activities and their management (Itoh et al., 2007), including work practices, policies or guidelines, supervision, available resources (including staffing and equipment), work pressure and other organisational factors; and Individual factors – characteristics of staff members, including knowledge and skills, experience, stress, fatigue and other individual factors (Itoh et al., 2007). As many contributing factors could be coded as needed.

Further detail regarding the role of error in the adverse incident was also identified. Each of the staff action-related classifications in the PEs or CFs involving medical task failures, monitoring tasks, delays, misdiagnoses, or medication issues were further classified using Rasmussen's (Rasmussen, 1982) skill, rule or knowledge-based error classifications, or the violation classification (Reason, 1997), as appropriate. Skill-based errors referred to unintentional failures in the execution of a well-rehearsed action or routine task that required little conscious attention. In the case of a medication-related action, a skill-based error could include misreading the dose prescribed. Rule-based errors referred to unintentional failures during activities conducted in familiar situations that were controlled by stored rules. An example of a medication-related rule-based error would be prescribing the wrong route of administration of a drug. Knowledge-based errors referred to unintentional failures during a novel situation that required conscious analytic processing and stored knowledge. For instance, a medication-related error of this sort would be an error in medication dose for a rare condition with an unknown treatment regime. A violation was considered to be an intentional failure to follow accepted work practices, guidelines or procedures during the execution of a task.

Each PE and CF were ranked for their causal significance for the occurrence of the clinical incident. The most significant PE or CF was ranked ‘1’ and termed the prime cause. A prime cause was defined is either a PE or CF which if had not occurred, would have prevented the incident from occurring. More than one primary cause (PE or CF) could be classified for an adverse event.

Inter-rater reliability between four coders using the HFCF for patient safety on agreed narratives was high, with average percent agreement between four coders for PEs at the first level of coding 97%, at the second level 75% and at the third level 73%. For the CFs, average percent agreement was 94% for the first level of coding, 87% for the second level and 93% for the third level (Mitchell et al., 2013).

Data were analysed using SAS version 9.3 (SAS Institute, 2012). Descriptive statistics were used to describe the types of PE, CF and prime causes relating to the incidents and to examine the temporal patterns of PE1 to PE4. For the four most common clinical incidents, the most common causal patterns were identified. Correspondence analysis was used to examine the relationships between the staff action PEs and error type. Correspondence analysis is related to principal components analysis and is an exploratory technique that can be used to display complex two, or multiple, dimensional data tables in a visual form (Clausen, 1988). For each variable, categories are represented as points on a two dimensional plot based on the chi-square distances between the categories. Categories that appear close together on the correspondence analysis plot have a stronger association than categories that appear far apart.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Of the 498 RCA investigative reports, there were almost equal numbers of events involving males (n = 231; 46.4%) and females (n = 228; 45.8%), with gender not recorded for 39 (7.8%) individuals. The average age was 58.5 years (sd 25.3). Sixty percent of incidents involved the death of a patient. The most common clinical incident types were procedures involving the wrong patient or wrong body part (22.9%), misdiagnoses or missed diagnoses (15.5%), in-hospital falls (8.8%), and inadequate treatment or care (7.0%). However, only 1.8% of the procedures involving the wrong patient or body part involved the death of a patient, whereas SAC1 incidents that involved inadequate treatment or care (97.1%), in-hospital falls (95.5%), and misdiagnoses or missed diagnoses (92.2%) almost always involved the death of a patient. Eighty percent of incidents occurred during the treatment phase of care (Table 1
                     ).

Almost all (98.8%) clinical incidents had at least one PE identified, 67.1% had at least two PEs, 29.9% had three PEs and 11.6% had four PEs identified. Staff action was the most common type of event identified for all PEs. Of these, for the PE closest to the event (i.e. PE1) just under one-third (31.9%) involved medical task failures, at PE2, 31.4% involved medical task failures and at PE3, medical task failures (22.1%) and communication/documentation issues (21.5%) were the two most common factors (Table 2
                        ). Overall, 59.2% of the precursor events were coded as the prime cause of the clinical incident. Equipment-related events were prime causes in just over half (55.2%) of the incidents in which they occurred. For the one clinical incident where the work environment was identified as a precursor in the event sequence, it was also identified as a prime cause of the incident. Staff action factors were identified as prime causes in less than one-third (27.0%) of incidents, while patient factors were identified as prime causes in almost two-thirds (61.8%) of incidents.

Of the staff action-related PEs, medical task failures, monitoring tasks and medication issues were commonly identified as rule-based errors, while delays were identified as lapses in timing and misdiagnoses were commonly identified as skill-based errors. Knowledge-based errors were relatively rare in the PE sequence. Overall skill-based errors appeared more likely at PE1, except for clinical incidents that involved a delay or a medication issue (Table 3
                        ).

Correspondence analysis was used to examine the relationship between all precursor events that involved staff action by type of error. This analysis showed that skill-based errors were strongly related to misdiagnoses. Rule-based errors were strongly related to both monitoring tasks and misdiagnoses as well as medication errors. Delays were strongly associated with time lapses (Fig. 2
                        ).

Almost all (93.6%) clinical incidents had a least one CF identified, with 1096 in total. Just over two-thirds (64.9%) of incidents had two CFs identified, 31.5% had three CFs and 11.8% had four CFs identified. Factors relating to the organisation (32.1%) or of the patient (26.9%) were the most commonly identified CFs (Table 4
                        ). Organisational factors (66.9%), predominantly work practices, policies and procedures (49.8%), and patient factors (53.2%), predominantly pre-existing physical health (44.0%), were the most common CFs identified that contributed to each incident. Prime causes occurring in the CFs were mainly organisational factors predominantly relating to work practices, policies or guidelines and these included a policy or guideline not being followed (51.4%), an inadequate work practice where no policy or guidelines existed (40.3%), inconsistent or inadequate policies or guidelines (7.4%) and policy guidelines not elsewhere classified (0.9%). Equipment-related factors were identified as a prime cause in over half (55.3%) the incidents to which they contributed. Forty-four percent of patient-related factors were identified as a prime cause in the clinical incident. These patient-related prime causes mostly related to the poor physical health of the patient (e.g. multiple comorbidities) and the deteriorating health state of the patient.

For the four most common types of clinical incidents, the relationship between PEs and CFs were examined. For procedures that were conducted involving the wrong patient or the wrong body part, communication/documentation and medical task failure were common PEs, accompanied by CFs that predominantly involved work policies and guidelines that were not followed, such as time out polices to check correct patient, correct procedure and correct site. For clinical incidents that involved a misdiagnosis or missed diagnosis, the misdiagnosis was often accompanied by a delay or a medical task failure in the PE sequence. These incidents usually involved patients with multiple comorbidities and there was either a work policy or guideline that did not exist or was not followed or there was absent communication/documentation identified as CFs. Incidents of in-hospital falls mainly involved a patient who was usually frail, in poor physical health and who had not had a falls assessment conducted as part of usual work practice. Incidents that involved inadequate treatment or care usually involved medical task failures, accompanied by communication/documentation as PEs, with work practices, policies or guidelines that were inadequate or not followed as CFs.

For the most common type of adverse clinical incident, procedures involving the wrong patient or the wrong body part, flow diagrams were used to show the relationship between PEs and CFs. Fig. 3
                            shows the pattern of PE sequences and CFs for incidents that involved the wrong patient or the wrong body part. Sequence patterns that were not common were terminated at PE2 or PE3 and none of these events involved a fourth PE. Organisational factors were the most commonly identified CF for the procedures involving the wrong patient or body part. For the staff action proceeded by a staff action sequence, organisational factors were a prime cause of the event in 83.3% of incidents. These organisational factors involved work policies and guidelines that were not followed, such as time out polices to check correct patient, correct procedure, correct site (77.1%), no policies or guidelines existing (20.0%) and work pressure (2.9%).

The two most common types of PE sequences for procedures involving the wrong patient or body part were a single staff action event (n = 55; 96.5%) and these were most commonly medical task failures, often as a result of a rule-based error, or documentation issues (Fig. 4
                           a). The other common PE sequence was a staff action, most commonly a documentation issue, proceeded by another staff action, often a medical task failure that occurred following a rule-based error (i.e. at PE1 and PE2; n = 42) (Fig. 4b). Together these two common PE sequences accounted for 88.2% of the incidents involving the wrong patient or body part.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The strengths of the HFCF for patient safety is that it provides a hierarchical classification system that is able to identify multiple causation factors that are involved in the occurrence of adverse clinical incidents. The framework allows the temporal relationship between factors to be identified, along with latent factors that contributed to the incident. The ability to identify common sequences of events and CFs, and to identify where in the sequence each factor is likely to occur and how important the factor was to the causation of the clinical incident provides a starting point in which to commence the identification of useful preventive activities for common types of clinical incidents.

This research showed that staff action was the most common type of PE identified in the sequence for each of the four PEs. This is not a surprising result given the essential role of staff in the delivery of health care. Health professionals work in a complex environment that often involves changing and deteriorating patient conditions, and frequent interactions among multiple health care staff (Amalberti and Hourlier, 2007); all circumstances that could lead to the occurrence of an error. Despite their best endeavours, individuals are not perfect and some degree of error can occur in any workplace (Leape et al., 1991). In complex systems, such as health care, even relatively minor errors can have adverse consequences (Leape et al., 1991; Nyssen and Blavier, 2006). PEs were not usually identified as the prime causes of the incident, usually a prime cause was pre-existing and occurred back in time before the sequence of PEs commenced. Recognition of the role of pre-existing events in contributing to the occurrence of the incident can often be overlooked and these pre-existing factors also need to be identified and targeted for preventive actions.

Examination of the role of error by type of staff action using correspondence analysis identified that error types differed by the type of action performed. For the errors identified, there were only a relatively small proportion of knowledge-based errors, instead the most common types of errors identified were either rule- or skill-based errors. Medical task failures were strongly related to rule-based errors. Failures in monitoring tasks and medication issues were also most strongly related to rule-based errors. Misdiagnoses were strongly related to skill-based errors and delays were naturally strongly related to timing lapses. The nature of the different types of errors indicate that different prevention strategies should be targeted for specific types of health care activities. For example, in the in-depth analysis conducted of the procedures involving wrong patient or body part, there was a mix of both rule- and skill-based errors, but rule-based errors were the most common. These were largely the result of procedures, such as checking that the correct patient, correct procedure, correct site policy, not being followed that ultimately resulted in the adverse incident. Adherence to formal procedures should be second nature to health care staff, but prompts to encourage the recognition of event sequences where it is common for these types of errors to occur would appear to be beneficial.

The CFs identified largely represented latent conditions that increase the likelihood of a PE occurring. The ability to identify these latent conditions provides additional information on the key characteristics that led to the clinical incident. Organisational factors, predominantly work practices, policies or guidelines, played a role in just over two-thirds of incidents, and were often identified as a prime cause of the incident. In most cases, these involved existing work practices, policies or guidelines not being followed. Patient-related factors, most commonly the pre-existing physical health of the patient, played a role in just over half of all incidents.

For the four common types of clinical incidents, the patterns of PEs and CFs varied. This highlights the multi-causal nature of each type of incident. However, while the nature of the patterns differed between the types of incidents, commonalities in the causal pathways were identified for each incident type. For example, the in-depth analysis of the causal patterns for procedures involving the wrong patient or body part identified that these incidents occurred largely as a result of a health professional not following existing procedures to adequately ensure they had the right patient or they had identified the right body site. In some cases, there was also confusion added by the patient indicating the wrong extremity was injured or the incorrect patient responding positively to another patient's name and subsequently being taken for a procedure, often a scan or X-ray. Martin (2005), in a study of clinical incidents in radiology and nuclear medicine, also found similar patterns of imaging events occurring as the current study.

There are obvious steps that can be put in place to attempt to limit the occurrence of wrong patient or body part incidents, such as checks of the request form and, where documentation is not adequate or there is contradictory evidence, delaying the procedure until verification checks have been conducted. In a small number of incidents, the patient contributed to the incident occurring, though not intentionally, with attempts by staff at confirmatory checks with some patients hampered by patients who were developmentally delayed, suffering from dementia, non-English speaking or who were very young. For these types of clinical incidents, the best remedy might not be to create an additional checklist or further staff training that might simply add to system complexity (Cook and Woods, 1994), but rather to attempt to ensure that individuals are able to recognise common scenarios (such as patient confusion) or sequences of events where clinical incidents often occur, so that a break in the chain of events becomes possible.

The clinical incidents reported in this research are SAC1 incidents, they represent the most serious adverse clinical incidents, and include the incidents that are required to be reported nationally in Australia as sentinel clinical events. In the majority of cases, these are out of the ordinary cases, where one thing goes wrong and, due to the rarity of the event and the alignment of different combinations of other factors (being present or not present, such as a lack of work procedure), the adverse incident occurs. For the majority of clinical incidents, they are multi-causal in nature, often with multiple prime causes identified, making it difficult to target one single common approach for prevention. However, by using the HFCF for patient safety to establish the PE causal sequences and to identify the associated CFs by clinical incident type, common incident scenarios are able to be identified.

There are limitations of the current study and the use of the HFCF for patient safety including the ability to identify the causal sequence of events and associated CFs is only as good as the information available. Some RCA investigative reports reviewed lacked detail of the circumstances of the incident and identification of PEs and CFs were difficult to determine for these incidents. In some instances, the RCA reports tended to focus on describing the immediate incident, rather than identifying any pre-existing contributing factors. Therefore, the HFCF for patient safety is most valuable when detailed clinical incident descriptions are available. It is also possible that some clinical incidents may go unreported and will therefore be absent from this analysis.

The HFCF for patient safety was able to identify causal patterns for adverse clinical incidents, and examine how staff, medical equipment, the health care environment and organisation all interact when adverse clinical incidents occur. In practical terms, the HFCF for patient safety, could be used by the RCA investigative team to guide their identification of the temporal sequence of events leading to the incident and identify the CFs involved for each event. While the HFCF for patient safety has been applied to less severe clinical incidents to determine its usefulness in identifying causal factors for medication and medical device-related incidents that did not involve the death of a patient (Mitchell et al., 2015), further research could involve comparing the HFCF for patient safety to other human factor classification taxonomies to compare their ability to independently identify patterns of causation for different types of clinical incidents.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study was able to provide detailed information regarding the role of human factors, particularly human error, in adverse clinical incidents in health care. The results confirm the complex, multi-causal nature of different clinical incidents and the need to identify the sequence of events, examine the relationships between the events and CFs, and to identify the importance of each PE or CF to the causal event chain to be able to identify appropriate strategies for prevention. The HFCF for patient safety was able to identify specific patterns of causation for the adverse clinical incidents, and how these factors interact, highlighting the need to target approaches to tackling clinical incidents based on an understanding of how and why they occur.

None.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was funded by an Australian Research Council linkage grant (LP0990057) and the NSW Clinical Excellence Commission and the NSW Ministry of Health. R Mitchell was supported by an ARC-linkage post-doctoral fellowship (LP0990057). A Williamson was supported by an NHMRC Senior Research Fellowship. The authors would like to thank Bronwyn Shumack from the CEC for extracting the sample of RCA reports for analysis and Lauren Ware and Amy Chung at the University of NSW for conducting the classification of the clinical incidents. The views expressed in this paper are the views of the authors do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the funding agencies.


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    1. Equipment
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.1Lack of medical equipment
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.2Medical equipment breakage or failure
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.3Medical equipment not elsewhere classified
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.4
                                             Non-medical equipment
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.5
                                             Medical supplies
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    2. Work environment
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.1
                                             Light
                                                   
                                                      2.1.1
                                                      No or too little light
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.1.2
                                                      Too much light
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.1.3
                                                      Light not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.2
                                             Temperature
                                                   
                                                      2.2.1
                                                      Too hot
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.2.2
                                                      Too cold
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.2.3
                                                      Temperature not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.3
                                             Noise
                                                   
                                                      2.3.1
                                                      Too noisy
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.3.2
                                                      Too quiet
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.3.3
                                                      Noise not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.4
                                             Physical layout
                                                   
                                                      2.4.1
                                                      Isolation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.4.2
                                                      Poor access
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.4.3
                                                      Physical layout not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.5
                                             Work environment not elsewhere classified
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    3. Staff action
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.1
                                             Communication or documentation issues
                                                   
                                                      3.1.1
                                                      Communication with patient
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.1.2
                                                      Communication with staff – handover
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.1.3
                                                      Communication with staff – not handover
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.1.4
                                                      Documentation issue
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.2
                                             Medical task failure
                                          
                                          
                                             Execution failures in medical treatment, such as while performing surgical tasks, or task performance related to medical treatment, such as diagnostic tests. It also includes not checking medical equipment is correct and/or functioning correctly prior to use.
                                                   
                                                      3.2.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.2.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.2.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.2.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.2.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.3
                                             Monitoring
                                          
                                          
                                             Lack or inadequate monitoring or follow-up of patient status, such as the monitoring of vital signs. This includes the monitoring of medication levels.
                                                   
                                                      3.3.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.3.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.3.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.3.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.3.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.4
                                             Delay
                                          
                                          
                                             Delays in diagnosis or treatment of the patient, e.g. delays in obtaining or reviewing test results or performing X-rays.
                                                   
                                                      3.4.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.4.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.4.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.4.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.4.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.5
                                             Misdiagnosis
                                          
                                          
                                             Misdiagnosis of a patient's ailment, including the severity of the ailment. Misdiagnosis refers to an incorrect or incomplete diagnosis of a health condition.
                                                   
                                                      3.5.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.5.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.5.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.5.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.5.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.6
                                             Medication issue
                                          
                                          
                                             Medication errors, including prescribing, transcribing, dispensing, or administering medication. Also includes computer entry error in relation to medication (e.g. incorrect data are entered into a computer system regarding medication type, dose or route). This specifically does not include issues related to documentation or monitoring of medications.
                                                   
                                                      3.6.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.6.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.6.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.6.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.6.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.7
                                             Human factors not elsewhere classified
                                          
                                          
                                             Other human factors not elsewhere classified.
                                                   
                                                      3.7.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.7.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.7.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.7.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.7.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    4. Patient factors
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    5. Other factors
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    1. Equipment
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.1
                                             Lack of medical equipment
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.2
                                             Medical equipment breakage or failure
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.3
                                             Equipment failure – design
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.4
                                             Medical equipment not elsewhere classified
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.5
                                             Non-medical equipment
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1.6
                                             Medical supplies
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    2. Work environment
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.1
                                             Light
                                                   
                                                      2.1.1
                                                      No or too little light
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.1.2
                                                      Too much light
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.1.3
                                                      Light not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.2
                                             Temperature
                                                   
                                                      2.2.1
                                                      Too hot
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.2.2
                                                      Too cold
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.2.3
                                                      Temperature not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.3
                                             Noise
                                                   
                                                      2.3.1
                                                      Too noisy
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.3.2
                                                      Too quiet
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.3.3
                                                      Noise not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.4
                                             Physical layout
                                                   
                                                      2.4.1
                                                      Isolation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.4.2
                                                      Poor access
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2.4.3
                                                      Physical layout not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.5
                                             Security
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             2.6
                                             Work environment not elsewhere classified
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    3. Staff action
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.1
                                             Communication and documentation issues
                                                   
                                                      3.1.1
                                                      Communication with patient
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.1.2
                                                      Communication with staff – handover
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.1.3
                                                      Communication with staff – not handover
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.1.4
                                                      Documentation issue
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.2
                                             Medical task failure
                                          
                                          
                                             Execution failures in medical treatment, such as while performing surgical tasks, or task performance related to medical treatment, such as diagnostic tests. It also includes not checking medical equipment is correct and/or functioning correctly prior to use.
                                                   
                                                      3.2.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.2.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.2.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.2.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.2.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.3
                                             Monitoring
                                          
                                          
                                             Lack or inadequate monitoring or follow-up of patient status, such as the monitoring of vital signs. This includes the monitoring of medication levels.
                                                   
                                                      3.3.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.3.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.3.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.3.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.3.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.4
                                             Delay
                                          
                                          
                                             Delays in diagnosis or treatment of the patient, e.g. delays in obtaining or reviewing test results or performing X-rays.
                                                   
                                                      3.4.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.4.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.4.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.4.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.4.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.5
                                             Misdiagnosis
                                          
                                          
                                             Misdiagnosis of a patient's ailment, including the severity of the ailment. Misdiagnosis refers to an incorrect or incomplete diagnosis of a health condition.
                                                   
                                                      3.5.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.5.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.5.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.5.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.5.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.6
                                             Medication issue
                                          
                                          
                                             Medication errors, including prescribing, transcribing, dispensing, or administering medication. Also includes computer entry error in relation to medication (e.g. incorrect data are entered into a computer system regarding medication type, dose or route). This specifically does not include issues related to documentation or monitoring of medications.
                                                   
                                                      3.6.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.6.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.6.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.6.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.6.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             3.7
                                             Human factors not elsewhere classified
                                          
                                          
                                             Other human factors not elsewhere classified.
                                                   
                                                      3.7.1
                                                      Skill-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.7.2
                                                      Rule-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.7.3
                                                      Knowledge-based error
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.7.4
                                                      Violation
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      3.7.9
                                                      Not known
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    4. Patient
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             4.1
                                             Physical health (pre-existing)
                                                   
                                                      4.1.1
                                                      Pre-existing disease or physical disability
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.1.2
                                                      Physical characteristic
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.1.3
                                                      Intellectual disability
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.1.4
                                                      Psychological disturbance
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.1.5
                                                      Sensory impairment – vision
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.1.6
                                                      Sensory impairment – hearing
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.1.7
                                                      Physical health not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             4.2
                                             Health state
                                          
                                          
                                             A change or alteration in health state, either physical or mental health state, which occurred during the current episode of care that played a part in the adverse incident.
                                                   
                                                      4.2.1
                                                      Infection
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.2.2
                                                      Fatigue
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.2.3
                                                      Health state not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             4.3
                                             Communication issues
                                          
                                          
                                             Poor communication by the patient contributed to the incident. This includes language barriers, where the patient does not speak English, or when the patient either unintentionally or intentionally does not disclose information to medical staff.
                                                   
                                                      4.3.1
                                                      Language barrier
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.3.2
                                                      Not disclosing information – unintentional
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.3.3
                                                      Not disclosing information – intentional
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             4.4
                                             Medication
                                          
                                          
                                             Prescription medication use by the patient contributed to the incident. This includes excessive or inappropriate use of prescribed medication and also appropriate use of medication as directed.
                                                   
                                                      4.4.1
                                                      Prescribed drug(s) – excessive or inappropriate use
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.4.2
                                                      Prescribed drug(s) – appropriate use
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             4.5
                                             Toxicology
                                          
                                          
                                             Excessive or inappropriate use of alcohol or illicit drugs by the patient contributed to the incident.
                                                   
                                                      4.5.1
                                                      Alcohol consumption
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.5.2
                                                      Non-prescribed or illicit drug consumption
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      4.5.3
                                                      Other toxicology
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             4.6
                                             Clothing
                                          
                                          
                                             Inappropriate clothing worn by the patient contributed to the incident.
                                                   
                                                      4.6.1
                                                      Flammable
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             4.7
                                             Patient not elsewhere classified
                                          
                                       Other characteristics of the patient contributed to the incident not elsewhere classified
                                 
                                 
                                    5. Organisational factors
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             5.1
                                             Work practices, policies or guidelines
                                                   
                                                      5.1.1
                                                      Work practice, but no policy/guidelines
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      5.1.2
                                                      Policy/guidelines exist, but are unclear/inconsistent/inadequate
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      5.1.3
                                                      Policy/guidelines exist, but are not followed
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      5.1.4
                                                      Policy/guidelines not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             5.2
                                             Supervision
                                          
                                       Events resulting from poor, inadequate or an absence of supervision of a junior member of the medical team.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             5.3
                                             Organisational resources
                                                   
                                                      5.3.1
                                                      Staffing issues
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      5.3.2
                                                      No bed available
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      5.3.3
                                                      Organisational resources not elsewhere classified
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             5.4
                                             Work pressure
                                          
                                       Work that was being performed under unusual time pressure or haste.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             5.5
                                             Organisation factors not elsewhere classified
                                          
                                       Other organisational factors not elsewhere classified.
                                 
                                 
                                    6. Individual factors
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             6.1
                                             Training
                                          
                                       Poor, inadequate or a lack of training of a member of the medical team.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             6.2
                                             Experience
                                          
                                       Lack of skill or competence to perform the task (e.g. training received, but no experience in performing the task or not skilled in performing the task).
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             6.3
                                             Fatigue
                                          
                                       Events resulting from fatigue of the staff member.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             6.4
                                             Stress
                                          
                                       Events resulting from the staff member experiencing stress.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             6.5
                                             Individual factors not elsewhere classified
                                          
                                       Other individual factors not elsewhere classified.
                                 
                                 
                                    7. Other factors
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

