@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Applying different equations to evaluate the level of mismatch between students and school furniture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Fifteen studies and 21 equations to test 6 furniture dimensions were identified.


                        
                        
                           
                           There are differences in the results when applying the different equations.


                        
                        
                           
                           The interrelations between some equations are based on contradictory criteria.


                        
                        
                           
                           The proposed methodology should allow for a more reliable analysis of school furniture.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

School

Furniture

Mismatch

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The mismatch between students and school furniture is likely to result in a number of negative effects, such as uncomfortable body posture, pain, and ultimately, it may also affect the learning process. This study's main aim is to review the literature describing the criteria equations for defining the mismatch between students and school furniture, to apply these equations to a specific sample and, based on the results, to propose a methodology to evaluate school furniture suitability. The literature review comprises one publications database, which was used to identify the studies carried out in the field of the abovementioned mismatch. The sample used for testing the different equations was composed of 2261 volunteer subjects from 14 schools. Fifteen studies were found to meet the criteria of this review and 21 equations to test 6 furniture dimensions were identified. Regarding seat height, there are considerable differences between the two most frequently used equations. Although seat to desk clearance was evaluated by knee height, this condition seems to be based on the false assumption that students are sitting on a chair with a proper seat height. Finally, the proposed methodology for suitability evaluation of school furniture should allow for a more reliable analysis of school furniture.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

School furniture is not the only cause of pain and discomfort reported by school children. However, being seated for a long period of time in school furniture is being associated with reports of musculoskeletal discomfort and pain (Fallon and Jameson, 1996). Also, school furniture dimensions, within the context in which it is used, may have an impact on some physical aspects of the students. For example, the high level of mismatch between students and school furniture is being associated with adolescent low back pain (Milanese and Grimmer, 2004). A relationship between furniture mismatch and postural overload is also reported by Batistão (2010), because when the seat height is low, students increase upper back left inclination and right upper arm elevation, and when the seat is short, students decrease the upper back flexion velocity and increase right upper arm elevation.

Furthermore, Sents and Marks (1989) show, in a laboratory setting, that all children earned higher scores on the intelligence test when seated in furniture that suited their body sizes compared to bigger sized school furniture. This finding was corroborated by Wingrat and Exner (2005), when students were seated in 2 different sizes: traditional classroom furniture and appropriately sized desks and chairs. Smith-Zuzovsky and Exner (2004) reveals that students from 6 to 7 years old, who were seated in furniture that fit them well, performed significantly better on the manipulation test than those who were seated in furniture that was too big for them.

The above situation reveals the great importance of defining school furniture dimensions in an appropriate way. Despite that, there is a large number of studies worldwide that show a clear mismatch between anthropometrics characteristics and the dimensions of school furniture (e.g., Afzan et al., 2012; Castellucci et al., 2010; Chung and Wong, 2007; Dianat et al., 2013; Gouvali and Boudolos, 2006; Molenbroek et al., 2003; Panagiotopoulou et al., 2004; Parcells et al., 1999; Saarni et al., 2007). However, Gouvali and Boudolos (2006) state that the equations used to examine the match or mismatch between school furniture and anthropometric dimensions can be problematic in the sense that they are sometimes based on contradictory criteria, originating from theory that has not necessarily been confirmed with research.

The main aim of this paper is to review literature that describes the criteria equation for defining the mismatch between students and school furniture, to apply the different mismatch equations to a specific sample, and to propose a methodology to evaluate school furniture suitability.

@&#METHOD@&#

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

One literature database, Scopus, was used to identify the studies carried out in the field of mismatch or fit between anthropometric measures and classroom furniture. The search terms used were “school furniture” and “classroom furniture” (Fig. 1
                        ).

The inclusion criteria for the selection of the relevant papers are all reviewed articles that are original studies, written in English, and published between January 1980 and January 2013.

The literature review was orientated toward the definition of the mismatch equations. Studies that only present a proposal of a new dimension set size for school furniture, based on, for example, the application of percentiles, were not considered.

Potential mismatch equations were grouped according to the part of the school furniture considered, namely:
                           
                              •
                              Chair dimensions;

Interaction between chair and table dimensions.

All mismatch equations, one- and two-way, were considered. For those cases where both the minimum and maximum limit were considered, a two-way equation was considered appropriate and for those with only a maximum or a minimum limit, a one-way equation was the required option.

The considered sample involved a group of students, with ages ranging from 5 to 19 years old (11.9 ± 3.5 mean), from basic and secondary schools in the Valparaiso Region of Chile. Fourteen schools were randomly selected from a list given by the Regional Ministerial Secretary of Education and the selection used a cluster design regarding the three types of elementary school administrations in Chile, as well as of the economic background level of the corresponding students.

The sample study consisted of 2261 volunteer subjects (1259 male and 1002 female). The data collection started after written authorization was obtained about the study from the headmaster of the school, which was followed by the collection of the written authorizations obtained from all parents and students.

The anthropometric measurements were collected from the right side of the subjects, while they were sitting in an erect position on a height-adjustable chair with a horizontal surface, with their legs flexed at a 90° angle, and with their feet flat on the floor or an adjustable footrest. During the measurement process, the subjects were without shoes and wearing light clothing (shorts and t-shirts).

All measurements were taken with a Harpenden standard anthropometer (Holtain Ltd., UK), with an exception made to subjects' stature, which was measure with an estadiometer.

The following anthropometric measures (ISO 7250, 1996) were considered and collected during this study (Fig. 2
                           ):

Determined as the vertical distance between the floor and the top of the head, and measured with the subject erect and looking straight ahead (Frankfort plane).

Vertical distance from subject's seated surface to the acromion.

Taken with a 90° angle elbow flexion, as the vertical distance from the bottom of the tip of the elbow (olecranon) to the subject's seated surface.

The vertical distance from the lowest point (inferior angle) of the scapula to the subject's seated surface.

Measured with 90° knee flexion, as the vertical distance from the floor or footrest and the posterior surface of the knee (popliteal surface).

Estimated using the formula (PH + TT)*0.9. This formula was developed using the average and standard deviations of PH, TT, and KH from different databases (Musa, 2011; Pheasant, 2003; Savanur et al., 2007).

The vertical distance from the highest uncompressed point of the thigh to the subject's seated surface.

The horizontal distance measured at the widest point of the hip in the sitting position.

Taken with a 90° angle knee flexion as the horizontal distance from the posterior surface of the buttock to the popliteal surface.

The following furniture dimensions (with the corresponding description) were gathered (Fig. 3
                           ):

The vertical distance from the floor to the middle point of the front edge of the seat.

The distance from the back to the front of the sitting surface.

The horizontal distance between the lateral edges of the seat.

The vertical distance between the middle points of the upper edge of the backrest and the top of the seat.

The vertical distance from the floor to the top of front edge of the desk.

The vertical distance from the floor to the lowest structure point below the desk.

The angle formed by the front part of the seat and the horizontal. It is measured on the median plane, at the angle between the horizontal and the line passing through the upper part of the front edge and the corresponding point at the rear part of the seat (for single sloped seats) or at the top point of the seat (for double sloped seats).

All the anthropometric data were analyzed using MS Excel and SPSS (v20.0). After the different equations were applied, categorical data (Low mismatch, Match and High mismatch) were analyzed. The Kappa statistic was applied to measure the degree of agreement between the different equations. kappa is a good tool to assess inter-rater reliability, particularly for qualitative items (match/mismatch). In this study was used to determine the level of inter-rater reliability of the equations.

In studies where the agreement between two or more observers/diagnostic test (equations) are an important factor, values can be compared by a statistic that takes into account the fact that observers/diagnostic test will sometimes agree or disagree simply by chance. The kappa statistic (or kappa coefficient) is the most commonly used statistic for this purpose (Viera and Garrett, 2005). A kappa of 1 indicates perfect agreement, whereas a kappa of 0 indicates agreement equivalent to chance.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Fifteen studies were found to meet the criteria described above (Fig. 1). The results from the studies are as follows:

This can be considered the most important dimension for the development of a mismatch criterion, since all the studies considered in this review applied an equation to test the fit of SH (Table 1
                              ). Also, it should be considered as the starting point and the most important variable for the design of the classroom furniture (Molenbroek et al., 2003; Castellucci et al., 2010). Regarding this dimension, two main equations can be found in the literature (Table 1). One is based on the biomechanics of the knee (Equation (1)), considering that SH needs to be lower than PH so that the lower leg forms a 5°–30° angle relative to the vertical and that the angle range will permit the student to sit in a chair high enough so that both feet are placed on the floor. On the other hand, the seat should be low enough to avoid and extension of more than 30° relative to the vertical in the knee joint. This is very important since with more extension, the feet will not be placed flat on the floor or the thighs would not be supported enough, generating discomfort.

The other equation includes 2 options (Equations (2) and (3)), but both are based on the fact that SH has to be evaluated in relation to the PH percentage.

In the three different equations, a two-way mismatch criterion is considered. Only one equation (Equation (1)) considers the use of shoe correction (SC).

This was used in the majority of the studies (14), being the second most common measurement. This furniture dimension can be evaluated using two equations that use the principle of percentage, but differ in the percentage of Buttock Popliteal Length (BPL) that is considered. This difference only affects the high limit of the equations in 4%, with 95% of the BPL and 99% of the BPL for Equations (4) and (5), respectively (Table 1).

This was applied in a few studies (Table 1) and can be tested by two equations. Both equations consider that SW should be higher than Hip Width (HW), and consequently, both equations take low limit or low mismatch into account. Moreover, Equation (7) suggests that SW should be at least 10%, but not more than 30% larger than HW in order to provide proper seating, while making an economic use of space.

one- and two-way limit equations were found for calculating these dimensions. Equation (8) is based on the percentage of SHH. However, none of the studies explain in detail why they used 60% and 80% of SHH. In order to avoid the compression of the scapula and a reduction in arm and trunk mobility (Garcia-Acosta and Lange-Morales, 2007; Orborne, 1996), Equation (9) is based on a one-way equation and tests if Subscapular Height (SUH) is higher than UEB.

This was evaluated in 7 studies and the equivalent dimension, Seat to Desk Clearance (SDC), which is obtained from the difference between UDH and SH, was only used once (Table 2
                              ). Both of these dimensions, UDH and SDC, reveal a great diversity of approaches and, consequently, of equations. Furthermore, three anthropometric measures can be used to define the level of furniture mismatch (TT, PH, and KH).

UDH has to be large enough in order to allow the students to push the chair under the table and to have enough space to allow leg movement. Accordingly, Equations (10), (11) and (13) propose that the desk clearance should be 2 cm higher than KH. In addition, Equation (13) allows for shoe correction (SC) and it raises the very interesting point that the high limit used tries to solve one of the major problems regarding two main school furniture dimensions, UDH and DH. This high limit assumes that UDH cannot be higher than the maximum DH minus the table thickness. This problem will be discussed at the end of this section. Equation (12) considers SDC appropriate when it is higher than TT. Equation (14) paints an unclear picture when one takes into consideration that 20 cm is (proportionally) a very different amount for students of 6 or of 17 years old.

This is the furniture dimension with the greatest number of equations in the literature. However, most of these were based on EHS, as the minimum height of DH. Also, the maximum DH, with the exception of Equation (17), depends on shoulder flexion and shoulder abduction angles of 25° and 20°, respectively (Chaffin and Anderson, 1991). Most of the equations are two-way, with the exceptions of Equations (18) and (19), which only considered the high mismatch. This might be a mistake, in the authors' opinion, since a low mismatch in this equation may originate an increase on spinal loading (Occhipinti et al., 1985). Equation (15) is based on the assumption that students were sitting in a chair with a proper SH, which does not seem to be realistic. Equation (17) is established to test the high limit and a flat 5 cm is added to every EHS, this may lead to some problems since the angles of abduction and flexion of the shoulder joint will not be the same for students with different EHS and SHH. Equations (16), (20) and (21) are quite similar but they do differ in certain respects. The latter two equations include the seat height, while Equation (16) tests SDH. Additionally, the backward slope of the chairs is considered in Equation (21), since the elbow is aligned with the back of the seat and it is lower than the front edge.

The descriptive statistics of the ten anthropometric dimensions of the students from the fourteen different schools are presented in Table 3
                           .

Before presenting and analyzing the school furniture of the different schools, it is important to mention that the sample included primary schools (1st to 8th grade, age 6–12), secondary schools (9th to 12th grade, age 13–18) and others with both levels. Due to this variability, some differences were observed regarding the number and type of desks and chairs that exist in each school. The different number of furniture types ranged from 1 to 4 and are represented in Table 4
                           .

After replacing the existing classroom furniture dimensions in each mismatch criterion equation, the established limits and the body dimensions of the students were compared.

It is important to mention, that 2 cm of shoe sole was considered. As expected, there are differences in the results of the three different equations (Fig. 4
                           ). Furthermore, there are considerable differences between the two most frequently used equations (Equations (1) and (2)). The result of Kappa Statistics shows slight (k = 0.12) and fair (k = 0.38) agreement between Equation (1) with Equations (2) and (3), respectively.

To improve the analysis, shoe correction (SC) was considered for Equations (2) and (3). This discrepancy in the results was reduced and the result of Kappa statistics shows moderate (k = 0.46) and almost perfect agreement (k = 0.91) between Equation (1) with Equation “2 with SC” and “3 with SC”, respectively.

Since the anthropometric measurements in the all studies were made without shoes, the non-consideration of SC appears to affect the overall results in the different studies that applied Equations (2) and (3). The conclusions of those studies appears to overestimate the number of students using a higher seat, a situation where the students would not be able to rest their feet on the floor, generating increasing pressure on the tissue of the posterior surface of the knee (García-Molina et al., 1992; UNESCO, 2001; Milanese and Grimmer, 2004).

Finally, even though Equations (2) and (3) are based on the same principles, the results of the mismatch show differences between them since Equation (3) is less strict. Kappa statistics indicates a moderate agreement between Equations (2) and (3) (k = 0.44).


                           Fig. 5
                            shows that 7% of high mismatch is the difference between the results of the two equations. On the other hand, the lower limit and the results of low mismatch remain the same for the two equations. The slight difference is confirmed by the result of an almost perfect agreement between equations (k = 0.82). Despite the Kappa results, considering the high limit of Equation (5), the students could have a space corresponding to 1% of their BPL between the front edge of the seat and the popliteal region. Using the sample from this research, the space mentioned before will be between 2.8 and 5.4 mm, which is too small if one considered the fact that the anthropometric measurements were made with the students using shorts, like most of the reviewed studies. When wearing regular clothes, the students could be in a more uncomfortable situation mainly due the compression of the popliteal surface. Furthermore, to avoid this situation, students will sit forward and will not be able to use the backrest of the seat in a proper way (Milanese and Grimmer, 2004). This erroneous use of the backrest would most likely generate a kyphotic posture (Khalil et al., 1993; Pheasant, 1991).


                           Fig. 6
                            shows almost double the level of low mismatch in Equation (7) when compared to Equation (6). The results of Kappa statistics show a moderate agreement range between Equations (6) and (7) (k = 0.51), where the difference is due to a margin of 10% in Equation (7). It is important to mention that the high mismatch was not considered in the Kappa statistic and can be considered to be of secondary importance due to the fact that it mostly affects the optimization of the space used rather than the student's seating posture. Finally, it can be concluded that Equation (7) is a stricter equation since it uses a margin of 10%. It seems relevant to highlight that this margin is more important for office chairs than for school chairs due to the more frequent use of arm support in the former case.


                           Fig. 7
                            presents the results of Equations (8) and (9). Taking into consideration that Equation (9) only has one limit, the results of mismatch are presented only as high mismatch. In this respect, it is possible to observe some differences between the results of these equations. Furthermore, the results of the Kappa statistic show a moderate agreement (k = 0.43). Lastly, Equation (8) needs to be analyzed more carefully since it assumes that UEB should be between 60% and 80% of the SHH. However, in the reviewed studies citing this equation (see Table 1) there is no detailed explanation or justification for the use of these limits percentage values. In authors' opinion, it is possible that 80% of SHH is at the higher limit of the UEB and, in this case, it can be considered similar to SUH in Equation (9). Paired Sample T-Tests (with 95% confidence intervals) were performed to examine the differences between 80% of SHH and SUH, considering the whole sample. The obtained results show that the values of 80% of SHH are significantly higher than SUH (t = 7.3; p = 0.001). This situation is reflected in the low levels of high mismatch from Equation (8) (Fig. 7). Additionally, the low limit considered in Equation (8) is somehow difficult to understand because the main problem is when UEB is higher than SUH. It is also important to mention that there is an interaction between UEB and the Lowest Edge of Backrest (LEBR), as well as with the Height of Backrest (HBR).


                           Fig. 8
                            shows that the Equations (10), (11) and (13) present the lowest level of mismatch, since those equations consider KH as the highest point of the lower limbs and compare this with UDH. Those equations seem to be based in the erroneous assumption that KH is higher than SH + TT. Furthermore, the majority of the students, like in most of the studies reviewed, were using a high seat (Fig. 4), which will increase the difference between SH + TT and KH. Equation (12) reveals a 52% mismatch since it compares SDC to TT. The result of Kappa statistics shows a slight agreement between Equations (12) and (10) (k = 0.11), between 12 and 11 (k = 0.03), and between 12 and 13 (k = 0.11). Despite the similar levels of mismatch in Equations (12) and (14), the Kappa statistics shows a moderate agreement between them (k = 0.52). Also, the principles of Equation (14) are wrong since they take into consideration the PH of the students, the measure used to define the SH, adding 20 cm flat, which is proportionally very different for students in the range of 6–17 years old.

From Fig. 9
                           , it is possible to observe that there are very high levels of high mismatch, but not many differences between the considered equations. Equations (16) and (20) present a perfect agreement (k = 1), since those equations are similar, except that they evaluate SDH and DH, respectively. Equations (19) and (21) have the same level of high mismatch and the Kappa statistics shows an almost perfect agreement (k = 0.99). Although, it is important to emphasize that Equation (19) only tests the high mismatch. The consideration of backward slope in Equations (19) and (21) seems to be the main cause of the differences in the results with Equations (16), (18) and (20). As an example, the Kappa statistics show a substantial agreement between Equations (21) and (16) (k = 0.68), between 21 and 18 (k = 0.69), and between 21 and 20 (k = 0.68).

Equation 17, the one that uses 5 cm flat to define the high level or the maximum SDH, presents similar results when compared with the other equations. Furthermore, the Kappa statistics of Equation (17) show an almost perfect agreement with Equation (16) (k = 0.89), 18 (k = 0.86), and 20 (k = 0.89) as well as a substantial agreement with Equation (19) (k = 0.59) and 21 (k = 0.59). This last result seems to be related to the consideration of backward slope, since the consideration of this aspect in Equation (17) leads to a Kappa statistic showing an almost perfect agreement with Equation (21) (k = 0.98). These results suggest that the use of Equation (17), considering also the use of the backward slope, can be considered as an alternative to Equation (21), in particular when the researcher did not gathered the SHH.

An issue that seems to lead to a very important discussion is the interrelation between the mismatch equations applied to test the fit of DH and UDH. Sometimes the proposed equations can be contradictory, even in ideal conditions. To better explain this situation, it is possible to consider the following assumption: the high limit of Eq. 21 – (SH + Eq. (12) + table thickness) < 0, and that will be the “High Mismatch”. This assumption leads us to the Equation (22):
                              
                                 (22)
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             {
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      [
                                                      
                                                         SH
                                                         −
                                                         
                                                            (
                                                            sinX°
                                                            
                                                            SD
                                                            )
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      ]
                                                   
                                                
                                                +
                                                EHS
                                                ∗
                                                0
                                                .
                                                8517
                                                +
                                                SHH
                                                ∗
                                                0
                                                .
                                                1483
                                             
                                             }
                                          
                                       
                                       −
                                       
                                          
                                             (
                                             
                                                SH
                                                +
                                                TT
                                                +
                                                2
                                                +
                                                7
                                             
                                             )
                                          
                                       
                                       <
                                       0,
                                       
                                       will
                                       
                                       be
                                       
                                       High
                                       
                                       DH
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where 7 cm corresponds to the minimum table thickness considered for the structure in the Chilean Standard 2566 (INN, 2002).

Considering the data of the 2,261measured students and applying Equation (22), the results show that 37% of the students will use a high DH or will have a high mismatch regarding DH. This situation shows that there is a problem in the criteria formulation for some of the presented equations. As it was mentioned before, the design and evaluation of school furniture begins with SH. Secondly, the students need an under table space that should be large enough to push the chair under the table and have enough space to allow for the movement of their legs. Having said that, there are not many changes that can be made to the SDC equation (Equation (12)) since it is a convenient equation for the determination of the needed space. On the other hand, DH or SDH equations need to be evaluated in the field or in laboratory; for example, the criteria presented by Chaffin and Anderson (1991) does not take the elbow or forearm support into consideration, which may be used to reduce the strain on the shoulder (Feng et al., 1997; Slot et al., 2009). Furthermore, there are some authors who suggest that, for writing and drawing with the forearm or elbow supported, the table should be positioned at 10 cm above EHS (Pheasant, 2003; Kroemer and Grandjean, 1997). However, as it was mentioned before, this could cause some problems since 10 cm above EHS is not necessarily the same for a student of 6 years or for a student of 18 years old.

This proposed methodology considered the evaluation of six furniture dimensions (Table 5
                        ). Despite that, there are some main furniture dimensions that have to be considered within this type of research, specifically those that are frequently used in the reviewed studies: SH, SD, SDC, and DH. To apply the different equations, researchers will have to considerer the following anthropometrics measures: PH, BPL, HW, SUH, TT, EHS, and SHH.

The current methodology is based in a bottom–top approach. This requirement stems from the fact that SH is the most important measure for the mismatch criteria. As it was shown before in Fig. 4, SC needs to be considered in the SH formula. It is also necessary to consider that SC may naturally vary according to culture, fashion, and country. To get more representative values of the sample under study, an option is to measure the shoe heel of the students or measure the shoe heel through a national consumers' survey (Castellucci et al., 2010). If this situation is not possible for the researchers, an alternative option is to consider SC as a value between 2 cm (Agha, 2010; Dianat et al., 2013; Gouvali and Boudolos, 2006) and 3 cm (Castellucci et al., 2010). There are also other authors who recommended SC with values between 2.5 (Herzberg, 1972) and 4.5 cm (Pheasant, 1984).

In the case of SDC, if the researchers have only gathered KH, TT can be estimated with the following equation:
                           
                              (23)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          (
                                          
                                             KH
                                             −
                                             PH
                                          
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                    ∗
                                    1
                                    .
                                    7
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

This equation was developed using the average and standard deviations of PH, TT, and KH from different databases (Musa, 2011; Pheasant, 2003; Savanur et al., 2007). Furthermore, if SDC was not gathered, UDH can be used instead, by applying the following equation:
                           
                              (24)
                              
                                 
                                    SDC
                                    =
                                    UDH
                                    −
                                    SH
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

Regarding SDC and DH, it is important to keep in mind, as discussed earlier, that the interrelation between the mismatch equations applied to test the fit of DH and UDH are based on contradictory criteria. Despite this, DH needs to be evaluated with Equation (21) (Parcells et al., 1999). To apply this equation properly, the seat angle has to be measured and replace the X° backward slope or negative seat angle. If the seat has a forward slope or positive angle it will be: SH + SD * sinX°.

Finally, it is important to considerer the cumulative fit or transversal mismatch, which is defined as the mismatch that takes into account the cumulative values of the different furniture dimensions. This can be considered as a very important indicator of the furniture fit, since it shows how many students are actually matched to the dimensions of their school furniture. The order to apply the cumulative fit is the same as this proposed methodology, i.e., through a bottom–top approach.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The results that have been obtained indicate that 6 furniture dimensions are evaluated with a high number of applied equations. For SH, the most evaluated furniture dimension, there are considerable differences between the two most frequently used equations. Additionally, one of these equations does not consider shoe correction. In the case of SD, there are not many differences between the two applied equations. Regarding UEB, the equations are based on principles that are not fully explained by the corresponding authors.

Most of the equations regarding UDH or SDC present one systematic error, which is to assume that students are sitting on a chair with a proper seat height.

It should be also acknowledged that the interrelation between the equations for evaluating the level of mismatch of SDC and DH are based on contradictory criteria and therefore, it will be necessary to develop new equations for these parameters and validate them.

Finally, the proposed methodology for the evaluation of school furniture suitability should allow for a more reliable and accurate analysis of school furniture.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was funded by the Fondo Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo en Salud (FONIS) N° SA11I2105, Gobierno de Chile (National Fund for Health Research and Development, Chilean Government).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

