@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A novel approach for fit analysis of thermal protective clothing using three-dimensional body scanning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A novel approach was developed to determine the air gap in protective clothing.


                        
                        
                           
                           Both the overall and local air gap distributions were analyzed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The air gap unevenly distributed over the body with the largest air gap in legs.


                        
                        
                           
                           The air gap depended on the body parts, fabric properties, and garment size.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Protective clothing

Fit analysis

Three-dimensional body scanning

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The garment fit played an important role in protective performance, comfort and mobility. The purpose of this study is to quantify the air gap to quantitatively characterize a three-dimensional (3-D) garment fit using a 3-D body scanning technique. A method for processing of scanned data was developed to investigate the air gap size and distribution between the clothing and human body. The mesh model formed from nude and clothed body was aligned, superimposed and sectioned using Rapidform software. The air gap size and distribution over the body surface were analyzed. The total air volume was also calculated. The effects of fabric properties and garment size on air gap distribution were explored. The results indicated that average air gap of the fit clothing was around 25–30 mm and the overall air gap distribution was similar. The air gap was unevenly distributed over the body and it was strongly associated with the body parts, fabric properties and garment size. The research will help understand the overall clothing fit and its association with protection, thermal and movement comfort, and provide guidelines for clothing engineers to improve thermal performance and reduce physiological burden.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Clothing is commonly made of fabric and covers over the three-dimensional (3-D) human body. Due to the specific geometry of human body shape and unique fabric properties, the space developed between these two surfaces and the overall contour formed along the body represents the garment fit. As the garment fit depends on many factors, such as individual perceptions, clothing fashion style, function, it is hard to define it (Ashdown et al., 2004; Song and Ashdown, 2010). Garment fit is crucial for the performance of protective clothing. In thermal protective clothing, the air gap thickness between clothing layers and the body affected the thermal damage to the skin (Song and Lu, 2013). Garment style and fit influenced thermal protection, as the inappropriate fit of the clothing style reduced its protection (Mah and Song, 2010b). In the effort to improve the protective performance of protective clothing, various garment design approaches were employed. The overall modification of protection was associated with the air gap distribution. Protective clothing often required a stringent conformity to body dimensions, as garments that were out of proportion to the wearer might result in accidents or impair efficiency and safe work performance (Robinette, 1986; Hsiao et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2011). For example, a crotch length that was too long might prevent a worker from moving quickly or might tear and leave him vulnerable to hazardous materials (Keeble et al., 1992). The garment fit had great influence on the air gap size and distribution (Kim et al., 2002; Song, 2007), which greatly affected the heat and mass transfer in the microclimate under clothing and range of mobility (Huck et al., 1997; Kim et al., 2002; Mah and Song, 2010b). To design well-fitted protective clothing and provide guidelines on the selection of protective clothing, fit analysis of protective clothing is necessary.

Current methods of analyzing garment fit calculated the difference between linear garment measurements and linear body measurements. Although these were useful for evaluating simple garment fit issues, they were not adequate to investigate the multifaceted relationship between the body and clothing. The 3-D body scanner captured three dimensional nature of human body and provided valuable information to analyze the garment fit (DesMarteau, 2000). Kim et al. (2001) investigated wearing ease, the distance between the body and the garment at critical locations using merged cross-section slices between the body scan and clothed scan. Loker et al. (2005) examined fit by superimposing scans made with and without clothing. The linear distances between the body scan and the clothed scan can be calculated. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional data such as circumference slices, surface areas, and volumes between the body and the clothed scan can be used to provide comprehensive and objective analyses of fit. The 3-D body scanning was introduced to measure the air volume of clothing microclimate quantitatively (Daanen et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2007; Havenith et al., 2010). The air volume was an integrated index to represent the overall garment fit, however, it was not sufficient to provide information in particular locations. The quantitative analysis performed by 3-D body scanning technology provides an approach to characterize complicated 3-D garment fit.

In US army, the air gap distribution for military garment was investigated using 3-D body scanning (Kim et al., 2002). The method used for measuring the air trapped between clothing and skin was as follows. The initial nude scan and clothed scan were conducted consecutively and superimposed. Once the two scans were aligned, cross-sections were conducted. Two vectors in the same direction, which originated at the centroid of the initial scan cross-section, were extracted. Subtracting the two vectors obtained the distance between the scan pair surfaces at a given point along their contour lines. Data obtained from the study demonstrated that 3-D whole body digitizing provided a unique view into the size and distribution of air gaps in a common clothing ensemble worn by U.S. Army soldiers (Kim et al., 2002). It was noted that the arm was moved forward or backward to decrease shadow region at torso, which had effect on the air gap distribution at adjacent positions. Song has investigated the average air gap size at the locations where a burn prediction occurred in single layer protective clothing exposed to flash fire (Song, 2007). The less drapable Kevlar®/PBI coveralls presented larger mean air gap sizes than Nomex® IIIA coveralls with the same style and size. A procedure using a 3-D body scanner to measure the size and distribution of air gaps between a female mannequin and a garment was developed to investigate the garment style and fit on thermal protection (Mah and Song, 2010a, b). The findings demonstrated that air gap sizes were not evenly distributed over the mannequin, and depended on garment style and fit, as well as body contour. There were a great number of smaller air gaps over the mannequin than larger ones. The principle of air gap measurement was the same with previous study of Kim et al., i.e. the magnitude difference of two vectors with the same direction originated from the centroid of nude body scan. Due to the irregular profile of human body, this principle might cause significant error in concave or convex area such as chest and pelvis regions. Recently, Psikuta et al. (2012) measured the air gap size and distribution, and the contact area of daily wear clothing by Geomagic software. However, the method used in air gap determination was not provided.

The purpose of this study was to conduct systematic exploration on fit analysis of thermal protective clothing using 3-D body scanning technology. It was also the intention of this study to develop a new approach to characterize the 3-D fit relationship between protective clothing and human body. In this study, a proposed approach using 3-D body scanning to characterize fit of selected clothing was developed. The air gap size and distribution for these clothing were statistically analyzed. The air volume was employed as an index to depict the spatial relationship between the clothing and human body. The effects of garment design features including fabric properties and garment size on fit were also investigated.

@&#METHODS@&#

Several thermal protective coveralls typically worn by workers in the oil and gas industry were selected. All the garments consist of a double layer fold-over collar and a top fly in the front center as well as a horizontal segment line at the waist, as shown in Fig. 1
                        (b). To understand the relationship between garment size and fit, different sizes of 40 (close-fitting), 42 (fitted), 44 (loose-fitting) FR cotton coveralls were employed. Materials and material combinations also affect the garment fit, therefore, the size of 42R single layer FR cotton coveralls with different fabric weight, and different layers protective clothing were also used to explore the effect of design features. The detail specifications about the testing garments were shown in Table 1
                        . The fabric thickness was measured in accordance with ASTM D1777-96 under pressure of 1 kPa. The stiffness of the fabrics characterized by flexural rigidity was measured using cantilever method according to ASTM D1388-08.

The overall contour developed on human body depends on a number of factors such as somatotype, postures, and physical status etc. In this study, a duplicate of flame manikin Harry (40 regular male in US standard size) was employed for the 3-D body scanning as shown in Fig. 1(a). The manikin head and legs are not movable and only the arms can be rotated forward and backward at the shoulders. There were no sensors located on the surface of manikin. A number of nodules at forehead, side neck and instep were mounted on the manikin surface for the alignment of nude and clothed scan.

To capture the 3-D body shape and clothing profile, a VITUS Smart 3-D whole body laser scanner by Human Solutions was used. This scanner was a non-contact optical measuring system capable of rapidly generating a 360° representation of the surface geometry of an object. A horizontal line of laser was projected onto the object to be scanned, and the light was reflected back into cameras located in a series of scan heads that moved vertically along the length of the scanning volume. The lasers moved from the bottom to top. Computer software used the displacement of the light pattern to calculate the distance from the object to the camera, from which the data were inverted to produce a 3-D form. The different camera views were then patched together to create a single image. The scanned object, formed by point cloud data and x, y, z coordinates, can be rotated, resized, and sliced. The VITUS scanner was connected to a computer equipped with ScanWorX software (version 2.9), which was used to visualize, process, and evaluate scan information. The “.stl” file format was used to output the raw scan data for fit analysis.

To analyze the garment fit, nude and clothed scans were required to be overlapped and aligned as accurate as possible. Successful alignment required minimal changes in the position of the nude and clothed manikin between scans. The detailed procedure of 3D body scanning could be found in the reference (Mah and Song, 2010a). The nude manikin was scanned first, and then the dressed manikin was scanned with the same positions. Each garment was scanned for three times by dressing and undressing to determine the reproducibility of the measurements. Because the size and distribution of air gaps were variable between scans and depended on how the manikin was dressed, changes in air gaps were minimized by following a specific dressing protocol, which involved gently pulling downwards on the waist, sleeve and leg cuffs of the garments. Pictures of the dressed manikin were taken and compared across garments of the same style to ensure consistency of fit.

The raw data obtained from nude and clothed scan were imported for further remapping with the software of Rapidform XOR. There were some missing areas in the scans where the cameras could not capture data. These missing areas included horizontal surfaces such as the top of the shoulder and head, and regions that are hidden by the body such as the area under the arms, the crotch. In addition, there were also some missing holes on the deep wrinkle locations. To well measure the air gap between the clothing and human skin, integral and smooth body surface was necessary. Firstly, the scan data was meshed. Then it was rewrapped and the holes were filled. Subsequently, healing wizard was applied and optimized mesh was made to smooth the mesh model. Finally, the refined model was exported for air gap measurement.

Both the processed nude and clothed scans were imported in Rapidform XOV for measurement. The nude scan was defined as nominal data and the clothed scan was considered as scan data. The two scans could be aligned by several points of nodules and then slightly shifted x, y, z coordinate of the clothed scan to perfectly align the two scans. The horizontal slices were carried out at different positions. In this study, cross-sections of neck, chest, abdomen, arm, pelvis, thigh, knee and cuff were made. From the neck to cuff, there were total 72 sections with equal interval of 2 cm. Fig. 2
                         presented the body separation according to the slices. As the horizontal sections at abdomen and pelvis included parts of arms, the analysis of air gap in these areas should be adjusted to exclude the arms. Likewise, the air gap at each arm was determined respectively via the selection of the range of arm area. It should be noted that the garment contour at armhole was difficult to separate, and thus the air gap at upper chest and upper arm was integrated.

The cross-section displayed two contours that alternately coincided or were separated by some distance, shown in Fig. 3
                        . The distance between the contour lines was the air gap. In previous studies (Kim et al., 2002; Mah and Song, 2010a), the air gap was measured by the difference of two vectors originated from the centroid of base scan with the same direction. However, it would result in big error for the convex or concave regions. In this study, the principle of minimum distance was applied to determine the air gap at each point of nude scan. The statistical analysis of the whole contour of the sliced cross-section was carried out. The minimum, maximum and average air gap was determined respectively, and the distribution of air gap for each slice was plotted. The overall air gap distribution over the body surface was presented with different color bars. In addition, the air volume entrapped in the clothing was calculated.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                        Fig. 4
                         showed the average air gap size of scanned coveralls of size 42. Coverall C1 provided the smallest average air gap, and coverall C8 showed the biggest average air gap among all selected coveralls. The overall air gap of selected single layer thermal protective coveralls (C1–C7) was in the range of 25–35 mm. The average air gap of C7 was bigger than any other single layer coveralls.

The relationship between rigidity of the fabric and average air gap size of the coverall was examined as shown in Fig. 5
                        . The warp stiffness was bigger than the weft stiffness, showing anisotropy, except the fabric of garment C7. The weft stiffness showed a significant linear correlation with average air gap size (R
                        2 = 0.92, p = 0.001). However, there was no significant correlation between warp stiffness and air gap size (p = 0.561). If the garment C7 was removed, then the correlation coefficient R
                        2 turned to be 0.41, showing a moderate correlation, but it was still insignificant (p = 0.172). C1 was made of Nomex®, which was soft, resulting in small space between garment and body. Coveralls C2 ∼ C7 were made of pure FR cotton or blended with nylon, which were stiffer than C1, therefore the air gap in the coveralls was larger than that of C1. In previous studies, it was found that Kevlar®/PBI coveralls had larger mean air gap sizes than more drapable Nomex® IIIA coveralls with the same style and size (Song, 2007). C8 was double layer and the shell fabric was the same with C7. The average air gap of C8 was larger than that of C7. This indicated that adding layers decreased fabric drape and clothing folds, resulting in the increase of average air gap of coveralls. Based on the analysis, the weft stiffness could be applied to predict the average air gap of a coverall.

Hu and Chan found that fabric weight had positive effect on drape coefficient (Hu and Chan, 1998). Mah and Song investigated the relationship between fabric drape coefficient and entrapped average air gap size and found these two parameters positively correlated (Mah and Song, 2010c). As shown in Fig. 4, the coverall C4 with higher fabric weight showed bigger average air gap size than C3 with the same style, which confirmed the positive effect of fabric weight on the entrapped air layer. The C5 was treated with polymer finishing on C4, resulting in higher flexural rigidity, and thus the air gap size showed bigger. This indicated that the surface finishing affected the air gap size entrapped in clothing. The stiffness of C4 was much higher than that of C6, but the average air gap of C4 was less than that of C6. It should be noted that the two coveralls were from different manufacturers, showing a little variance of garment ease although the garment size was the same. This might contribute to the difference of air gap size.

Total air volume was another parameter to characterize the space between body geometry and garment contour. Fig. 6
                         showed the relationship between air volume and average air gap size. The air volume of single layer thermal protective coveralls was in the range of 35–60 dm3. In Daanen's study, the air volume of the air suit was around 33 dm3, which was in the same order of magnitude with the coveralls used in this study. It was found that the air volume linearly increased with the average air gap size. In Lee's study, the air volume was well correlated with thermal insulation (Lee et al., 2007). However, only the vest was investigated. It was confirmed that the garment fit characterized by average air gap size greatly affected thermal insulation (Chen et al., 2004). For thermal protective coveralls, the air volume showed good relationship with average air gap size based on the results in this study. The air volume could provide useful information to assess the overall garment fit.

The average air gaps of different body parts were compared in Fig. 7
                           . It was observed that air gap distributed unevenly at different locations. All the coveralls showed similar change trend. The air gap formed in leg including thigh, knee and calf was much larger than any other regions, and the air gap in upper chest and neck area was smaller than other areas. Lower air gap in chest and pelvis might be related to the convex body geometry. The contour of abdomen was concave, showing large space between body and clothing. The bigger air gap at lower chest than that at upper chest also demonstrated that concave locations showed higher air gap than convex areas. The circumferences of chest and pelvis were main parameters for clothing design. The size in these locations consisted of basic circumference plus design ease. For the style “H” coveralls employed in this study, the air gap size of body parts depended on the circumferences of the locations. The small air gap in arm might be caused by the posture of arm, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The bent arms resulted in many folds and wrinkles around sleeves. This might lower the air gap. Coverall C3 and C4 were made of identical style but the fabric weight was different (refers to Table 1). It was observed in Fig. 7 that the air gaps of C4 in various body parts were higher than those of C3, except in leg. However, there was no difference in thigh, knee and calf. The results showed that fabric weight had different effects on the air gaps at different areas.

The overall air gap distribution of C2 on human body was shown in Fig. 8
                            presented by color bar. The air gap between body and clothing was unevenly distributed over the whole body. The air gaps on right posterior thigh and both anterior calves were obviously higher than other parts. However, the air gaps on right anterior thigh and posterior calves were small. This might be caused by forward flex of right knee. In addition, the air gap of forearm was bigger than that of rear arm. It was also related to the flex of elbow. The air gaps at two sides were relatively higher than the front and back. There was larger air gap at waist than abdomen, and there was smaller air gap in buttock. It demonstrated that the air gap in concave areas was higher than that in convex positions. The air gap at chest and upper back showed relatively uniform distribution. Based on the results obtained in this study, it was indicated that the air gap distribution of a specific coverall depended on body geometry and posture. Some areas at head and feet showed negative air gap, which might be due to the processing of scan data (void filling and alignment) and scan errors (Kim et al., 2002; Psikuta et al., 2012). This was considered as contact area in a previous study (Psikuta et al., 2012).

The average air gap of C2 determined by the whole air gap distribution was 24.2 mm, which was smaller than that shown in Fig. 4 (average air gap size was 27.9 mm). The air gap estimated by the whole deviation method included the head and feet. They were not covered by clothing, and thus the air gap was around zero. Therefore, the average air gap was lower than that calculated by multiple sections which only took areas covered by clothing into consideration. The statistical data showed that air gap between 0 and 5 mm took the largest proportion (15.7%) among all the air gap size ranges. The percentage of air gap size less than 5 mm was about 20%, that less than 15 mm was approximate 40%, that less than the average air gap was about 53%, and that less than 50 mm was close to 87%. The results confirmed that there were higher proportion of smaller air gaps than larger ones, which was consistent with Mah and Song's study (Mah and Song, 2010a).

The statistics of air gap distributions for different coveralls with size 42 were compared in Fig. 9
                           . The air gap size group d2 (0–5 mm) took the largest proportion among all the air gap size ranges, except garment C8. Air gap size group d10 (40–50 mm) was a turning point for all the garments. The garments C1∼C6 exhibited a similar air gap distribution. The percentage of air gap size decreased from group d2 to group d9 (35–40 mm), then increased when the air gap size was in group d10, and decreased subsequently. For garment C7, the distribution of air gaps located in different ranges was relatively even (minimum is 5.03% and the maximum is 9.94%). The garment C8 also showed different air gap distribution. The percentage of air gap size increased from group d2 to d7 (25–30 mm). The percentage of air gap size group d10∼d13 (>80 mm) was much higher than those of other groups. Moreover, around 40% air gap size was bigger than 40 mm.


                           Fig. 10
                            showed the accumulative percentage of average air gap of sections for different coveralls. The statistic generated from the average air gap of total 72 sections. Coveralls of C1 ∼ C6 showed similar trend and the air gap size was similar. The maximum average air gap of all the sections was around 50 mm. The percentage of the average air gap of section increased sharply when the size was between 12 and 40 mm. Among the air gap distribution, the air gap less than 12 mm was 10% and higher than 40 mm was 10%. It indicated that about 80% air gap size was in the range of 12–40 mm. There showed no significant difference between C7 and the other single layer coveralls (C1 ∼ C6) when the percentage of air gap was less than 15%. The range of air gap size for C7 less than 28 mm only took 20% of all the sections, while the air gap between 28 and 40 mm took 40% of all the sections. The 80% air gap sizes among the all sections were in the range of 28–50 mm. C8 was double layer coveralls with the same outer shell of C7. The change trend of C8 was similar to C1 ∼ C6, but the air gap developed was much higher. The percentage of air gap increased remarkably as air gap was higher than 23 mm. The air gap less than this value took only 10%. The significant difference between C7 and C8 occurred when the air gap was higher than 30 mm. Furthermore, the air gap dispersed in a wider range. It was observed that C3 took more percentage than C4 as the air gap was between 6 and 26 mm and they occupied the same percentage at the other air gap sizes. This might be because the lower fabric weight and softer rigidity of C3 resulted in lower air gap in body parts (shown in Fig. 7).

Air gap sizes of various body parts for protective coveralls with different sizes were compared in Fig. 11
                        . It was found that the air gap size in different locations increased with the increase of garment size except neck and upper chest. There was no significant change in neck and upper chest when the coverall size increased. The results demonstrated that increase of garment size at certain level provided larger air gap around the body.

In a previous study, it was reported that the air gap of loose-fitting clothing was higher than that of tight-fitting clothing (Psikuta et al., 2012). However, the detail about the exact garment size was unclear. In addition, the design feature of the compared garments was totally different. In this study, it was confirmed that loose-fitting coveralls provided higher air gap size. Lee et al. (2007) found that the air volume of vest increased with increasing of garment ease. The air volume of coverall of size 40, 42 and 44 was 39.8, 44 and 50 dm3 respectively. It indicated that air volume became higher as the garment size increased, which was consistent with Lee's study. The results obtained in this study showed that garment size had great effect on garment fit.

The accumulative percentage of air gap for coveralls with different sizes was compared in Fig. 12
                        . The coveralls with different sizes took significantly different percentage when the air gap size was between 14 and 38 mm. The percentage for the coverall of size 40 was the highest and that of size 44 was the lowest while the air gap was in the range of 14–38 mm. Moreover, the coverall of size 44 occupied least percent of all the sections as the air gap was between 14 and 50 mm. This confirmed that garment size had positive effect on air gap in this range. The air gaps less than 14 mm of all the three coveralls took 15% of all the sections. It indicated that the coveralls of different sizes had the same percentage of smaller air gap. As shown in Fig. 9, these areas mainly included neck and upper chest. The coveralls of size 40 and size 42 showed the same trend when the air gap was higher than 38 mm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

An approach for comprehensive processing of 3D body scanning data was developed to characterize the air gap size and distribution of selected thermal protective clothing worn by industrial workers. It was found that air gap developed between human body and clothing based on body parts, fabric properties, garment size, and garment design. The air gap unevenly distributed over the body surface. Larger size of air gap was observed in legs and abdomen. The air gap in chest, pelvis and arms was relatively small. The air gap of convex area was smaller than that of concave area. Coverall made of stiffer fabric tended to develop larger air gap size. The air gap increased with the increasing of garment size. The proposed approach could provide both information on overall air gap distribution and the air gap for localized body areas. The data obtained could be correlated to thermal comfort and protection, and thus provided information on the design of thermal protective clothing to improve thermal performance and reduce physical burden.

Further studies are required to improve the data post processing to reduce misalignment and error of void filling. Thermal protective clothing always composes of multilayer fabrics. The outer layer might compress the inner layer and influence the overall garment profile (Lee et al., 2007). To characterize the air gap between clothing layers is an important issue in the future works.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This paper was financially supported by Start-up funding of Soochow University and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project. The authors appreciated the manufacturers who provided all the testing garments.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

