@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Matching performance of vehicle icons in graphical and textual formats

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The experienced drivers had significantly better recognition accuracy.


                        
                        
                           
                           The image-related format is recommended for use in the design of vehicle icons.


                        
                        
                           
                           Textual icon can be used for functions describable using simple English and for users with English reading ability.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Image-related

Icon taxonomy

Confusion matrix

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The current research classified 82 vehicle icons into seven categories (image-related, concept-related, semi-abstract, arbitrary, abbreviation, word, and combined) for their matching accuracy, matching sequence, and matching time. These data can be compared and used as a framework for future icon development. Forty participants, all with a university degree, took part in this experiment. Half of the participants had intensive driving experience, while the other half never driven a car. The results indicated that on average, word icons had a significantly greater matching accuracy than the other icon formats; ranging from 4.7 to 20.8% difference. Regarding the matching sequence, participants matched image-related icons before other icon formats. Arbitrary and combined icons took significantly longer to match than other icon formats by 1.4–6.2 s. Based on the high matching accuracy (86.3%) and high ratings on subjective design features, word format can be used for functions describable using simple English for users with English reading ability. Confusion matrices showed that 63.2% of the misunderstandings were caused by similarity in format or function.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

With the increase in the number of functions in the driving environment, icons that are compact and international (language) (Horton, 1994) are often used in a vehicle to convey information to the driver (Green, 1993). Effective icons can provide the driver with a quick and complete understanding of the information to ensure driver safety (Baber and Wankling, 1992). But designing comprehensible icons is not a simple task. Saunby et al. (1988) showed that only 16 of 25 car icons tested could be matched correctly by a minimum 75% of experimental participants.

An icon may be comprised of border, background, symbol (consisting of graphical elements), and textual labels (Fig. 1
                     ) (Campbell et al., 2004b; Horton, 1994) although not all of these components must be present. Each icon component can add meaning to an icon in its own way. Borders can make icons appear more consistent; background can help to group icons; and graphical and textual elements convey the main meaning of the icon (Carney et al., 1998).

As indicated by Wang et al. (2007), icon taxonomy can fulfill a variety of functions including classifying icons into different types to evaluate the effectiveness of each type to be used as a framework for the future development of icons. Most icon taxonomy systems were developed to classify graphical icons according to how abstract or concrete they are (Wang et al., 2007). For example, graphical icons can be classified into image-related (pictorial), concept-related (analogy), or arbitrary based on how far the graphical elements in an icon (Fig. 1) resemble their referents (Goonetilleke et al., 2001; Lodding, 1983). Image-related icons are typical pictorial representations of the object or action. Concept-related icons attempt to visualize a concept that is not far but separate from the concrete image. Arbitrary icons have no obvious reference to their intended meaning, but become meaningful only through convention and education (Goonetilleke et al., 2001; Lodding, 1983). However, according to Blattner et al. (1989), semi-abstract icons combine an image-related (representational) pictorial element with an abstract (concept-related or arbitrary) symbol. For example, a folder with an arrow that indicates placing items in it. Similar semi-abstract icons can be found in cars, for example 
                        
                      for rear window demisting and defrosting, the square depicts the rear window while the wavy arrow lines symbolize hot air flow. Besides graphical icons, two more categories can be added if incorporating textual elements into the icons: textual and combined (Reder and Mccallum, 2004). Textual icons can be further divided based on whether they contain words or abbreviations. Therefore, all icons can be classified into seven categories (image-related, concept-related, semi-abstract, arbitrary, word, abbreviation, and combined) presented in a tree-shaped diagram (Chi et al., 2012) (see Fig. 2
                     ).

Prior research has compared the advantages of each icon format. The general conclusion is that recognition of graphical images has been found to be superior than that of text for recall and recognition accuracy (Paivio, 1971; Shepard, 1967), while text has been better for reaction time (Dewar et al., 1976). For graphical icons, image-related icons are easy to interpret because they have an obvious mapping between icon and the referent, thus image-related icons were considered the most effective for fast and accurate recognition (Blankenberger and Hahn, 1991; Wiedenbeck, 1999; Stotts, 1998). Other graphical icon formats, e.g. concept-related and arbitrary, have less obvious connections with the real world, and are therefore more difficult to interpret. Arbitrary icons should be avoided because educating people to associate arbitrary objects and their referents requires a considerable amount of funding and time (Horton, 1994). However, image-related (concrete) icons are less likely to provide any functional benefits for experienced users, even though they may be preferred (McDougall and Curry, 2004).

The majority of above statements seem to suggest that image-related icons would be the most effective. However, if we review the commonly used ISO standard icons, we will find that not all of the icons are image-related because for some functions or contexts it is difficult or impossible to find a real object to represent the referent when creating image-related icons. Besides, most previous studies only compared three types of graphical icons (Wogalter et al., 2006) or graphical versus textual icons (Baber and Wankling, 1992; Wiedenbeck, 1999). Therefore, the current study categorized 82 existing icons within a newly built vehicle into seven different icon formats and compared the comprehension performance of the participants as they responded to each of the different formats.

Eighty-two icons were classified into seven major categories based on Lodding (1983), Goonetilleke et al. (2001), and Blattner et al. (1989). Previously, before the introduction of the semi-abstract category, there were inconsistencies and confusions in classifying icons that had a representational pictorial element with an abstract symbol, i.e., air flow control (
                     
                        
                     ) and recirculated air (
                     
                        
                     
                     ). Most of these confusions were between image-related and concept-related; or among image-related, concept-related, and arbitrary, which could be resolved by categorizing them into the semi-abstract category. Besides, there was some confusion about classifying the car key reminder indicator (
                        
                     ), as either image-related or concept-related, because of its poor image quality. Since image quality was not an attribute for the classification of each icon format (
                        
                     ) was classified as image-related.

Since subjective rating scales are easy to administer, at times they can be more sensitive than objective measurements (Chi and Lin, 1998). Therefore, these 82 icons were also evaluated based on some subjective design features (McDougall and Reppa, 2008) such as familiarity, concreteness, visual complexity, and semantic distance. Each will be defined as in Table 1
                     . The subjective rating features can help to explain why some icons could be better recognized than others (Liu and Ho, 2012).

Among the seven differential icon formats, all four subjective design features (familiarity, concreteness, complexity, and semantic distance) can be used to evaluate image-related, concept-related, semi-abstract, arbitrary, and combined icons. However, for word and abbreviation formats, besides semantic distance, participants were also asked about whether they understood the meaning of the word or abbreviation in an icon. One small flaw in the evaluation of subjective design features is that the text meaning of the combined icons was not measured.

The education level (university education versus without) (Ng and Chan, 2007) and experience (Goonetilleke et al., 2001; Isherwood et al., 2007) of the respondents were found to have significant effects on comprehension. Our experiment chose to test participants with at least a university-level education and divided their driving experience into having no driving experience and having intensive driving experience. Driving can be seen as a form of training that can increase icon recognition significantly (Goonetilleke et al., 2001). The current experiment measured icon recognition using novice drivers and experienced drivers to derive the proper baseline performance and evaluate the beneficial effect of experience on recognizing the different icon formats.

In evaluating the comprehensibility of symbols, Wolff and Wogalter (1998) recommend using appropriate context showing the environment in which the symbol will likely be placed. Eighty-two icons copied from the steering wheel, center stack, and dashboard of a newly built vehicle would be presented on three task screens, respectively. Each task screen deals with maneuvering the vehicle, setting turning signals and activating the windshield wipers to increase driving safety, and serving the entertainment and information functions (Geiser, 1985; Tonnis et al., 2006). Icons in other locations, e.g. hood, trunk, and gas tank; were not included because it takes tremendous time to build each context and findings from the current three task screens can be generalized to icons in other contexts. Besides providing appropriate context, Wolff and Wogalter (1998) and SAE J2830 published by SAE International (2008) also recommended the use of an open-ended test. Since the scoring of open-ended responses is subjective and difficult, and mean comprehension on multiple-choice test with plausible distractors was not significantly different from the result generated from the open-ended test (Wolff and Wogalter, 1998), the current study choose to use a matching test (similar to multiple-choice test with plausible distractors) because it is an easy and reliable quantification of comprehension performance.

Participants will match each icon with the most appropriate referent name. The referent names were copied from the owner's manual. A possible flaw in our matching task is that for some of the (new) referent functions, the image is a good choice to represent the underlying function, but the referent name was poorly chosen. The subjective design features would be rated for each icon after the matching test. These 82 icons would be categorized into seven different formats (i.e., image-related, concept-related, semi-abstract, arbitrary, word, abbreviation, and combined) to compare the matching accuracy, time, and sequence produced by the participants. The results obtained for the different icon formats on these performance measures can be used to perfect ISO standard 2575 published by the International Organization of Standardization (2010) to facilitate the design of new icons for new contexts or applications.

@&#METHODS@&#

A matching experiment was designed to collect comprehension performance data on 82 icons followed by subjective ratings of their design features. The comprehension performance was measured by the matching time, matching sequence, and the percentage of participants who matched the icon correctly with its functional name (Carney et al., 1998). Forty participants aged between 23 and 53 years old (mean = 30 years) took part in this experiment. All participants are students or staff members of National Taiwan University of Science and Technology with at least a university-level education. They consisted of two different groups: those having driving experience (drive at least once a week) and those without any driving experience (not having a driver's license and having never driven a car). Collecting data from two different experience groups can determine whether image-related (concrete) icons are less likely to provide any functional benefits for experienced users (McDougall and Curry, 2004).

Prior to the experiment, all participants were screened for visual acuity abnormalities and color blindness. They were briefed about the purpose of the experiment, and practiced the matching test routine. After the matching test, participants were asked to give ratings on each of the subjective design features.

Two experimental modules were conducted on two Lenovo Think Centre A70z computers equipped with 19″ monitors, i.e. the matching test and subjective rating evaluation. In the matching test, icons were displayed on a car dashboard layout to give context, as suggested by Vukelich and Whitaker (1993) and Wolff and Wogalter (1998). Since context provides ecologically valid cues would limit the possible referents and raise the matching performance scores (Wolff and Wogalter, 1998), matching accuracy may not have enough sensitivity. The matching sequence of each icon was derived from reviewing the videotape as an index of the matching difficulty.

Eighty-two icons were divided into three task screens – steering wheel, center stack, and dashboard – according to the icons' relative positions on a newly built vehicle (Figs. 3–5
                        
                        
                        ). In other words, the icon format was nested within the task screen. The three task screens would be shown to each participant in random sequence to minimize the learning effect. Participants were asked to click on what they thought was the most appropriate referent name for a specific icon and drag it to the answer box. Each participant was allowed to revise her/his answer during the experiment without any time limit. The computer program would collect the name of each icon and the time it took to match it. Reaction time was measured as the time between placing the two referent names (previous and current) onto the two respective answer boxes. If a participant changed his/her answer, the reaction time was measured by the accumulation of all attempted trials. If the matching result had been altered in any way, all previous matching results would also be recorded (Table 2
                        ) and analyzed together within the confusion matrix.

In the subjective rating of design features, participants were asked to rate each icon in accordance with how familiar, concrete, simple, and strongly related to its referent on a 1–7 scale they perceived the icon to be (Preston and Colman, 2000). Fig. 6
                         shows the test screen for subjective ratings of the design features. Unlike the matching test where icon formats were nested in three separate task screens, on this subjective rating test screen, each icon was evaluated on an individual basis.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Mean performance measures of all experimental conditions are presented in Table 3
                         and Fig. 7
                        . The nested analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on matching accuracy and matching time to examine whether icon format and driving experience had a significant effect on them. Since the sum of the matching sequence for all icons is the same for all participants, the effect of driving experience would not be tested on the matching sequence. Duncan's multiple range test was conducted on all the performance measures to analyze significant differences between each icon format.

The ANOVA result indicated that the task screen had a significant effect on all three performance measures (see Table 4
                        ), while driving experience and icon format had a significant effect on the matching accuracy (p < 0.01). Participants with driving experience had better recognition accuracy than participants without experience. On average, word icons had significantly greater matching accuracy than other formats (Table 3) because all participants had a university-level education and basic reading ability for English. Even participants without driving experience had 100% recognition rate for 
                           
                         (snow mode switch) and 
                           
                         (CD/DVD player), and an above 90% recognition rate for 
                           
                         (select down option), 
                           
                         (mode switch), 
                           
                         (confirm key), 
                           
                         (radio), and 
                           
                         (deactivation of air conditioning or heating).

Icon format had a significant effect on matching sequence (p < 0.01). Analysis for all 82 icons (Table 3) shows that image-related icons had a significantly smaller mean matching sequence than all other icon formats; indicating that image-related icons were recognized faster than other formats. Most of the combined icons referred to advance driving assistance system such as 
                           
                         (Lane Departure Warning System) and 
                           
                         (front radar detection) were matched later in the sequence because they are new and more difficult for all participants to recognize.

Icon format and driving experience both had a significant effect on the matching time. Arbitrary and combined icons took significantly longer than all other formats (see Table 3). Quite unexpectedly, participants with driving experience took significantly longer than inexperienced participants. Based on Hick–Hyman Law, reaction time can be affected by the number of unmatched icons left (Cockburn et al., 2007). However, after reviewing the videotape to derive the reaction time versus the matching sequence curve, it was found that several icons matched later in the sequence had significantly longer reaction times (see Fig. 8
                        ) from those predicted by Hick–Hyman Law. The matching accuracy raised to 70% for those without driving experience and 80% for those with experience because the number of possible options left reduced gradually (Wolff and Wogalter, 1998). Under such conditions, the matching sequence is more sensitive and reliable than the matching accuracy, and the sequence indicated that participants chose to match image-related icons before icons of other formats. This has very important implications because the duration of any given glance during driving should be relatively short (shorter than 0.8 s), with there being about 3 s between glances (Green, 1999). Thus, those icons that had a high recognition rate, but were matched at the last minute, should not be used during driving.

Three confusion matrices were developed for the three task screens. Due to space limitation, only icons with less than 90% matching accuracy are presented in the confusion matrices. The diagonal of the confusion matrix gives the matching accuracy (see Figs. 9–11
                        
                        
                        ). All confusions outside the diagonal were analyzed further, to see whether the confusions were caused by similarity in format or function.

From all three confusion matrices, 26.2% of the confusions in the final answers took place in icons where they share similarity in both format and function. Commonly seen icons on the steering wheel (see Fig. 9), such as rear window washer (
                           
                        ), rear window washer and wiper (
                           
                        ), and windscreen washer and wiper (
                           
                        ) had relatively low matching rates and were confused with each other because of the similarity in both icon format and their relation to the vehicle window cleaning function. Similarly, rear fog light (
                           
                        ) and front fog light (
                           
                        ) were confused easily (see Fig. 10). Such confusions were also found in Green and Pew (1978) using native-born American participants. In their study, participants also were confused by the front and rear fog light and between the windshield wiper and windshield washer icons. Similar findings between their study and the current experiment indicated that the confusion between those icons can be generalized for all drivers regardless of their racial identity.

Icons with similar functions were confused easily as well (24.5%), e.g., rear window washer (
                           
                        ) and the cleaning agent (
                           
                        ) or between engine coolant temperature indicator (
                           
                        ) and the engine warning light (
                           
                        ) because they are related to vehicle window cleaning function (see Fig. 9) or engine function (see Fig. 11), respectively. Icons that share similar formats accounted for another 12.5% of the confusions. For example, abbreviation icons on the dashboard including the transmission system warning light (
                           
                        ), electronic stability control failure warning light (
                           
                        ), and adaptive front lighting system warning light (
                           
                        ) were confused with each other easily (see Fig. 11). There are another 36.8% of confusions that cannot be attributed to similarity in format or function. Several of these confusions were because of the introduction of new/advanced functions such as deactivate traction control system (
                           
                        ) and lane departure warning system (
                           
                        ) or between smart power tailgate switch (
                           
                        ) and light induction OFF/AUTO system (
                           
                        ).

The information about participant's self-corrections in the matching test was also incorporated in the confusion matrices. The numbers written in the brackets indicate the number of participants who initially matched a specific icon with a designated referent name then changed their answer later. For each referent, the significant positive correlation between the number of confusion in the end and confusion during the matching process (r = 0.37, p-value < 0.01) indicated that icons which were wrongly matched in the end were the ones that participants had trouble matching during the process. Since the final confusion matrix correlated highly with their confusion during the process, the matching test is still a reliable measure.

The means of the subjective ratings for each design feature are listed in Table 5
                        . The analysis of variance was conducted to analyze whether icon format and driving experience have a significant effect on each design feature for graphical and combined formats. Since each icon was evaluated individually, without the task screen context, factorial ANOVA was conducted on the subjective ratings of the design features. The ANOVA result (Table 6
                        ) indicated that experienced participants provided significantly higher ratings for all design features except for semantic distance. Icon format had a significant effect on almost all design features, but the effect on concreteness was the only icon design feature that had not reached a significant level (F(4,80) = 2.08, p = 0.09). Image-related icons were expected to have higher ratings on concreteness and semantic distance than arbitrary icons. However, arbitrary icons had higher ratings on most design features because all arbitrary icons followed the ISO standards and have been used in other contexts such as power on/off (
                           
                        ) and hazard warning (
                           
                        ) which are used in electronic devices and road signs, respectively. Due to the fact that all participants had a university-level education and could read English, word icons were perceived to have higher semantic distance ratings than image-related icons. On the contrary, all concept-related and combined icons were related to functions used only in vehicles, such as front fog light (
                           
                        ), engine coolant temperature indicator (
                           
                        ), and the anti-lock brake system warning light (
                           
                        ), thus, novice participants gave relatively lower ratings on most of the subjective rating scales. A t-test was conducted to compare text meaning and semantic distance ratings between icons in word and abbreviation formats. The result indicated that word icons have significantly higher ratings for both text meaning (t = 2.98, p < 0.01) and semantic distance (t = 2.24, p = 0.03). Based on these results, word format would be a good choice for icons that can be described using simple English for users with some level of English ability.

Although participants were asked to rate four different attributes: familiarity, concreteness, simplicity, and semantic distance, there were significant inter-correlations among ratings for different attributes as well (Liu and Ho, 2012), experienced participants gave significantly greater ratings on all attributes. The inter-correlation among attributes and higher ratings perceived by the experienced participants indicated that subjective ratings only provide an overall sense of the icon design. Subjective ratings can be more sensitive than objective measurements (Chi and Lin, 1998), but they are not diagnostic. Besides, various researchers have suggested different criteria based on different application domains or data collection methods. For example, Huang et al. (2002) suggested icons should incorporate the following design criteria: styling, message quality, meaningfulness, locatability, and metaphor, but the current study choose to rate on familiarity, concreteness, simplicity, and semantic distance.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#


                     Kern and Schmidt (2009) suggested that designing user interfaces for computer domains where the user pays full attention to the application is totally different from that for cars, where the user's main focus has to be on the primary task of driving. Ng and Chan (2008) indicated that people with a university-level education, or above, perform significantly better in symbol comprehension tests than those without a university-level education. This study recruited participants with a university-level education and, as a result, all the recognition performances may have been inflated. Also, recognition performance improves dramatically with driving experience (Isherwood et al., 2007; Margono and Shneiderman, 1993). The car manufacturer and interface designers must be aware that if a great number of icons tested cannot be recognized with the user's full attention then worse recognition performance is expected in a real driving situation and for users without a university-level education and without driving experience.

If we divided the experience level of the 20 participants into less than 10 years, 10–20 years, and more than 20 years, and compare their performance in terms of matching accuracy and matching time, it was discovered that matching time is proportional to age while participants with the middle level of experience (10–20) had the greatest matching accuracy (see Table 7
                     ). Chi and Lin (1998) divided jobs into age-enhanced, age neutral/counteracted and age-impaired, based on whether age is an enhanced or negative factor (Warr, 1994). Based on a similar concept, we can perhaps classify (matching) time as an “age-impaired measure” as age played a negative factor and (matching) accuracy as “age-counteracted measure” for the negative impact of age can be partially compensated for by additional knowledge and modification of behavior (Chi and Lin, 1998).The age effect could explain why participants with driving experience took significantly longer than those without driving experience.

Although Lodding (1983) stated that pictorial communication predates text communication and it is more natural to communicate with images, the current study failed to prove that image-related icons have a better matching accuracy than the textual icons. The result can be partially explained by the poor design quality with some of the image-related icons, just as Lodding (1983) suggested, that image-related icons will be clearer and easier to understand when the image bears a close resemblance to a particular object and context is provided. For example, both the car key reminder indicator (
                        
                     ) and the engine warning light (
                        
                     ) had poor recognition rates mainly because both images have poor resolution and do not resemble closely to the key or engine, respectively. The findings highlighted the importance of legibility on icon recognition performance (Rousek and Hallbeck, 2011; Campbell et al., 2004b).

In this study, any given icon was tested in one format. There is an obvious confounding between referent function and icon format, the image-related icon format does not seem to have better recognition performance. A study conducted by Sayer and Green (1998) provided better proof that image-related icons were the best icon format. In their study, 32 drivers were asked to rank 142 candidate icons for 25 functions based on their meaningfulness in representing the described function. Even though they did not discuss icon formats, but for any given function, almost all of the most meaningful candidates ranked by drivers were image-related, while concept-related and arbitrary icons had inferior rankings.

Besides the confounding between referent function and icon format, there are at least two other factors that could have affected the comparison between different icon formats: user's experience and ISO standards. For experienced users, image-related (concrete) icons are less likely to provide any functional benefits (McDougall and Curry, 2004). Previous studies suggest that arbitrary icons should be avoided, for they have no obvious reference to their intended meaning (Goonetilleke et al., 2001; Lodding, 1983). However, most arbitrary icons in this experiment adopted from ISO 2575:2010, had a much better matching performance than what we had expected. If we divided all 82 icons into the ISO group (n = 42) (adopted from standardized symbols for controls and indicators provided by ISO 2575: 2010) and the non-ISO group (n = 40), the t-test results proved that experienced participants had a significantly greater matching accuracy for icons following the ISO standards (ISO = 86%, NON–ISO = 78%). But the difference for novice participants (ISO = 71%, NON–ISO = 66%) had not reached a significant level. The confounding between referent function and icon format, and the use of ISO standard icons could also explain why image-related icons did not have significantly higher ratings on concreteness and semantic distance than other icon formats.

Since the matching performance was always better than that of the non-ISO for both novice and experienced drivers, for conventional functions, icons should follow the ISO standards. For example, the icon for the forward collision warning has been included in ISO standards (
                        
                     ) (Campbell et al., 2004a), and it should be used to replace the current icon for the collision warning light system (
                        
                     ). Since a majority of the icons appearing on the center stack screen were new and no ISO standard was available to be followed, the confusion pattern for the center stack is more spread out and more difficult to describe (see Fig. 10).

In order to conclude all of the above findings, a backward stepwise multivariate analysis was conducted to predict the matching accuracy and matching time using the icon category, set size (number of icons on each test screen), semantic distance rating, and driving experience. The icon category was tested with six dummy variables (Cohen et al., 2003) using the combined format as the reference group. Semantic distance was the only subjective rating included in the regression analysis because all the subjective ratings were highly correlated and the semantic distance was tested for all icon categories. Age, instead of experience, was chosen for predicting the matching time since matching time is proportional to age (see Table 7).

As shown in Table 8
                     , semantic distance, icon category, driving experience, and set size were associated with matching accuracy while age, icon category, and set size were significant for predicting the matching time. The squared semipartial correlation (sr
                        2
                     ) gave the unique contribution for each predicting factor (Cohen et al., 2003) and R
                     2 indicated the overall variance explained by the model including all significant factors. Interestingly, semantic distance alone can explain 26% of the variance in predicted matching accuracy, but semantic distance was not significant for predicting the matching time. Identical to our earlier statement that matching time is proportional to age, 30% of the variance in predicted matching time can be explained by the age factor. Table 8 also indicated that icons with a greater semantic distance rating or belonging to either image-related, concept-related, semi-abstract, or word categories had a greater matching accuracy. On the other hand, icons belonging to concept-related, semi-abstract, word, and abbreviation had a significantly shorter matching time. Notice that the generalization of our findings related to icon category can be limited by the confounding between the referent function and icon format. We expect that the seven icon categories could better predict the matching accuracy and matching time if the confounding between the referent function and icon format could be better controlled as mentioned earlier.

Regarding set size, Table 8 also indicated that a greater set size increased both the matching accuracy and matching time. Since reaction time is critical for driving, one important implication from the current study is the number of functions that can be accessed easily without overloading the driver (Kern and Schmidt, 2009). After seeing the test results and feedback from car users, icon designers should be more cautious in placing too many icons (functions) into their new models. Luckily, some control functions can be replaced by automatic sensors or redundant coding. For example, the automatic induction light system can relieve the driver from having to turning on the beam light; the turning signal seldom relies on the visual sense, but more on the sense of feel or touch. Above all, the most important issue may not lie in the icon design itself, but in the system design stage to determine what functions need to exist to meet the system objectives and performance specifications (Stevens et al., 2002).

Last but not least, is the limitation in the matching test. Even though Wolff and Wogalter (1998) suggested that mean comprehension on a multiple-choice test with plausible distractors was not significantly different from the results generated from an open-ended test, there are still flaws in both the correct and incorrect matching results. For the correct matching result, it is possible that participants could match the referent to the icon, but may actually have no idea what the icon does or represents. In such cases, participants might have guessed the correct answer. The matching sequence and matching times collected in this study can help to identify the icons that had a high recognition rate, but were matched later in the sequence or took significantly longer to recognize; such as rear window demisting and defrosting (
                        
                     ) and automatic operation of air conditioning or heating (
                        
                     ). On the other hand, an incorrect matching result could have been caused by the poor design of an icon (what we intend to measure), a poor/uncommon referent name, or the participants may not understand what the icon represents. This is why the SAE (2008) recommended employing only participants with a driving license, who drive at least twice a month, to avoid recruiting participants who may not understand what the icon represents. However, by testing participants without driving experience allows us to identify the icons that can be matched perfectly by experienced drivers, but could not be properly recognized by novice drivers. For icons that have a significant difference in the matching rate between participants with and without driving experience, e.g., rear fog light (
                        
                     ), engine coolant temperature indicator (
                        
                     ), reverse gear (
                        
                     ) and drive (
                        
                     ), most of these icons only appeared in a driving context. It is necessary to educate novice drivers about the icons' meanings in order to promote safe driving.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study evaluated 82 vehicle icons in seven icon formats (image-related, concept-related, semi-abstract, arbitrary, word, abbreviation, and combined) with two groups of participants, with and without driving experience. The results indicated that driving experience had a significant effect on matching accuracy, while the matching sequence was affected by the icon format. All participants chose to match image-related icons before other icon formats. Incorporation of new icons (functions) should be carefully reviewed at the system design stage and be restrained to minimize the visual and information processing load for the driver. Campbell et al. (2004b) suggested a general development process for icons be used in all vehicles. The guidelines identify which in-vehicle messages required an icon. Since the matching performance of ISO icons was always better than that of the non-ISO for all participants, the icon designer should consult the relevant standards to check if a standard icon exists and follow the (ISO) standards whenever possible. In cases where no standard icon is available, the designer needs to use production tests to generate ideas for icons, identify candidate icons for further testing, then conduct appropriateness ranking tests to screen the candidate icons and select the best ones for further testing. To ensure candidate icons can be recognized properly, the designers can choose to conduct a recognition test on candidate icons with a representative group of participants or conduct a matching test on a complete set of icons. Based on the test results, redesigning the icons that have poor recognition performance or matching performance (e.g., fail to reach at least 85% or 67% correct) should be done. In the end, icons that are redesigned should go through a comprehension test or matching test to ensure proper recognition performance.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors also would like to thank Li-Kai Tseng and Shin-Cheng Chen for their invaluable help during the development of the matching test program.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

