@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Context adaptable driver information – Or, what do whom need and want when?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           As guideline for design of context adaptive driver information systems or for optimization of display space.


                        
                        
                           
                           As a weight when evaluating future adaptive information systems.


                        
                        
                           
                           When deciding whether a function should be activated automatically or manually.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Adaptable

Driver information

Context

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study deals with a first step towards context adaptive functionality of a Driver Information System.
                  Driving a car is a complex task for which the driver needs appropriate information to fulfil his or her goals. New technologies enable adaptability to driver state, task, personality etcetera and also to the context.
                  The aim of this study was therefore to investigate what information people perceive that they need and want from the car in different contexts and to what extent there is consensus about the function. A new methodology was developed, and 33 private car drivers were interviewed and asked to rate a number of possible abstract functions in a car in different contexts.
                  It was shown that people need and want different types of information in different contexts. It was furthermore indicated that there is sometimes a difference in drivers' opinions about what should be presented by the car and that there is varying consensus over different functions in different contexts. The rating result was illustrated by an easily perceived Context Function Matrix. The results may be used in the design of a context adaptive driver information system.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the near future it will be necessary and expected, as well as possible to better support the driver in driving more safely, environmentally friendly, efficiently (cost and time) and legally, through new technology such as displays, sensor and connectivity (Davidsson et al., 2009). One of the most important and best available ways of doing this is probably to provide the driver with appropriate information.

An additional purpose of driver information is to support emotional aspects (comfort, perceived control, fun etc.) (Davidsson et al., 2009), meaning that some of the functions in the vehicle exist also or just because drivers 
                        perceive a need or desire for
                      them. They may find that the function is not needed for rational reasons but that it is “enjoyable” or “fun” or perhaps because “it used to be there”.

The real “need” of information may be most easily found in driver models such as the strategic, tactical and operational level of control model by Michon (1985), the SRK taxonomy by Rasmussen (1986) or collected from experts such as human factor experts, crash statisticians, safety analysts, green driving or engine experts. However, if a function is given low priority because it is not really needed from an expert point of view, the design or functionality may be experienced as poor. Furthermore, a function perceived as un-needed but that, from an expert's viewpoint, is important may require more design effort to motivate it.

These purposes, technology push and the fact that future cars have access to a huge amount of information gathered by car to car (C2C) or car to infrastructure (C2I) can, if not designed in a careful manner, result in a functional growth that may reach beyond drivers' capability. Showing all the information simultaneously would probably create distraction and inattention and make driving less safe, less environmentally friendly and so on because of visual, manual or cognitive distraction. (For a definition, see for instance Regan et al., 2009.)

One of the problems with previous and most of the current driver information system hardware is that it is inflexible. However, new display technology has enabled adaptability (and flexibility), and it may therefore be possible to better adapt to drivers' needs and desires.


                     Alfredson (2007) suggests that ideal system development should include a dynamic adaptation of interfaces to different input factors, such as current vehicle status, situational conditions and contextual prerequisites as well as the individual's status, operator performance and historical behavioural data. For instance, a tired driver and an alert driver, a daily trip to work and a holiday trip, a worn car and a new car and drivers with long and short response times may need different information. This dynamic adaptation may either be performed automatically by a dialogue manager with an increased risk for automation induced errors such as mode confusion and increased mental workload, or manually through interaction with the system with an increased risk for visual and manual distraction (Davidsson, 2009).

The scope of this study was therefore to take a first step towards dynamic adaptation by studying if and how different contexts require different information. For instance, how needed or wanted is a speedometer when the car is parked in a garage? A natural starting point is therefore to study how context can govern driver information functions. Another issue is of course the level of consensus among drivers about what information should be available and when it should be available.

The purpose of this study was therefore to investigate:
                        
                           •
                           whether drivers want or have a perceived need for different functions in different contexts (Q1),

what information different drivers perceive to be needed and wanted in different contexts (Q2),

the extent to which there is consensus about each function (Q3)

And to illustrate and make understandable the functions in the different contexts (Q4).

@&#METHOD@&#

The study was a combination of an interview and a rating of functions. The purpose of the interview was to try to make the participants think beyond today's design of cars and to gather data for an understanding about how people think in different contexts.

The numerical data in this study were not used for significance testing but rather for the purpose of analysing the function's levels of importance and level of consensus among car drivers.

The reason for this approach was that, when working with future functionality, it is necessary to have an understanding of how people think, rather than studying only what functionality they have today or what the functionality currently does. The intention of the numerical data was instead, in conjunction with the interview, to form an answer to the research questions.

Thirty-three Swedish private car drivers, 14 men and 19 women, participated. The participants were on average 42 years old; the minimum age was 20 and maximum age 69. The drivers' experience spanned between the categories of beginners to experienced drivers (Michon, 1993), and they were recruited in the Gothenburg region of Sweden.

The different contexts and functions were decided in a group discussion by five Safety and Human Machine Interaction (HMI) experts at Volvo Car Corporation and Luleå University of Technology. The experts were also used when developing the Context Function Matrix (CFM), heavily inspired by the Context Activity Template (CAT) by Naikar et al. (2005) (see Appendix 1). The CAT is included in the second level in Cognitive Work Analysis (CWA) (see for instance Vicente, 1999), which is called Activity Analysis.

The criteria for grouping contexts were threefold. First, the context groups should be easily distinguished from each other. Second, they should cover a whole “typical” trip from door to door. Third, they should offer some kind of information needed in the context to support the purposes mentioned in the objectives (not only safety).

The following context groups were established (a context group has different locations but similar road type).
                           
                              •
                              
                                 Before/After: Before/going to/entering the car/post driving.


                                 Car parking: When parked, in a car park or in a garage, looking for a parking place.


                                 City crossing: Intersection, traffic light, left turn across path, straight crossing path, roundabout.


                                 Highway crossings: Intersection, red light, left turn across path, straight crossing path, roundabout.


                                 Straight highway driving: Drifting, lane change merge, negotiating a curve.


                                 Queue: Driving in a queue.

Nine pictures (3 × 3 matrix) illustrating one context group were displayed on a paperboard. Among the different participants, the pictures were randomly mixed on the board to avoid order effects. The pictures showed different viewing angles such as from inside the car and a bird's eye view. See Fig. 1
                        . The contexts “queue” and “before/after” driving were found difficult to illustrate by pictures. Instead, written text was used.

A simulation interview was conducted, inspired by the Applied Cognitive Task Analysis (ACTA) method (Militello and Hutton, 1998). The simulation interview is a walkthrough, a mental simulation, of driving in or through the specific context, after which the participants are asked to think of what they do, how they do it, what they find difficult and what they feel. The interview was not biased towards safety or green driving or any other attribute.

Most of the participants were interviewed in two contexts but some in only one, due to time constraints. There were ten participants in each of the six contexts, which gave a total of 60 interviews. The duration of each interview was in general between half an hour and 1 h.


                        Davidsson et al. (2009) decomposed the functional purpose of driving information by using the first step in Cognitive Work Analysis (CWA) called Work Domain Analysis (WDA) described in for instance Vicente (1999). This decomposition was used to define the functions, and the second lowest level of abstraction, called physical function, was used. The 70 physical functions can be found in the FCM in Appendix 1.

A grading scale from 1 to 5 was used. (1 = not important, 5 = very important). In addition, a “waste bin” was provided for functions not applicable, inappropriate or considered dangerous.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Each interview followed the procedure described below in which numbers 1–4 represent the simulation interview.
                           
                              1.
                              The participant sat down in front of the board with pictures.

The participants were given instructions:
                                    
                                       a.
                                       Look at the pictures on the board (see Fig. 1) for a few minutes.

Think of what you are doing in a context like this.

Think of what is easy or hard for you in this context.

Consider that the traffic flow, road and time could be different from what you see.

Can you divide what you are doing into phases, going from the red to the green dot (provided on the pictures)?

Think of how you usually feel in this kind of context.

The participants were left alone for 5 min.

They were asked to describe what they did in a context like this. Notes were taken.
                                    
                                       a.
                                       Describe what you do in this type of context and what strategy you have.

What is important for you in this type of context?

What is the most positive thing about driving in this type of context?

What is the most negative thing about driving in this type of context?

Can you name any information that you would like to have from the car in this type of context?

Grading of physical functions. Notes were taken.
                                    
                                       a.
                                       The participants were asked to “grade the function from 1 to 5, where 5 is very important and 1 is not important; if the function is not applicable, inappropriate or dangerous for the context, put it in the waste bin”.

The participant was given instructions to say the name and number of the physical function, to think aloud and to ask questions if the function was not understood.

The participant took a card on which the physical function was printed from a randomly mixed stack of cards, read the physical function and the number aloud (then often looked at and browsed the pictures) and decided which grade to give the function. The card was put in a cup below the pictures (see Fig. 1).

If the participant put a comment, notes were taken.

The participants were then shown gratitude for their participation. No monetary compensation was given.

After the interview, the data were gathered and the average, standard deviation and percentage of waste calculated (See a few examples in Table 1
                        ). The different functions were then arranged in the CFM as described in Fig. 2
                        .

@&#RESULTS@&#

Because of the large number of functions (70), Table 1 shows only a selection of the grades from the grading exercise. The complete table of results can be acquired from the author upon request.

Not surprisingly, the results indicate that drivers want or need different functions in different contexts. One way of analysing the data is to follow the function through the different contexts, for instance, the function “Show where the roads are heading in the next intersection” (See CFM in Appendix 1 or Fig. 2).

Before and after driving, this information is of little use to the driver (M = 1.3, SD = 0.6, W = 70%). In the car park or in the garage, the drivers start to prepare for their departure. Some found the information interesting, but most believed that it was of no help (M = 2.8, SD = 1.3, W = 50%). At the highway crossing, the grades indicate both that drivers wanted and/or needed the information and that there was consensus about it (M = 4.2, SD = 1.3, W = 10%). On the straight highway, the driver again found the information less important (M = 2.7, SD = 1.1, W = 10%). If the driver ended up in a queue, the grading increased somewhat again (M = 3.1, SD = 1.4, W = 10%). From the notes taken, it is understood that the driver wants to solve the queue problem by finding another route to the destination. At the city crossing, drivers again found this information useful (M = 3.8, SD = 1.2, W = 0%), as in the case of the highway crossing.

The grades (M = 3.2, SD = 1.4, W = 28) for all contexts for this particular function reveal nothing more than that it is rather useful for these particular contexts since the contexts are not weighted and all possible contexts are not included in the results. However, if the standard deviation was lower, such as in the case with the function “Show that there are queues on the way to the destination” (M = 4.0, SD = 1.0, W = 10%), it could be interpreted that the function is useful in more or less all contexts.

These are a few examples, but the way of analysing a function may be the same for all.

Before driving, functions of a more strategic character are graded high: “warn for slippery road conditions”, “show outdoor temperature”, “warn for slippery road conditions on the way to the destination”, “show fuel level”, “show distance to empty tank”, “show alternative roads to the destination”, “show information about dangerous roads”, “show estimated time of arrival”, “show that there are queues on the way to the destination”, “show recommended speed due to road conditions, visibility” and “show tire pressure in the different tires”.

However, the consensus is low for many of the functions. For instance, “show recommended speed due to road conditions” was graded to be important, although three out of ten participants stated that they did not want the function at all (M = 4.2, SD = 0.4, W = 50%).

On the other hand, functions such as “show coming traffic signs”, “show that you are unintentionally changing lane”, “warn if the car enters a curve at too high a speed”, “show if there is a traffic light soon”, “show other cars in an intersection”, “show when it is permitted to take over”, “show road grip in relation to how much you turn” are rated very low with a high consensus. These are mainly tactical and operational, which is of course of less use in this context.

The open end answers such as “before long trips”, “when planning a trip”, “plan when to fill up the tank”, “plan when to eat” and “before you go” together with the grading reveal that this is information that is used for strategic decisions and long term planning. In some cases, the comments also deal with feedback from the car, for instance “compare how fast you drove at permitted speed” or “good to have statistics afterwards”.

In the case of parking, information close to the vehicle is more interesting to the driver. Functions such as “show a top view of the car and its close proximity”, “show free parking places” and “show near view behind the car” are among the top grades. These functions can be considered tactical and/or operational. There is consensus about the first two functions mentioned above. However, the latter show a lower consensus. Some mentioned that they “wanted to see for themselves”, which may explain why they did not want information from the car. Interestingly, speed came in 26th place, although with a low consensus.

“Lap time”, “show cruise control set speed”, “ability to watch movie”, “show when it is permitted to take over”, “show engine oil temperature” and “show average speed” were given the lowest scores but had a high consensus.

Open end comments such as “important to see what the time is”, “plan the trip” and “plan for slippery road conditions” indicate that the functions should primarily be useful before strategic decisions. Together with the high grades described above, this shows that the most important information is both strategic and operational.

In a highway intersection, the drivers want and need functions such as “show if there are cars in the blind spot”, “warn for slippery road conditions”, “improve night vision”, “warn if the car enters a curve at too high a speed”, “show where the roads are heading in the next intersection”, “show recommended speed due to road conditions, visibility etc.”, “inform that you are driving too close to the vehicle ahead”, “show what the next intersection looks like” and “show alternative roads to the destination”. It seems that the driver needs and wants information on all three levels when approaching an intersection. There was high consensus among the participants about which information is useful and desired.

“Ability to surf on the Internet”, “show free parking places”, “show engine oil temperature”, “show engine oil pressure”, “lap time”, “show start time for parking heater” and “remind that the car needs regular service” received the lowest grades. As among the top graded functions, there is a consensus that these functions are of less use when driving in intersections.

“Stressful to find the right way”, “Great, this is where accidents happen” and “Affect my speed” indicate that the information needed is of a more tactical character than for parking and for before and after driving.

The functions are mainly strategic or tactical. “Show speed” was given the highest grade. Functions such as “warn for slippery road conditions”, “improve night vision”, “show fuel level”, “warn for slippery road conditions on the way to the destination”, “warn for being distracted (e.g. looking away for a long time)”, “show alternative roads to the destination (in the case of queues or accidents)” and “show recommended speed due to road conditions, visibility etc.” were also given a high grade. There was high consensus among the drivers that these functions are important.

The lowest rankings were given to “show engine oil temperature”, “learn the car's different functions and systems”, “show start time for parking heater”, “show how fast the car accelerates”, “ability to watch movie” and “ability to play games”. The consensus for these functions was also rather high.

A queue is different from the other contexts. It could perhaps better be described as a situational condition rather than a context. Nevertheless, the most important functions while driving in a queue are: “show alternative roads to the destination”, “show that there are queues on the way to the destination”, “show that an accident has occurred on the way to the destination”, “show a map of where you are”, “show the current time” and “show where the roads are heading in the next intersection”. It seems that the drivers need strategic information and support in order to solve the problem themselves.

Interestingly, functions such as “ability to play game”, “ability to surf on the Internet” or “ability to watch a movie” were rated rather high. However, there were high standard deviations, which indicates low consensus.

The functions that were graded lowest were mainly related to speed, which gives information about something that the driver in fact lacks. These were functions such as “warn if the car enters a curve at too high a speed”, “show how fast or slow you have to drive to get a green light”, “show information about speed cameras”, “show cruise control set speed” and “show how fast the car accelerates”. Speedometer came in 24th place.

“Something to entertain myself with”, “at least something to do” and “something to play with” show that drivers can accept some functions that they normally would not.

Show if there are cars in the blind spot”, “improve night vision”, “show alternative roads to the destination”, “show that an accident has occurred on the way to the destination”, “show that you are driving close to a school”, “help recognize other nearby vehicles” and “warn for slippery road conditions” were functions that received high grades. Similar to the case of highway intersections, the consensus on the functions is high.

There was a high consensus about the lowest grades: “show engine coolant temperature”, “show oil level in engine”, “show engine oil temperature”, “measure time”, “show travel distance in total” and “show engine oil pressure”.

Notes were taken during the grading. These notes help to explain why the participants gave the grade they did and the preferred source of the information: car, driver, road authority etc. The notes can be acquired from the author upon request. However, a few examples are provided below.

Example: Function/Context: “Note”
                              
                                 •
                                 Show fuel level/Before and after: “If you have to leave earlier, for planning”

Show that you are close to a school/Straight highway driving: “There are signs about this” (indicates that the participant prefers a sign instead of in-vehicle information)

Show information about dangerous roads/Straight highway driving: “Want to see in reality” (indicates that the participant prefers to see for him/herself rather than using in-car information)

When looking into the data the research team recognized a pattern. This pattern resulted in an easily understood metaphor, to be further developed and validated, for how the participants graded the functions and can be seen as a “zoom lens” (See Fig. 3
                        ). Before, when planning the trip, the driver zooms out to make strategic decisions about the trip. In the parking area, the driver zooms into the closest proximity of the vehicle. Then, on the highway, the driver again zooms out. What is going on next to the car is not important. When the driver approaches an intersection, the tactical positioning is more important and the driver zooms in again but not to the closest proximity.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS@&#

The first research question was whether drivers want or have a perceived need for different functions in different contexts (Q1), The interviews, function grading and open end answers in the study gave an indication that drivers have different perceived needs and desires in different driving contexts. A function, very important in one context, can be of no or little use in another context.

An interview and a rating of abstract functions were carried out to investigate what information different drivers perceive to be needed and wanted in different contexts (Q2). The ratings gave a hint about what functions are needed or wanted and the standard deviation indicated to the extent to which there is consensus about each function (Q3).

A CFM was created to illustrate the information needed in different contexts in a simple way for designers (Q4). The CFM can be utilized in the design of new context adaptive driver information interfaces. For instance, in queue driving, an explanation for why there is queue may be a way to solve the problem by perhaps giving re-routing information, while speed is of less importance. Drivers also want to be able to reduce the negative effects of queueing by for instance visual entertainment.

It is indicated that there are differences between different persons' opinions about what or who should provide the information for some of the functions. Should it be the car, the road authority or the driver him/herself? Some wanted for the most part to see for themselves and did not believe that a system could help them, and others preferred “systems” for almost everything. Perhaps different ways to enable these kinds of functions for a driver, ranging from option at purchase to a check box in the settings menu, can be an appropriate solution.

This phenomenon may be illustrated by the function “help to recognize other nearby vehicles” in the “highway crossing” context. The function received a high grade, a high variance and two participants put the function in the waste bin (M = 4.0, SD = 1.1, W = 20%). It is likely that this function may help some, annoy some and even be found inappropriate by others.

One explanation for this difference between participants may be found in the taxonomy for “locus of control” (Rotter, 1966). Locus of control is defined as a personality attribute reflecting the degree to which a person generally perceives events to be under his or her own control (internal locus of control) or under the control of external forces (external locus of control). Research has shown that locus of control is one of the most crucial psychological factors determining drivers' acceptance of new in-vehicle technologies (Rudin-Brown and Noy, 2002).

When designing context adaptive information systems, is it important also to have consensus about the contexts. In this study, before and after driving were merged into one context. However, the results showed that the information wanted and needed before driving and after driving is sometimes completely different. This made it difficult for the participants to give a grade that was equal for both before and after. Consequently, the participants used different strategies when they graded functions, such as “average between the two” or “a five – if before”. This indicates that the context is “weak”, and a split of the context may be suggested.

The usefulness of the outcome may be divided into two parts: the result in itself and the method.

More available information and a higher demand on performance require, and flexible display technology enables, context adaptive driver information. The results can be used as a guideline for design of context adaptive driver information systems or for optimization of display space. For instance, functions that are perceived to be less important can be made less salient and those that are more important more salient in different contexts.

The results, and in particular the grades, could possibly also be used as a weight when evaluating future adaptive information systems. For instance, a system that has a high score for the function “show speed” in a parking context still gets a weighted score that is low.

In an adaptive driver information interface, when deciding how a function should be activated (automatically or manually) and if the design should be individualized, the system designer may look at the standard deviation. A large standard deviation can indicate low consensus about the function and, consequently, some of the drivers may be surprised or annoyed by receiving this information automatically. Furthermore, a large standard deviation may therefore also put forward that the design should be individualized.

The method, changing the level of abstraction in both context and function, was an attempt to make participants think beyond the common functions and specific contexts that may be further developed and used in the development of, for instance, future In-Vehicle Information Systems (IVIS). Methodological considerations are further discussed below.

It was necessary to be somewhat creative in designing this study in terms of the balancing act between being too user centred and being too expert oriented. The following section considers the challenges and describes the solutions.

A previous CWA was used to identify and formulate the functions in the interview. Normally, when performing a CWA, the designer of the system has to move outside the user community to get input for the design (Burns and Hajdukiewicz, 2004). The idea is to provide the user with a greater level of support than if the data collected came from users solely via, for instance, surveys, as in a User Centred Design (UCD) approach. In this study, the safety and HMI experts defined the different physical functions and the different contexts, but real users were used to grade and give comments. The reason for this mixture was that real users may have more than rational reasons, wants, perceived needs or desires, for ranking a function high or low, while experts are perhaps better at judging real needs. This dimension needs to be considered, since private cars are consumer products and purchase involves emotions that are not always rational.

To make the test participants better decision makers, it was important to support them in identifying central attributes, such as safety or environment friendliness (Wickens, 1992). Furthermore, it was important to make the participants think of what they do, how they do it, what they find difficult and what their feelings are, to make the grading of the functions better.

There are of course more possible contexts than the few that were chosen and, depending on the use of the results, other contexts could have been included. This study's contexts were decided by HMI and safety experts, and the contexts are thus possibly more important from a safety perspective. However, the pictures on the board were as unbiased as possible and did not show anything particularly problematic or hazardous. The reason for this was that the study was about the drivers' own experience. For instance, if a picture was shown of someone in an accident, the participants may have increased their acceptance for an accident avoiding system.

As this was a first study regarding context dependant information it was natural to start in Sweden. However, the between subjects design allow for other contexts and other regions.

The reasons for showing pictures, and showing them simultaneously, were threefold: first, in order to get a grading from a generic context rather than from one specific one, it was necessary to present several examples of the family of one context; second, we wanted to avoid serial position effects (e.g. Wickens, 1992) that may occur if the contexts are presented in sequence, such as in a movie; third, the pace at which a driving task is performed may be important. If the participant is presented a movie in which someone else is driving, the pace could be different from the participant's own, and this may well have an effect on the result.

There are indications that this worked as intended. The participants browsed the board and did not seem to favour any of the pictures. They discussed the whole sequence of the context, they mentioned events in their own experience that could be applied to the pictures and they discussed their own pace in similar situations.

An important challenge was how to illustrate the functions to reduce bias from well-known functions. An approach was needed that gave the less used, very new or more complex functions a reasonable chance. Shifting the representation from a low, detailed level (physical form) to a higher level of abstraction with less resolution can make complexity look simpler. Put metaphorically, moving up one or two levels allows drivers to “see the forest for the trees” (Vicente, 1999). In addition, when creating a CAT, the abstraction is on the general function level (GF). However, this level seemed to be too abstract for the users to understand.

It also seemed that the participants lost their ability to judge their “wants” the more abstract the function became; they became experts.

The trade-off between being too abstract to be understood, bias of well-known systems and how the CAT is usually carried out amounted to choosing the abstraction level, physical function (PF).

Using the abstract level of physical function rather than physical form or general function also seemed to have worked as intended, but it is difficult to see how well. One indicator was that, instead of just grading the function without much thought, the participants gave the impression of thinking twice before giving their grade and they moved sometimes up and sometimes down one level of abstraction, just as intended. A second indicator was that very common functions such as “show speed” showed great differences in how they were graded in the different contexts.

Nevertheless, a more extensive comparison between the two ways of presenting the functions would be appropriate.

One constraint when designing driver information is that some functions are mandatory from a legal perspective. In this study, however, participants were able to rate even “legally necessary” functions low.

The participants were interviewed in only one or two contexts (between subjects design). The reason for this test design was threefold: first, to keep the time spent on each interview within reasonable limits and, secondly, to be able to add contexts afterwards. Finally, the pilot study showed that participants, if interviewed in more than two contexts, also included the transition between the different contexts, which was not intended. The transition between two sets of information may be regarded as an automation challenge; this is discussed for instance by Davidsson (2009).

The effect of the test design and the limited project resources resulted in a small number of participants in each context, which of course poses limitations to the statistical analysis when comparing the contexts.

A scale from 1 to 5 (1 = not important, 5 = very important) without a waste bin would not have worked since a function could be worse than “not important”. A function could also be not applicable, inappropriate or dangerous, and the waste bin was added for this reason. For instance, “show speed” may be considered not to be applicable before driving and after driving and “ability to surf on the Internet” may be inappropriate and dangerous while driving in an intersection.

As a consequence, the size of the population varied in almost every function, which makes it more difficult to calculate different statistical measures. However, the statistics and the open ended answers may together give an answer about whether and how well a function suits a particular context.

The question “show average speed” was repeated (functions 14 and 77) to judge whether the participants were able to give a similar grade twice. The difference between the mean values is small with one exception: HC. However, this indicates that the respondents reason in much the same way. Details also reveal that only one participant had a greater difference than one grading step between the two questions in HC.

The number of respondents was limited to ten persons in each context. To validate the methodology further, it is recommended that at least one context category be repeated with a greater number of participants.

Driver Information that adapts to current vehicle status, situational conditions and contextual prerequisites etcetera may be a future dream. This study aimed to get beyond drivers' current needs and describes a perhaps new approach to represent functions and contexts and a new way to grade functions. The study resulted in a context function matrix and a zoom metaphor useful for future context adaptive driver information. The novel approach, limited number of participants, number of contexts and that the research only took place in one country implies that further research is needed.


                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

