@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effect of touch-key size on the usability of In-Vehicle Information Systems and driving safety during simulated driving

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The effect of touch-key sizes on the usability of IVIS's and driving safety was experimentally investigated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Both the measurements for usability of IVIS’s and driving safety increased with increased touch-key sizes.


                        
                        
                           
                           However, the measurements for usability and driving safety reached an asymptote beyond certain touch-key sizes.


                        
                        
                           
                           The appropriated touch-key size considering both the usability and the safety was derived.


                        
                        
                           
                           Fitts’ law analysis was performed under dual-task (pointing task while simulated driving).


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Touch-key size

In-Vehicle Information System

Touch-screen

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Investigating the effect of touch-key size on usability of In-Vehicle Information Systems (IVISs) is one of the most important research issues since it is closely related to safety issues besides its usability. This study investigated the effects of the touch-key size of IVISs with respect to safety issues (the standard deviation of lane position, the speed variation, the total glance time, the mean glance time, the mean time between glances, and the mean number of glances) and the usability of IVISs (the task completion time, error rate, subjective preference, and NASA-TLX) through a driving simulation. A total of 30 drivers participated in the task of entering 5-digit numbers with various touch-key sizes while performing simulated driving. The size of the touch-key was 7.5 mm, 12.5 mm, 17.5 mm, 22.5 mm and 27.5 mm, and the speed of driving was set to 0 km/h (stationary state), 50 km/h and 100 km/h. As a result, both the driving safety and the usability of the IVISs increased as the touch-key size increased up to a certain size (17.5 mm in this study), at which they reached asymptotes. We performed Fitts' law analysis of our data, and this revealed that the data from the dual task experiment did not follow Fitts' law.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In-Vehicle Information Systems (IVISs) have gained in popularity for drivers over the last few years. In general, IVISs include navigation systems, entertainment systems such as music/video players and satellite broadcasting receivers, and various car management systems. IVISs are operated mainly by virtual controls on touch-screen interfaces, by physical controls such as knobs and buttons, or by voice recognition systems. Among these methods, especially for aftermarket products, touch-screen interfaces are the most prevailing methods for operating IVISs. A touch-screen interface is one of the most natural and intuitive interfaces, and typical input is a natural pointing gesture; as a result, training is minimized (Greenstein, 1997; Scott and Conzola, 1997). In addition, they require no additional input devices such as physical keys or a mouse; therefore, the dimension of a device can be minimized (Holzinger, 2003; Scott and Conzola, 1997). Furthermore, the interface design is very flexible; the layout, dimensions and number of touch-keys are limited only by the dimension of the touch-screen size.

In most cases, touch-screen interfaces, especially for IVISs, are manipulated by fingers. For finger interactions, Pfauth and Priest (1981) identified that the touch-key size is the main factor in the design of the touch-screen interfaces. As the touch-key size decreases below a certain level, usability measurements such as the task completion time, accuracy, and subjective ratings are significantly degraded compared to physical keys. This degradation could be attributed to a lack of tactile feedback (there is no engraved surface between neighboring keys) and visual feedback (the target is occluded by the fingers). Many studies that focus on touch-key sizes have been conducted on relatively large touch-screen interfaces such as kiosks and ATM machines, which are mainly manipulated by the index finger (Bender, 1999; Beringer, 1990; Colle and Hiszem, 2004; Hall et al., 1988; Scott and Conzola, 1997; Sears, 1991), and on small interfaces such as PDAs and mobile phones, which focus on one-handed thumb uses (Parhi et al., 2006; Park and Han, 2010; Perry and Hourcade, 2008). However, as far as the authors are aware, there is no published study of touch-key sizes that focuses on IVISs.

The purpose of the previous studies on the touch-key size was mostly to investigate the effect of the touch-key size on the usability of the touch-screen interfaces and to, thereby, determine the proper touch-key sizes for specific touch-screen devices. However, a study on the touch-key size for IVISs needs to focus on the driving safety together with the usability of the IVISs. Interacting with IVISs is often a secondary task that is performed while conducting a primary task, which is driving. According to the multiple-resource theory of attention, humans have only a limited amount of attention that is available at any given time (Navon and Gopher, 1979; Wickens, 1984). When users perform a secondary task while conducting a primary task, the amount of attention to the primary task is reduced, and the performance of both the primary and secondary task is decreased (Sanders and McComick, 1993; Vollrath and Trotzke, 2000). The performance degradation in the secondary task becomes larger as the demand for resources made by the primary task increases (Sanders and McComick, 1993). The result of Tsimhoni et al. (2004) is an example, of how the secondary task performance (in terms of task completion time for entering address into a navigation system) decreased as the primary task workload of driving (in terms of road curvature) increased. The performance degradation in dual tasks was found to be amplified when both the primary and secondary tasks required the same human resources (Brookhuis et al., 1991; Lee, 2007; Schweitzer and Green, 2007; Sodnik et al., 2008; Tsimhoni et al., 2004). Lee (2007) showed that text messaging while driving could interfere with driving much more than conversing on a mobile phone. Brookhuis et al. (1991) empirically showed that manual input while driving causes more interference on driving than conversing on a mobile phone. Sodnik et al. (2008) experimentally showed that the visual interface of text messaging and calling causes more interference with driving and also causes a higher workload for the users compared with an auditory interface. Tsimhoni et al. (2004) showed that, when drivers use a touch-screen keyboard to enter addresses while driving, the lateral deviation and the number of lane crossings was higher than when a voice recognition system was used. Interacting with IVISs while driving is definitely a case in which the primary and secondary tasks are performed simultaneously and require the same human resources, such as visual processing, cognitive processing and motor control. In line with the above fact, many studies have reported that driving performance decreased and safety risks increased when the participants were interacting with IVISs while driving (Alm and Nilsson, 1995; Glcukman et al., 1988; Gopher, 1990; Horrey et al., 2006; Hosking et al., 2009; Janelle et al., 1999; Salvucci, 2001; Salvucci et al., 2007). In such a risky case, an improper touch-key size could increase the level of difficulty of interacting with IVISs and could lead to a further increase in interference to driving. In turn, improper touch-key sizes could not only decrease the usability of IVISs but also increase the safety risks. Strictly speaking, it might be most desirable not to use IVISs while driving. However, considering the current trend of private vehicles becoming mobile offices, using the IVISs while driving is inevitable in spite of the safety risks (Sodnik et al., 2008).

Another interesting issue that is related to pointing tasks is Fitts' law (Fitts, 1954). Fitts' law has been widely used in the field of Human–Computer Interaction to quantify the performance of human pointing tasks by logarithmically relating the movement time, the target width and the movement amplitude. Fitts' law works well for a variety of user interfaces in which various body parts are used to interact with different input devices and targets (Mackenzie, 1992). There are also several studies that investigated Fitts' law specifically in touch-screen devices (Bender, 1999; Colle and Hiszem, 2004; Mackenzie and Zhang, 2001; Parhi et al., 2006; Sears, 1991; Sears and Shneiderman, 1991; Sears and Zha, 2003). Bender (1999) investigated target acquisition tasks that used a numeric keypad with touch-key sizes of 10 × 10 mm and 30 × 30 mm and performed Fitts' law analysis. The results were consistent with the predictions of Fitts' law. Mackenzie and Zhang (2001) investigated typing tasks that used a touch-keypad with key-sizes of 6.4 × 6.4 mm and 10 × 10 mm. The results from the analysis of the entry speed and key-size were also consistent with the Fitts' law prediction. Parhi et al. (2006) explored single-target pointing tasks on small touchscreen devices, and the results are consistent with Fitts' law. While the results of these studies were consistent with Fitts' law, there were few studies of touch-key pointing tasks that were not consistent with Fitts' law (Colle and Hiszem, 2004; Sears, 1991; Sears and Shneiderman, 1991; Sears and Zha, 2003). This inconsistency could arise because cursor pointing with a touch-screen is inherently different than pointing with most other devices (Sears and Shneiderman, 1991). In other words, when compared to traditional pointing tasks, touch-key pointing tasks required choice (visual scanning) and motor programming processes in addition to movement (Colle and Hiszem, 2004). All of these studies were performed in the context of the single task of pointing to touch-keys, although the results of the previous studies were dissimilar; however, there were no studies that investigated it in the context of dual tasks, especially for interacting with IVISs while driving. Under dual task conditions, humans cannot fully concentrate on the secondary task (interacting with IVISs) because their attention is allocated to both the primary task and the secondary task. The time that is required to achieve the secondary task is limited because they must drive safely simultaneously. For this reason, the results from the dual tasks are not expected to be in line with Fitts' law. Fitts' law analysis of our data was performed in the discussion section.

In this study, the effects of the touch-key size on driving safety together with the usability of IVISs were experimentally investigated through driving simulation. Specifically, the standard deviation of the lane position, speed variation, and glance behavior were investigated with respect to driving safety, and the task completion time, error rate, subjective preference and workload (NASA-TLX) were measured with respect to the usability of IVISs. Additionally, we performed Fitts' law analysis on our data.

@&#METHODS@&#

A total of thirty participants (graduate and undergraduate students of Pohang University of Science and Technology, 7 females and 23 males) with legal driving licenses voluntarily participated in the experiment. All of the participants had at least a half year of driving experience (range: 1–15 years, mean: 4.7 years, standard deviation: 3.7 years), and their ages were between 22 and 38 years (mean: 28 years, standard deviation: 3.6 years). All of the participants had normal (or corrected to normal) vision without any motor impairments.

The experiment was conducted with a desktop computer that was equipped with the Windows XP Professional OS, a 17-inch LCD touch-screen monitor (dwcom17s, Digital Window Communication) with a resolution of 1280 × 1024 and a dot pitch of 0.264 mm, a beam projector (SONY), a 1.9 m × 1.4 m screen, a driving wheel and pedal (Logitech Wingman Formula Force GP, Fig. 2) and a camcorder (Samsung vm-hmx 10a). The experimental environment was composed of the simulated driving software and the IVIS prototype, which was developed using Microsoft Visual Studio 2005 (Fig. 1
                        
                        ).

The simulated driving environment was projected onto the 1.9 m × 1.4 m screen by using a beam projector. The simulated road was a three-lane road with a width of 15 m (5 m per lane). The real size of the expressway in Korea is approximately 3.6 m. However, in this study, to compensate for the decreased spatial perception in 2D simulated driving, a wider road was presented. The participants drove on the middle lane of the road. The size of the car in the simulated driving software was determined by considering the car model of a BMW M5 (maximum width: 2146 mm, maximum length: 4856 mm). The performance of the car was designed for drivers to feel as if they were in a real car (maximum velocity: 225 km/h, maximum acceleration: 25 km/s2, maximum deceleration: −12 km/s2, and acceleration with friction from air resistance = acceleration − 0.004 × velocity). Fig. 3
                         shows the layout of the simulated driving environment when viewed from the driver's seat. A 5-digit number that the participants must enter was provided on the top left corner of the screen. The real-time driving speed of each participant was shown at the bottom center of the screen.

The IVIS prototype was presented on the 17-inch monitor with a resolution of 1280 pixel × 1024 pixel. The center of a 17-inch monitor was located 35 cm right and 26 cm behind from the center of the driving wheel, which was decided by surveying conventional cars from Korean car manufacturers. Fig. 4
                         shows the layout of the IVIS prototype: (a) shows the 5-digit number that is presented to the participants in the simulated driving environment, (b) shows the actual number that is entered by the participants. The size of the keypad (c) is 153.1 mm × 92.0 mm (7-inch), which is the most popular display size on the Korean IVIS market. The backspace button (d) is presented for the correction of the wrong inputs.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

This experiment used a two-factor (touch-key size × driving speed) within-subject factorial design. To avoid any transfer, learning or fatigue effect, a balanced Latin Square presentation order was used. Each experimental condition was presented to each participant once.

The independent variables manipulated in this experiment were the touch-key size (SIZE, 5 levels) and the driving speed (SPEED, 3 levels). The touch-keys were square-shaped with varying SIZEs, starting at 7.5 mm, and the size range also included the same size that was used for commercial IVISs. To determine the largest SIZE, a preliminary experiment was conducted with the participants performing the digit-input task during the simulated driving (100 km/h). From the results of the preliminary experiment, the largest SIZE was determined to be 27.5 mm, which was sufficiently larger than SIZEs (mostly 17.5 mm and sometimes 12.5 mm or 22.5 mm), beyond which no performance improvement was observed in the task completion time and error rate. The SIZE was incremented by 5 mm, with an initial size of 7.5 mm. The final set of the SIZEs included the following: 7.5 mm, 12.5 mm, 17.5 mm, 22.5 mm, and 27.5 mm. Additionally, the SPEED was set to three states: the stationary state (0 km/h), the highest speed limit of a Korean highway (100 km/h), and the midpoint of the two states (50 km/h).

The dependent variables were classified into ‘usability of IVIS’ and ‘driving safety’. First, in the category of usability of IVIS, the task completion time (TIME), error rate (ERROR), NASA-TLX, and subjective preference (PREF) for each SIZE were measured. TIME was defined as the time required to complete the task of entering a 5-digit number, and the data collection was started when the Task/Driving convert button was pressed and was stopped when the button was pressed again. ERROR was defined as the sum of the incorrect-not-fixed touches (INF) and incorrect-fixed touches (IF) divided by the total number of touches, and the total number of touches were the sum of the correct touches (C), INF and IF (Soukoreff and MacKenzie, 2003). ERROR was collected during the same time interval as TIME. NASA-TLX is a subjective workload assessment tool, and it derives an overall workload score that is based on a weighted average of the ratings on six subscales (mental demands, physical demands, temporal demands, performance, effort level, and frustration level). PREF is a subjective preference evaluated by the participants on each touch-key size which is scored between 0 and 100 points. Second, in the category of driving safety, the standard deviation of the lane position (SDLP), the speed variation (SV), and four measurements related to the glance were measured. The measurements for the driving safety that are used to measure the safety-relevant distraction effects were derived by referring to Tijerina (2000) because the driving safety cannot be measured directly except in retrospect (Dingus, 1997). SDLP is the standard deviation of the lateral position of the car while performing the task of entering a 5-digit number. The data collection was started when the Task/Driving convert button was pressed and was stopped when it was pressed again. SV is the standard deviation of the car speed while performing the task of entering a 5-digit number, and the data collection time was taken at the same time as SDLP. Glance is defined as the behavior that drivers turn their eyes off the road to other objects (IVIS in this study) for a short period of time and turn back their eyes to the road (Society of Automotive Engineers, 1999; Stanton, 2012). Glances were analyzed through video analysis that was performed by one person, and a glance began when the participant's eyes left the road and ended when the participant's eyes left the IVIS to look back at the road. Measurements related to a glance were the total glance time, the mean glance time, the mean time between glances, and the mean number of glances. Total glance time was defined as the total amount of glance time while entering a 5-digit number. Mean glance time is mean time for each glance. Mean time between glances is mean time between two consecutive glances. Mean number of glances is mean number of glances while entering a 5-digit number.

The experiment consists of five steps. First, the experimenter collected each participant's demographic information, such as driving experience and eyesight. Second, we explained the purpose, the procedure and the tasks in the experiment. Third, the participants performed practice trials to become familiar with the simulated driving and IVIS prototype. Fourth, in the main experiment, the participants were instructed to accelerate the car to the given speed (one of 0, 50, and 100 km/h). While the participants were driving at the given speed, a 5-digit number that should be entered was presented at the top left corner of the screen. We considered the average human's working memory and determined a 5-digit number that was under Miller's magic number 7 ± 2 (Miller, 1956). The participants were told to memorize the 5-digit number because, in a real driving situation, drivers usually “recall” the information that they want to enter rather than copy the information. Next, the participants pressed the button on the driving wheel (Fig. 2) to start entering the 5-digit number, and the stopwatch was initiated. The participants were instructed to enter the number as quickly and accurately as possible and to use only the index finger of their right hand. If the participants entered wrong numbers, then they could correct the numbers by using the backspace button of the IVIS prototype. After entering the 5-digit number, the participants pressed the button again to signify the completion of the task, and the stopwatch was stopped. Finally, TIME, which is the time interval between the two button presses, was automatically saved in each participant's log-file. A beep sound was presented whenever the button was pressed. All of the experimental procedures (focusing on the participants' eyes) were recorded by a camcorder for the video analysis of “glance”. The participants performed a total of nine trials (entering a 5-digit number/trial) for each experimental condition (SIZE × SPEED). The nine number sets were the same across all of the experimental conditions, but the presentation order was randomized in each experimental condition. The following shows the instruction given to the participants:
                           
                              •
                              Avoid crossing the lane while driving and entering the numbers (the first priority).

Stay as close to the middle of the road as possible

Enter the numbers as quickly and as accurately as possible.

The participants evaluated NASA-TLX for the completion of each experimental condition, and at the end of all of the experimental conditions, the participants evaluated PREF for each SIZE on a paper with real-sized touch-keys. During the experiment, the participants were allowed to rest whenever they wanted.

@&#RESULTS@&#

An ANOVA was performed for the dependent variables regarding the usability of IVIS (Table 1
                        ). For the significant main effects, a Student Newman–Keuls (SNK) test was conducted as a post-hoc analysis. For the significant interaction, a simple effect test was conducted. In general, the usability of IVIS increased as SIZE increased and SPEED decreased.

For TIME, the trials with at least one error, whether corrected or not, were eliminated from the data set, and the mean of the remaining trials was computed for each experimental condition (SIZE × SPEED). As a result of the ANOVA, there was a significant effect of SIZE (F (4,116) = 88.34) and of SPEED (F (2,58) = 47.92). TIME for the SPEEDs of 0 km/h, 50 km/h and 100 km/h were 3.8 s, 5.7 s, and 6.9 s, respectively, which were significantly different from one another. SIZE of 7.5 mm (8.0 s) showed the longest TIME followed by 12.5 mm (5.6 s). There was no significant difference in TIME for SIZEs of 17.5 mm (5.0 s), 22.5 mm (4.4 s), and 27.5 mm (4.3 s) (Fig. 5
                           ).

ERROR was significantly affected by SIZE (F (4,116) = 78.48) but not by SPEED (F (2,58) = 2.71). ERROR appeared to decrease as SIZE increased. SIZE of 7.5 mm (0.15) showed the highest ERROR and there was no significant difference among SIZEs of 12.5 mm (0.03), 17.5 mm (0.01), 22.5 mm (0.01), and 27.5 mm (0.01). SIZE significantly interacted with SPEED (F (8,232) = 4.32). When SIZE was 7.5 mm, 0 km/h showed the lowest ERROR, and there was no significant difference in ERRORs for 50 km/h and 100 km/h. When SIZEs were 12.5 mm, 17.5 mm, and 22.5 mm, there was no significant difference between the SPEEDs (Fig. 6
                           ).

PREF was significantly affected by SIZE (F (4,115) = 91.65). We observed that, as SIZE increased, PREF also increased (Fig. 7
                           ). Post-hoc analysis revealed that SIZEs of 17.5 mm (73.5 points), 22.5 mm (75.1 points), and 27.5 mm (70.6 points) showed higher PREFs than 7.5 mm (6.1 points) and 12.5 mm (44.0 points), but there was no difference among 17.5 mm, 22.5 mm, and 27.5 mm.

Both SIZE (F (4,116) = 56.83) and SPEED (F (2,58) = 124.74) affected NASA-TLX. The overall workloads increased with SPEED (25.7 points (0 km/h), 44.0 points (50 km/h), and 53.1 points (100 km/h)). The overall workloads decreased with SIZE (59.3 points (7.5 mm), 40.1 points (12.5 mm), 37.6 points (17.5 mm), 35.0 points (22.5 mm), and 32.7 points (27.5 mm)) (Fig. 8
                           ). Meanwhile, the interaction between SIZE and SPEED was not significant (F (8,231) = 0.55).

Additional analysis was conducted for each subscale (mental demands, physical demands, temporal demands, performance, effort level, and frustration level). As a result, for all of the subscales, there were significant differences in SIZE and SPEED (α = 0.05), but the interaction between SIZE and SPEED was not significant (α = 0.05). The workload for each subscale usually increased as SPEED increased and SIZE decreased; the same trend was observed in the overall workload.

Analysis was conducted only for the data from SPEEDs of 50 km/h and 100 km/h because measurements for driving safety can only be obtained when the car is moving. An ANOVA was conducted for the dependent variables of driving safety (Table 2
                        ). For the significance of the main effects, a Student Newman–Keuls (SNK) test was conducted as a post-hoc analysis. For the significant interactions, a simple effect test was conducted. In general, driving safety increased with decreasing SPEED and increasing SIZE.

SDLP was significantly affected by SIZE (F (4,116) = 40.88) and SPEED (F (1,29) = 370.84). SDLP appeared to decrease with increasing SIZE. SIZE of 7.5 mm (361.9 mm) showed the highest SDLP, followed by SIZE of 12.5 mm (277.6 mm). However, we did not find any significant difference among 17.5 mm (250.4 mm), 22.5 mm (226.3 mm), and 27.5 mm (223.8 mm) (Fig. 9
                           ). SDLP for SPEED of 100 km/h (321.0 mm) was significantly larger than that for 50 km/h (215.0 mm). At the same time, the interaction between SIZE and SPEED was not significant (F (4,116) = 1.06).

SV was significantly affected by SIZE (F (4,116) = 9.87) and SPEED (F (1,29) = 11.80). SV appeared to decrease with an increasing SIZE. SIZE of 7.5 mm (1.1 km/h) showed the highest SV, but there was no significant difference among 12.5 mm (1.0 km/h), 17.5 mm (1.0 km/h), 22.5 mm (0.9 km/h), and 27.5 mm (0.7 km/h) (Fig. 10
                           ). SV for SPEED of 100 km/h (1.1 km/h) was larger than for 50 km/h (0.9 km/h). At the same time, SIZE did not interact with SPEED (F (4,116) = 0.58).

The measurements related to glance were analyzed through video analysis. All of the video analysis was performed by one person.
                              
                                 a.
                                 Total glance time

The total glance time was significantly affected by SIZE (F (4,115) = 78.88). SIZE of 7.5 mm (7.6 s) showed the longest total glance time followed by 12.5 mm (3.7 s). There was no significant difference among 17.5 mm (3.0 s), 22.5 mm (2.7 s), and 27.5 mm (2.5 s) (Fig. 11
                           ). The total glance time was not affected by SPEED (F (1,29) = 0.49). At the same time, the interaction between SIZE and SPEED was not observed (F (4,114) = 0.22).
                              
                                 b.
                                 Mean glance time

The mean glance time was significantly affected by SIZE (F (4,115) = 2.82) and SPEED (F (1,29) = 112.33). In spite of the statistical significance, the mean glance time for different SIZEs appeared to be negligible. SPEED of 50 km/h (1.3 s) showed a higher mean glance time than for 100 km/h (1.0 s). The interaction between SIZE and SPEED was not significant (F (4,114) = 0.72).
                              
                                 c.
                                 Mean time between glances

The mean time between glances was significantly affected by SIZE (F (4,115) = 4.33) and SPEED (F (1,29) = 24.60). In spite of the statistical significance, the mean time between glances for different SIZEs appeared to be negligible. The mean time between glances was longer when SPEED was 100 km/h (0.7 s) compared with 50 km/h (0.6 s). SIZE did not interact with SPEED (F (4,114) = 2.39).
                              
                                 d.
                                 Mean number of glances

The mean number of glances was significantly affected by SIZE (F (4,115) = 61.14) and SPEED (F (1,29) = 116.68). The mean number of glances appeared to decrease with increasing SIZE. SIZE of 7.5 mm (7.0 time) showed the largest mean number of glances, but there was no difference among 12.5 mm (3.6 times), 17.5 mm (3.2 times), 22.5 mm (2.8 times), and 27.5 mm (2.9 times) (Fig. 11). The mean number of glances was higher when SPEED was 100 km/h (4.3 times) compared with 50 km/h (3.5 times). The interaction between SIZE and SPEED was not significant (F (4,114) = 0.46).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Overall, both the usability of IVIS and the driving safety increased as SPEED decreased and SIZE increased. TIME decreased as SIZE increased. Interestingly, the TIME increase with decreasing SIZE was not a result of the increase in the time required for individual target selection (which is explained by the mean glance time) but, instead, was a result of the increase in the number of target selection trials (which is explained by the mean number of glances). According to Fitts' law (Fitts, 1954), as SIZE decreases, the index of difficulty in the pointing tasks increases and so the time required for individual target selection increases. However, in this study, the time required for individual target selection remained almost the same for different SIZEs because the time for individual target selection was decided not only by the target width but also by the driving safety. In other words, as SIZE decreases, individual target selection time increases but cannot exceed a time threshold beyond which the driving safety becomes significantly risky. In this case, the accuracy could be significantly decreased, resulting in high ERRORs, and the number of glances can also be increased to correctly accomplish the tasks by repeating the trials. The required target selection time was observed to be longer than the time threshold when SIZE was below 17.5 mm, under which TIME, ERROR, the mean number of glances, and the total glance time increased. Considering the above result that the time for the pointing task while driving cannot be longer than a certain threshold, it is important to provide sufficiently large targets in IVIS to prevent poor usability or safety risks. At the same time, TIME appeared to reach an asymptote at SIZE of 17.5 mm. The authors speculate that the participants underutilized the presented SIZE when the SIZE was larger than 17.5 mm. Further investigation revealed that the increase in the effective target width was much smaller compared to the increase in the actual target width when the SIZE was larger than 17.5 mm (Fig. 14). The effective target width is defined as the width within which 96% of the total touch points fall (Mackenzie, 1992; Schmidt et al., 1979; Welford, 1968; Zhai et al., 2004).

In addition, we performed Fitts' law analysis. To perform this analysis, we extracted the time between pressing the starting button on the driving wheel and pressing the first touch-key, and then, we calculated the effective target width (W
                     
                        e
                     ) and the index of difficulty (ID = log2 ((A + W
                     
                        e
                     )/W
                     
                        e
                     )) for each SPEED. The movement amplitudes (A) from the starting button to each touch-key were measured (A
                     1: 394 mm, A
                     2: 424 mm, A
                     3: 459 mm, A
                     4: 391 mm, A
                     5: 418 mm, A
                     6: 451 mm, A
                     7: 374 mm, A
                     8: 407 mm, and A
                     9: 446 mm), where A
                     
                        i
                      is the distance between the starting button and the i-th touch-key. The results of Fitts' fitting are shown in Fig. 12
                     . The coefficient of determination (R
                     2) of our data (0.74 for 0 km/h, 0.60 for 50 km/h, and 0.52 for 100 km/h) was relatively low compared to early studies on various devices (Card et al., 1978; Epps, 1986; Fitts, 1954; Jagacinski and Monk, 1985). R
                     2 of Fitts' fitting were 0.96 with the hand (Fitts, 1954), 0.83 with the mouse (Card et al., 1978), 0.88 and 0.98 with the joystick (Card et al., 1978; Jagacinski and Monk, 1985), and 0.86 with the trackball (Epps, 1986). However, our results were similar to the results of early studies using touchpads, for which the R
                     2 were 0.49 and 0.55 (Epps, 1986). These dissimilar results with Fitts' law were intensified as SPEED increased. As the workload of the primary task increased, the performance on the secondary task became worse because of reduced attention (Sanders and McComick, 1993). In other words, as the workload of the driving increased, the performance of interacting with IVISs decreased because the drivers had a more limited amount of time to interact with IVIS. This caused the inconsistent results with Fitts' law as SPEED increased.

The mean time between glances increased from 0.61 s to 0.72 s as SPEED increased from 50 km/h to 100 km/h, while the mean glance time decreased from 1.31 s to 1.00 s. This finding can be explained by the fact that, before or after each individual pointing task, time for aligning the car to the center of the road is required because the car could be laterally deviated out of the safe track of the road during the previous pointing task. As SPEED increases, it is more probable that the SDLP increase requires more time for the alignment. As SPEED increases, more SDLP or even lane crossings can occur when the participant's eyes are off the road to manipulate the IVIS; therefore, participants more frequently switched their attention between the road and the IVIS (50 km/h: 3.47 times, 100 km/h: 4.31 times, p < 0.0001) while reducing the mean glance time. At the same time, while SPEED increased, the mean glance time decreased but the mean number of glances increased; thus, there was no difference in the total glance time. However, both the mean time between glances and the mean number of glances increased as SPEED increased; therefore, the total time between glances (the product of the mean time between glances and the mean number of glances) significantly increased from 2.67 s (50 km/h) to 3.93 s (100 km/h). The increase in TIME as SPEED increased might be caused by an increase in the total time between glances rather than the total glance time, which is consistent with the results of Tsimhoni et al. (2004).

The digits-input patterns of the participants were changed as SIZE changed. As SIZE increases, the participants attempted to enter more than 1 digit/glance. For example, for large SIZEs (22.5 mm or 27.5 mm), the mean number of glances was approximately 3, and more than one digit was entered in average per glance. In contrast, for small SIZEs (7.5 mm or 12.5 mm), the participants appeared to enter 1 digit/glance or to make errors more often.

For subscales of NASA-TLX, ‘effort level’ obtained the highest score (50.03 points) and ‘frustration level’ obtained the lowest score (26.96 points). This tendency was observed regardless of SIZE and SPEED. In this experiment, the participants performed both driving and manipulation of IVIS, which simultaneously required the same human resources, and they did their best to maximize not only the driving performance but also the accuracy of the pointing tasks. To achieve this goal, participants might have exhaustively used their visual processing, cognitive processing and motor control. Therefore, ‘effort level’ showed the highest score. Meanwhile, the task was relatively simple and easy in spite of the workload of the simultaneous tasks. For this reason, the ‘frustration level’ obtained the lowest score.

SDLP increased as SPEED increased and SIZE decreased, which is consistent with the previous studies (Brumby et al., 2009; Tsimhoni et al., 2004). As a result of the analysis, SDLP was closely related to the total glance time. As SIZE increased, the total glance time and SDLP both decreased. During a glance, it is impossible to keep an eye on the road or to adjust the driving direction; hence, SDLP increased as the total glance time increased.

Similar to in the previous studies on touch-key size for relatively large touch-screen interfaces such as kiosks (Bender, 1999; Colle and Hiszem, 2004; Martin, 1988; Scott and Conzola, 1997; Wilson et al., 1995) and for small interfaces such as mobile devices (Parhi et al., 2006; Park and Han, 2010; Perry and Hourcade, 2008), the appropriate touch-key size can be determined for IVISs. The method from the previous studies was to determine the touch-key size at which the usability no longer increased (Beaton and Weiman, 1984; Bender, 1999; Colle and Hiszem, 2004; Martin, 1988; Parhi et al., 2006; Sears and Shneiderman, 1991; Wilson et al., 1995). In other words, the appropriate touch-key size is the minimum size that has the maximum measurement for the usability. The difference between the previous approaches and our approach for IVISs is that the driving safety issue was also considered when deciding the appropriate target size. In other words, a touch-key size considering only the usability of IVISs might not be sufficiently large for driving safety. Based on the data collected from this study, an example can be presented as the following. For the measurements of the usability of IVIS, a sufficiently large touch-key size for both TIME and PREF was 17.5 mm and for ERROR was 12.5 mm. For the measurements on driving safety, the appropriate touch-key size for SDLP was 17.5 mm and for SV was 12.5 mm. As a result, the appropriate touch-key size can be decided to be 17.5 mm, beyond which no increase in the usability of IVISs and the driving safety was observed. However, the appropriate touch-key size derived from the above approach may not satisfy the “absolute” criteria for driving safety. For example, we can imagine a road that should not allow SDLPs that are wider than 350 mm because of the road width or other research results (Criterion 1 of Fig. 13
                     
                     ). In this case, the appropriate touch-key size, derived from considering only the asymptotical behavior of the usability and safety measurements, is sufficient because the SDLP for a key size of 17.5 mm is smaller than 350 mm for all SPEEDs. Thus, in this case, the appropriate touch-key size of 17.5 mm is reasonable. On the other hand, imagine another road that permits only 150 mm for SDLP because the road width is too small (Criterion 2 of Fig. 13). In this case, 17.5 mm is not sufficient because all of the SDLPs in Fig. 13 exceed the “absolute” criterion of 150 mm. Therefore, in this case, it is more reasonable to consider the “absolute” criteria of driving safety that is required for a given driving condition.

We additionally investigated input offset since parallax occurred when using IVIS unlike kiosks and mobile devices which are usually used directly in front of the users. Input offset was defined as the difference between the center of a touch-key and a pressed point (the center of pressed point minus the center of the touch-key), and input offset of X and Y was analyzed in terms of column. As a result, column was significantly affected by X offset but not affected by Y offset (Table 3
                     ). X offset decreased as the number of columns increased, and it means that the participants tend to press the left of the center of the touch-key as the distance between the participant and the location of touch-key increased. Knowing the information about X and Y offsets in company with effective target width, usability of IVIS can be improved by adjusting touch recognition areas as Park and Han (2010) did for mobile devices, and quantitative guidelines showing the relationship between touch-key size and expected accuracy can also be developed as Leahy and Hix (1990) did. To achieve this, further research will be needed.

This study has attempted to examine the effect of the touch-key size on the usability of IVISs and driving safety and to derive the appropriate touch-key size considering both the usability and the safety. However, similar to in previous studies (Drews et al., 2009; Hosking et al., 2009; Sodnik et al., 2008; Tsimhoni et al., 2004; Young et al., 2012), the experiment was performed in a simulated driving environment rather than in a real driving environment, for safety reasons. Therefore, the appropriate touch-key size derived in the simulated driving environment should not be directly applied to the real driving situation. Furthermore, we have conducted the experiment in a relatively simple driving environment (straight expressway, no other cars around), which had a low level of difficulty in the driving. Therefore, to apply the derived touch-key size to a real driving environment, additional researches conducted in analogical environment to the real driving environment in terms of various shapes of roads, auditory noise, vibrations are needed for practical applications. We performed Fitts' law analysis of our data and this revealed that the data from dual task (interacting with IVISs while driving) did not follow Fitts' law. Developing a modified Fitts' law under dual task conditions is an interesting research issue. Especially in the case of a pointing task while driving, a revised Fitts' law including speed factor needs to be developed. In addition, there are several research issues that should be investigated to improve usability of IVIS. For example, design factors such as the key spacing and the location of the keys should be investigated for better usability of IVISs. Adjusting touch recognition areas with the information about input offset and effective target width could be a way to improve usability of IVISs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In this study, the effect of touch-key sizes on the usability of IVISs and on driving safety was experimentally investigated. Both the usability of the IVISs and the driving safety increased with increased touch-key sizes but reached an asymptote beyond certain touch-key sizes. Therefore, providing as large touch-key sizes as possible is recommended to maximize both of the usability of IVISs and the driving safety. Although a size could be derived from the previous studies regarding touch-screen devices, driving safety should also be considered for the IVISs before directly applying the previous methods. Hence, more complicated processes and a variety of measurements for driving safety should be considered and collected to suggest appropriate touch-key sizes in a real driving environment. Moreover, the numerical results of this study cannot be directly applied to design touch-key sizes in IVISs used in a real situation because the experiment was conducted with simulated driving. Therefore, a number of further studies should be performed for a variety of driving conditions in a real driving environment. In this study, we focused on the key size among the design factors that are related to usability; in addition, other design factors, such as the key spacing and the location of the keys, should be investigated for better usability of IVISs. Finally, developing a modified Fitts' law under dual task conditions could be an interesting research issue that has not yet been explored.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (No. 2011-0003091).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

