@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Factors affecting the risk of developing lower back musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in experienced and inexperienced rodworkers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Inexperienced preferred raising to upright more frequently, possibly increasing the risk of back muscle fatigue.


                        
                        
                           
                           Experienced preferred to remain in full trunk flexion for longer periods, potentially putting them at risk of ligament creep.


                        
                        
                           
                           Both groups seemed to be at risk of decreased back stability by different means.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Rodwork

Low back

Prolonged trunk flexion

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Injury and dropout rates during rodwork training appear to reflect difficulties encountered by apprentices adapting to increased physical demands of tying on slab, one of the rodworking tasks with the highest injury risk. Because experience influences work strategies, and consequently the risk of developing musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs), this study aimed to identify differences in work practices associated with tying rebar on slab, potentially relevant to back MSD development, in experienced and inexperienced rodworkers.
                  Fourteen male rodworkers were recruited from either experienced (>2 years experience post apprenticeship), or inexperienced (<6 months experience) groups. Both tied an area with rebar laid on the ground. Trunk flexion/extension angles were measured. L4/L5 moments were estimated from T9 Erector Spinae EMG.
                  Experienced workers were found to spend longer periods of time in trunk flexed postures, with lower peak L4/L5 moments. Our findings revealed practices associated with each group might have different implications on back health.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

“Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs)” is an umbrella term used to describe disorders of the musculoskeletal system, which may involve damage to the muscles, nerves, ligaments, joints, cartilage, and spinal discs (OHSCO, 2007). MSDs are important in the workplace because they are prevalent and costly. Rodwork is the construction trade responsible for building the rebar matrices for concrete reinforcement prior to pouring concrete. It is very physically demanding, and has previously been associated with upper limb and lower back discomfort (Shanahan et al., 2013); thus it is noteworthy to investigate the work strategies specific to the trade, which may pose risks for to develop MSDs.

Tying rebar at ground level is a commonly performed task in the rodworking trade. During tying, workers are required to work below the knee height, typically while standing on rod structures. The task consists on wrapping the wire around perpendicular rod intersections, grasping it with pliers, twisting it tightly, and then cutting it. This task usually involves prolonged trunk flexion to cover large areas of rebar on the ground. Continuous trunk flexion and tool use can pose a risk to develop back and upper limb MSDs (Buchholz et al., 2003; Paquet et al., 2005; Shanahan et al., 2013; Wickstrom et al., 1985).

Currently, high injury and dropout rates during rodwork training appear to reflect difficulties encountered by apprentices in response to the increased physical demands of this particular task. Evidence has shown that experienced individuals tend to employ safer work practices, thus reducing the risk of injury (Villanueva et al., 2007; Gagnon, 2005). Differences in motor strategies are important because they can influence considerably the level of risk to develop MSDs.

In an attempt to help improving training strategies to reduce the incidence of injury and dropouts from training, the purpose of this study focused on identifying movement differences and concomitant musculoskeletal demands, between apprentices and experienced rodworkers when tying rebar.

We investigated measures potentially relevant to upper limb and low back health, however the data presented on this paper are limited to variables directly associated with back health.

It was hypothesized that during the tying task inexperienced workers will 1) Maintain longer periods of trunk flexion without standing up, resulting in fewer incidents of upright posture; and 2) Experience higher loads on the spine, increasing EMG at the T9 level, thus the moment at the L4/L5.

@&#METHODS@&#

Fourteen healthy male, right handed, rodworkers were recruited to tie wire on slab at the Rodworkers Training Facility (Table 1
                        ). Participants were recruited by the Ironworkers Union of Canada, Local 721, from one of two groups, experienced and inexperienced. The ‘inexperienced group’ consisted of apprentices enrolled in basic training, who were considered as ‘capable’ by the union's standards to go out to work, and who had less than 6 months of experience. Only one apprentice had worksite experience. The ‘experienced group’ consisted of workers who had worked for at least two years after completing their 4000-h apprenticeship. Our sample size and selection were based on the following: 1) selection of apprentices was limited to current number of students, who were enrolled in the facility's ongoing training at the time of the study, and who were considered as capable to work, 2) selection of experienced workers was limited to selecting workers who were available. An initial questionnaire was administered to obtain general demographic information (age, handedness, and anthropometrics), musculoskeletal health (diseases/conditions affecting physical activity (i.e. cardiovascular problems, joint problems), neuromuscular disorders (i.e. carpal tunnel syndrome), acute injuries (i.e. fractures), chronic injuries (i.e. tendonitis, low back pain) in the past year, or any current pain/discomfort), and work related information (years of experience, stage of apprenticeship, and tool preference). Our exclusion criteria included sustaining a musculoskeletal injury within the last year, receiving musculoskeletal rehabilitation during the time of the study, or the presence of pain or any disease that might have influenced movement or produced musculoskeletal discomfort. None of our participants had sustained an injury or musculoskeletal disorder in the past year, or had pain/discomfort. There were no participants who were excluded based on these criteria.

After getting informed consent in accordance with the Human Participants Review Committee at York University, and completion of an initial questionnaire, participants were equipped with EMG sensors and inertial measurement unit (IMU) sensors. Calibration of the IMU's followed the calibration of the EMG system, after which participants were required to tie an area of slab for 15 min, containing approximately 130 rebar intersections. This number of ties was determined to simulate a realistic work pace. The participants were given the following instructions: “Imagine you are at work, and this is the area that you need to tie. Please tie it as you would if you were at the construction site”. Participants were given either 7″ or 9″ pliers based on their stated tool preference. They used regular 16-gauge wire for their tying task. A questionnaire to rate back discomfort (RPD) produced by the tying task was administered to each participant at the end of the task.

A portable data acquisition unit (DataLOG W4X8, Biometrics LTD, Cwmfelinfach, Gwent, UK) was used to record raw surface EMG at 1000 Hz, bilaterally from the Erector Spinae (ES) at the T9 and L4/L5 levels. The Biometrics EMG system allows the researcher to collect raw EMG signals within the range of 15–450 Hz, with a common mode rejection ratio (CMRR) at 60 Hz (dB) of more than 96 dB (typically 110 dB), and an input impedance of more than 1015 Ohms. EMG of the T9 ES has been shown to be a practical method for estimating continuous compression of the spine (Mientjes et al., 1999; Jackson et al., 2008; Potvin et al., 1990). While EMG of the ES was collected at two levels, the T9 and L4/L5, L4/L5 EMG will not be further discussed because it was not as strongly correlated with L4/L5 moments as the T9 EMG.

Integral dry reusable, bipolar, plate electrodes (Sensor SX230, 2 cm inter-electrode distance, Biometrics LTD, Cwmfelinfach, Gwent, UK) were placed along the fibres of the ES at the T9 level, on the belly of the Longissimus muscle (Fig. 1
                              ). The site for each electrode was located by palpation. The skin was prepared before placing electrodes by shaving and cleaning the area with alcohol. Participants were required to flex their trunk 45° while the ES electrodes were positioned, in order to minimize subsequent stretching of the skin under the electrodes while bending over during tying tasks. Electrodes were taped with medical tape to minimize their movement. The ground electrode was taped on the C7.

During EMG calibration, participants performed a total of ten five-second reference voluntary contractions (RVC's) of the ES comprising five conditions performed twice each. Six of these RVC's were sustained with arms relaxed by the side, hanging vertically from the shoulders, in three trunk postures: vertically erect, trunk flexed at 45° and trunk flexed at 90°. For the remaining RVC's, participants were asked to repeat the two flexed postures while holding a 10 lb weight in their hands, with arms relaxed in front of their shoulders. Trunk posture was controlled with a manual goniometer while ES EMG was recorded.

Postures of the trunk and dominant forearm were recorded in three planes using the Xsens MTx Xbus system, (model: Xbus Master, MTx sensors, XSENS, Xsens Technologies B.V., Enschede, Netherlands, 2008, www.xsens.com). The Xsens Analyzer Software was used to determine relative orientations of each sensor with respect to adjacent sensors (NexGen Ergonomics Inc., Quebec, Canada). Orientation of segments was collected at 50 Hz. The Xsens system was configured through the X-Analyzer to provide Euler angles of the trunk, shoulder, elbow, and forearm rotation. For the purpose of this paper, only trunk angles were analysed because of their relevance to back health.

Five Xsens sensors were placed on the participants while they were standing in anatomical position (Fig. 2
                           ). Participants wore two sensors on the trunk: one at the T7 level adjacent to the inferior border of the scapula, and another at the L4/L5 level. Three additional sensors were placed on the dominant arm, but will not be reported in this paper. The positioning of the sensors was selected not only to avoid interfering with the tying tasks, but also to allow the researchers to consistently place the sensors over easily palpated landmarks. In all sensors, the local “x” axis pointed upwards, the “y” axis pointed to the left side of the participant, and the “z” axis pointed backwards in relation to the participant (Fig. 3
                           ). Trunk angles were measured with respect to the pelvis sensor; with higher values indicating greater trunk flexion (Fig. 4
                           ). Xsens data were collected continuously throughout 15 min of tying, and then saved on the computer for processing post-collection.

An initial trial was recorded for 30 s, with each participant standing still with the arms relaxed by their sides, which allowed sensors to adapt to the environment, a procedure similar to the one used by Shanahan et al. (2013). We then proceeded to calibrate the Xsens system by recording a series of reference trunk postures in the sagittal plane, which were intended to record known orientations of each sensor with respect to adjacent sensors. To achieve reference postures for the pelvis and upper back sensors, participants held three postures for five seconds each, in the following order: 1) Upright with arms relaxed by the side, 2) trunk flexion at 45°, and 3) trunk flexion at 90°.

The participants were videotaped with a JVC digital video camera at 30 Hz to verify measured postures of the trunk in the sagittal plane when tying. The EMG system was started before Xsens. Then, while the camera was recording, the Xsens was started along with the activation of an event marker on the EMG, which emitted a red light to the camera.

EMG data was processed using a custom-made program with Matlab (Matlab 7.7, The MathWorks, Inc., US). The EMG signal was processed as follows. First, the biases were removed from the raw ES signal. Then the signal was high-pass filtered with a 1st order, Butterworth filter with a cut-off frequency of 410 Hz. This high-passed signal was used to predict L4/L5 moment. The cut-off frequency was selected because the lowest error between actual and predicted force was found when using the higher frequency components of an EMG signal (410 Hz) (Potvin and Brown, 2004). The signal was then full-wave rectified, and low-pass filtered at 1.9 Hz. This cut-off frequency was selected because Potvin and Brown (2004), using a similar filter, reported that 1.9 Hz was on average the optimal cut-off frequency for their previously high-pass filtered EMG signal.

The linear envelopes from the right and left ES EMG signals were combined to obtain a weighted average. Means were calculated over three seconds for each RVC. A biomechanical modelling tool (4D WATBAK, Ergowatch, Waterloo, ON. Canada) was used to calculate the L4/L5 moment at each RVC, which was later correlated with the ES linear envelope with a linear regression analysis. During the trials, the static, dynamic, and peak L4/L5 moments were determined for each participant using amplitude probability distribution functions (APDFs) according to Jonsson (1978). The static L4/L5 moment level is 10th percentile found in our data. It gives an estimate of the lowest back moment experienced in a particular task. The median level represents the 50th percentile, which can be an estimate of the average posture during the task in a normal data set. The peak level corresponds to the 90th percentile, and can be used as an estimate of the highest back moments experienced during the task.

Relative Euler angles of the upper trunk sensor with respect to the pelvis sensor were imported from the Xsens Analyser to Matlab. A custom-made Matlab program isolated the trunk postures on the sagittal plane for each trial, removed the bias, and performed an APDF of trunk flexion during the tying trials for each participant (Jonsson, 1978). The static (10th), the dynamic (50th), and the peak (90th) values were used to compare the trunk flexion angles of experienced and inexperienced rodworkers. In this case, the static level was an estimate of the amount of time spent in upright, whereas the peak level was an estimate of the peak trunk flexion seen in both groups. We created a custom made matlab program to analyse the number of upright postures, the percent time in upright, and the average time in upright per rising. An upright posture was defined as any displacement ≥30° from the average trunk flexion during a period of full flexion during the task.

We used two-sample t-tests to compare groups using SAS 9.4 software (SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC, USA, 2014) for each of the following variables: trunk flexion and L/4L5 moment APDF levels, trunk lateral flexion and rotation ranges, total number of ties, back RPD, and variables associated with upright posture analyses).

@&#RESULTS@&#

All linear regressions showed high r2 values ranging from 0.88 to 0.99, and p < 0.05 in all but one participant. Two of fourteen participants, one of each group, were excluded from postural statistical analyses, and one inexperienced participant was excluded from moment analyses due to missing data. Our results of the static level of trunk flexion showed that the experienced group preferred to avoid upright postures throughout the tying task, spending more time at greater trunk flexion angles than the inexperienced. The former spent at least 10 percent of their time at 73° of trunk flexion or less, while for the latter at 44° or less (Table 2
                     , Fig. 5
                     ). There were no differences between groups at the median and peak levels of trunk flexion.

The results with regards to upright posture characteristics (Table 3
                     ) seem to suggest that dissimilarities at the 10th percentile were due the inexperienced rising more frequently, and spending more time in upright when compared to the experienced. Although significance was not reached, the former rose twice as many times and spent more than three times the time in upright than the experienced. It was evident that the inexperienced were unable to work at the pace of the experienced workers, tying less than half the ties of the experienced (Table 4
                     ). The inexperienced were visibly more variable in all upright characteristics than the experienced, although only the average and percent time approached significance. These results may suggest increased is achieved through short upright postures, a strategy not yet adopted by the apprentices.

Consistent with these results, even though the median and peak L4/L5 moments were not statistically different, the higher moment seen in the inexperienced group may have reflected the moment required to extend the trunk to upright repetitively, or to move through partially flexed postures (Table 5
                     ). Because the ranges of motion in the frontal and transverse planes were not different between groups, it was assumed that movement in non-sagittal planes affected both groups similarly in terms of the EMG-load relationship (Table 2). It is important to note however that the trunk rotation range of motion in the inexperienced group was significantly more variable than that seen in the inexperienced.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Several factors may explain the motor differences between the two groups: energy expenditure, muscle endurance, and flexibility. Considering that repetitive trunk flexion/extension when rising to upright intermittently requires increased back musculature activation, it can potentially lead to increased energy expenditure, thus greater risk of fatigue. On the one hand, it is possible that the inexperienced workers chose more upright postures because they may had not been exposed to long periods of tying, perhaps unacquainted with fatiguing effects of repetitive trunk flexion/extension when performed for a number of hours. On the other hand, experienced workers chose to remain in greater trunk flexion during tying, which may have the advantage of requiring less back musculature (ES) activation, potentially decreasing the risk of fatigue, at the risk of increased risk of ligament creep. It is possible that one of the reasons for choosing to do so may have been their awareness of the fatiguing effects of repetitive trunk flexion/extension during tying and in longer sessions of tying substitute long upright pauses in place of multiple shorter ones.

In an attempt to further explain the increased back moments in the inexperienced, we speculated that the higher moment seen in the inexperienced could also have been due to tying further away from their feet because of ineffective footwork (i.e. placing feet away from tie location). This strategy would have increased the moment arm associated with their upper body weight, thus increased the required support back moment. Such speculation was based on Gagnon's 2005 findings, where experienced workers selected safer footwork practices during manual handling activities, which reduced the external load's moment arm. However, after a closer look at their work strategies on film, it was apparent that the experienced were more likely to tie further away from their feet, contradicting Gagnon's results, suggesting that the tie location with respect to their feet may not have had an substantial effect on the back moment.

Furthermore, muscle endurance may have also contributed to the differences between the two groups. Previous research has shown increased activation of the quadratus lumborum, and deep erector spinae musculature when compared to upright (Andersson et al., 1996; Morris et al., 1962), suggesting that inexperienced workers may have activated some of these muscles sufficiently to induce momentary fatigue, encouraging them to search for recovery by returning to upright. Our findings are supported by El Ahrache et al. (2006), who suggests that small levels of muscle activation might be enough to decrease the ability to continue to produce force, thereby reducing the muscle endurance time, and increasing the need for recovery time. Additionally, our findings were similar to those observed by Rose et al. (2001), who reported that rodworkers had longer endurance times and shorter resumption times (defined as the time it takes for discomfort to decrease to a level at which the participant can resume work) when compared to individuals who were unacquainted with work requiring trunk flexion. In light of this, it is possible that the longer trunk flexion periods exhibited by the experienced group may be attributable to physical adaptation elicited in part by gains in muscle endurance from previous exposure to this task.

Lastly, decreased upright postures in the experienced group may have also been explained by increased flexibility, due to repeated exposure to tensile loads during prolonged periods of trunk flexion over the years. Previous research has shown that individuals with higher flexibility are able to turn off the muscles under tension during a stretch. For instance, Hashemirad et al. (2009) reported that individuals with higher scores in a touch-toe flexibility test were able to relax their erector spinae muscles while in large trunk flexion angles, while those with lower scores did not. It is probable that increased flexibility in our experienced group was a noteworthy contributor to their ability to remain in trunk flexion for longer, by allowing them to relax their back during tying.

Load support is one the most important biomechanical functions of the lower spine, which requires stability to prevent buckling (Panjabi, 1992; McGill, 1998; Cholewicki and McGill, 1996). Back stability is achieved by the interaction of active (i.e. muscles, tendons), passive (i.e. ligaments) and neural systems (Panjabi, 1992). Dysfunction of any of these systems can reduce spinal stability and result in pain, acute injury, and/or chronic disorders (Panjabi, 1992). Our study suggested that, regardless of experience, tying on slab might compromise back stability, potentially increasing the risk of back injury. Although both groups are at risk of reduced stability, the mechanism by which this may occur differs between groups.

On the one hand, it is plausible to suggest that the strategy used by the inexperienced workers may put them at higher risk of fatigue because of the increased back musculature activation requirement associated with repetitive trunk flexion/extension. It is imperative that the spinal system continuously monitors and adjusts muscle tension to meet the changing loading demands in a coordinated manner (Punjabi, 1992). However, in the presence of muscle fatigue, the ability of the spine to meet those demands is diminished. Previous research has shown compromised back stability as a result of fatigued erector spinae muscles (Granata and Gottipati, 2008). Changes in the capability to produce the appropriate amount of force in a timely manner have been associated with fatigue (i.e. EMG-Force relationship, EMG amplitude and timing of firing rate) (DeLuca, 1984, Panjabi, 1992), clearly reflecting a dysfunction of the neural and active systems. In light of this, the preferred strategy of the inexperienced may be more likely to put them at risk of increased vulnerability to perturbations and erratic overcompensation responses when attempting to regain back stability, both of which could lead to injury or low back pain (Panjabi 1992, Cholewicki and McGill, 1996).

In contrast, the experienced workers’ strategy is likely to result in loading of the passive tissues of their lower back, by sustaining prolonged periods of full trunk flexion. Passive loading has been shown to decrease muscle strength for up to 1 h and sensory sensitivity for up to 30 min, post-stretch (Avela et al., 1999; Fowles et al., 2000), which may increase the risk of injury by lowering the ability to respond to potential perturbations. In addition, stretching passive ligamentous structures can increase intervertebral laxity, thus reduce back stability in the short term (Rose et al., 2001). Increased intervertebral laxity is likely to contribute to increased intervertebral displacements, which can result in irritation of nocireceptors on the spine (Panjabi, 1992). Furthermore, prolonged tensile loading of the back tissues may result in connective tissue damage, including ligaments, fascia and collagenous structures (Avela et al., 1999; Fowles et al., 2000.). The current findings suggest that both groups are at risk of developing back injury via back instability, although instability may occur, through different mechanisms.

It may be noteworthy to point out that the compressive critical load of an isolated spine, in which it buckles is 20 N and 90 N for thoracolumbar and lumbar segments respectively, which is exceptionally low when compared to the loads normally carried by the spine during every day activities (i.e. 6000 N) (Panjabi, 1992; Cholewicki et al., 1986; McGill and Vaughan, 1996). The increased capability to support large loads is achieved by the coordination of muscles surrounding the spine (Panjabi, 1992). Because of the larger contribution of the active and neural systems to back stability, it may be reasonable to suggest that the strategy used by the inexperienced workers may be more likely to cause injury than that preferred by the experienced.

One of our main limitations is the nature associated with cross-sectional studies. Because we did not track our participants’ musculoskeletal health status and work practices over a period of time, we cannot assure that the differences in strategies are solely due to practice. Other factors unknown to us may have played a role in the adaptation of the experienced to this job.

We recognize that our sample size and selection were a limitation in this study. It is possible that many of our analyses did not reach significance due to our small sample size. In addition, our groups had a large age and tenure discrepancy, which could be a source of other confounding factors. However, our young inexperienced workers were selected because we are aiming at inferring our results to workers in training, and workers generally begin young in this trade. Our experienced group on the other hand, have acquired their high level of skill through years of experience, which unfortunately comes with years of tenure and increased age.

Another limitation was the software used to calculate the moments (WATBAK) is limited to 2D calculations, thus any spinal loading caused by movements outside the medio-lateral axis was not accounted for. Furthermore, our model does not consider spinal compression force caused by co-contraction of musculature around the spine. However, the method used to estimate L4/L5 moments has been previously validated for tasks with predominant movements in the sagittal plane, similar to the task of interest of this study. Due to logistical challenges presented in the workplace, we were unable to measure pelvic tilting angle, which plays an important role in vertebral orientation of the lower back.

Despite group differences suggesting significant adaptation to the task by the experienced workers, it is important to point out the possibility of a ‘natural selection of workers’ as a source of variance between groups. As Wickstrom et al. (1978) pointed out; it may be that, since rodwork requires workers to cope with increased musculoskeletal demands, the experienced workers were the product of selection, because only they were able to survive in this trade. If this is the case, the inexperienced group may comprise not only those with some unspecified physical advantages that will enable them to continue in the trade, but also others who will be selected out by the rigours of the work conditions.

It is possible that the fifteen-minute period in the present study was too short to capture the effects of fatigue on the apprentices’ work strategies. Thus, it may be interesting to test differences in motor strategies between experienced and inexperienced workers tying on slab over the course of an entire working day.

Balancing between the number of upright postures and the length of full flexion episodes may help reducing the risk of fatigue, while potentially allowing some recoil of passive tissues by coming back to upright. However, it is difficult with the information available from the current study to assert that this is the case. What can be concluded from this study is that the strategy preferred by inexperienced workers can be metabolically costly, possibly inducing fatigue to a point of reduced back stability if performed for long periods of time. The strategy preferred by experienced workers on the other hand may strain the ligamentous structures of the back, reducing back stability, via increased intervertebral laxity. Understanding the possible repercussions of both strategies on lumbar stability may be a useful component of training and task selection during a workday. Such example may be to discourage workers from participating in tasks that require considerable back stability (i.e. lifting/carrying rebar) immediately after a prolonged period of tying on slab. The results do suggest that increased hip flexibility may be important in continuing in the trade and may be an important component of training.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

