@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Assessments of risky driving: A Go/No-Go simulator driving task to evaluate risky decision-making and associated behavioral patterns

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           High-risk and low-risk drivers in G/NG-SDT were characterized by the number of Go decisions.


                        
                        
                           
                           High-risk drivers showed more violations, as well as higher DBQ-violations scores, and more BART pumps.


                        
                        
                           
                           High-risk drivers demonstrated smaller safety margins, and more reckless longitudinal and lateral controls.


                        
                        
                           
                           Velocity, accelerator and rotation were consistently distinguishable between high and low risk drivers in all situations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Risky driving

Simulator

Decision-making

Behavioral patterns

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study sought to develop and validate a Go/No-Go Simulator Driving Task (G/NG-SDT) to evaluate driver risky decision-making and associated behavioral assessments at a situation-specific level. Eighty-four participants were instructed to complete a route in as short time as possible, but avoiding any violations or crashes. To achieve this aim, they had to decide to go or wait in the dilemma scenes, paired with the baseline scenes in several scenarios. High-risk drivers with more Go decisions demonstrated more violations, in both simulator tasks and real road driving, as well as higher scores of Driving Behavior Questionnaire (DBQ) violations and more Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) pumps. These high-risk drivers also showed distinguishable behavioral patterns in simulator driving, moderated by the specific driving situations (e.g. scenario and scene). Several behavior assessments were consistently distinguishable in all tested situations, qualified as robust indictors to predict risk-taking in more general driving situations.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Despite the unremitting efforts of road administrators, automobile manufacturers, and researchers to enhance road safety, traffic accidents remain the major cause of casualties worldwide. Global fatalities and injuries due to traffic accidents exceed one million and tens of millions per year, respectively (WHO, 2013). Nearly one hundred thousand fatalities occur each year on the roads in China (CRTAS, 2013). In 2011, the United Nations (UN) launched its decade of action for road safety (WHO, 2011), with the aim of stabilizing and then reducing global road deaths by 2020. Over one hundred countries, including China, have committed themselves to this aim.

Previous studies have claimed that risk-taking is a key contributor to these on-road tragedies (Arthur et al., 1991; Gully et al., 1995; Iversen and Rundmo, 2002; Jonah, 1986). It is well known that traffic violations and aggressions are associated with risky decision-making (Bachoo et al., 2013; Blockey and Hartley, 1995; Cheng et al., 2012; Ivers et al., 2009; Junger et al., 2001; Parker et al., 1995).

Driving tasks require drivers' decisions a compromise between motivated goals (e.g. saving time or sensation seeking) and risk avoidance (e.g. penalties or accidents), which motivate subsequent behavior on the road. Such decisions were driven by individuals' punishment-reward system, including Behavioral Activation System (BAS) and Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS) (Balconi and Crivelli, 2010). Risky drivers often give higher weight to the former, (Tom et al., 2007), which also related to the traits of impulsivity, sensation-seeking and anger (Bachoo et al., 2013). Therefore, reliable and comprehensive assessments of traits relating to risk-taking are necessary to identify high-risk individuals in order to undertake corresponding interventions.

The Driver Behavior Questionnaire (DBQ), developed by the Manchester Driver Behavior Group (Reason et al., 1990) is the most widely used instrument of self-reported driving behavior. In the DBQ, violations and errors are distinguished as two different concepts (Parker et al., 1995). Violations are defined as “deliberate dangerous driving”, while errors are referred to as “the failure of planned actions to achieve the intended consequences”. The subsequent study suggested a supplementary concept of lapses, which were related to “failures of attention or memory” (Lajunen et al., 2004). It was suggested that scores of violations directly indicate intended risk-taking, which also demonstrated stronger correlation with crash involvements than the scores of errors or lapses (de Winter and Dodou, 2010; Parker et al., 1995).

Aggression is another well-conceptualized risky behavior, which is largely determined by a driver's anger traits (Jerry L. Deffenbacher et al., 2001; J. L. Deffenbacher et al., 1994; Jovanović et al., 2011). It was suggested that drivers with highly aggressive propensities are more likely to be angered by uncomfortable driving situations, and risky driving could also be a way to vent their anger in such situations (Delhomme et al., 2012). Anger traits have often been measured by the Driving Anger Scale (DAS) (J. L. Deffenbacher et al., 1994), the Aggressive Driving Behavior Scale (Houston et al., 2003) or the Prosocial and Aggressive Driving Inventory (Harris et al., 2014).

Although many studies have validated the subjective instruments by linking them to actual behavior on the road (J. L. Deffenbacher et al., 1994; T. Lajunen et al., 2004; Xie and Parker, 2002; Zhao et al., 2012), it was also claimed that the data derived from these instruments was lacking in reliability due to participant response styles, imperfect recall of retrospective events, impression management, and social desirability (Timo Lajunen and Summala, 2003; Sullman and Taylor, 2010). For these reasons, several objective indictors have gained prominence to assess risk-taking behavior in real-life situations. For instance, the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) (Lejuez et al., 2002), which has been shown to correlate significantly with risky driving (Cheng et al., 2012).

Compared with the above instruments, driving data could provide more direct and objective assessments of risky driving. Previous simulator studies (Schwebel et al., 2007, 2006) examined risky decision-making of drivers while driving through closing gates which blocked the intended route. The results implied a relation between risky decision-making during simulator tasks and violation history, which was mediated by the individual personalities.

Meanwhile, various behavioral assessments were explored to quantify risk tendency. Several studies examined the safe margin of drivers in specific situations, such as crossing/turning at intersections (Alexander et al., 2002; Pollatschek et al., 2002) or merging into traffic streams (Beanland et al., 2013; Yan et al., 2007). These studies suggested that risky drivers demonstrated high acceptance of small safety margins (e.g. Time-to-Collision or distance, TTC). The metrics of driver longitudinal (e.g. velocity, accelerator and brake pedal) and lateral (e.g. rotation, steering wheel) controls were also promising indicators of risk-taking. In a simulator study to explore the influence of personal traits on driver behavior (Stephens and Groeger, 2009); drivers with higher DBQ-violation scores tended to brake less heavily. In line with this result, a real world highway driving study (Zhao et al., 2012) also found that drivers with high DBQ-violation scores drove faster and demonstrated more lane changes.

Decision-making could quantify a driver's balance between motivated goals and risk avoidance. However, the critical situations which can lead to risky decision-making are difficult to control and repeat in the real world. Other behavioral assessments (e.g. safety margin and vehicle control) were repeatable and comparable in both simulator and field environments. Nevertheless, the major challenge for these behavioral assessments was that the individual behavioral patterns were largely determined by specific driving situations, as elaborated by the task–capability interface model and risky-homeostasis theory (Fuller, 2005), and supported by experimental studies (Hoogendoorn et al., 2013; Stephens and Groeger, 2009). For example, in situations of high complexity/risk, even risky drivers demonstrate low speed and conservative maneuvers. In contrast, in situations of low complexity, even safe drivers adopt high speed and initiative behavior. The behavioral patterns reflecting the individual differences were largely buried by the variety of driving situations and difficulty in providing robust predictors of risk-taking in general situations (Stephens and Groeger, 2009; Zhao et al., 2012). To address this issue, it is necessary to explore these behavioral assessments in a wide range of driving situations.

The purpose of the present study was to develop and validate a Go/No-Go Simulator Driving Task (G/NG-SDT) with objective assessments of driver risk related traits. Based on the above discussion, the proposed protocol and assessments should meet the following requirements: 1) the designated driving task should include a variety of driving situations, to comprehensively reflect driver decision-making and related behavioral patterns; 2) risky decisions in driving tasks should be related to driver records on the road in the real world, as well as other existing instruments; 3) the behavioral assessments qualifying as robust indicators of risk-driving should be able to distinguish high-risk drivers consistently across different situations.

Specifically, during the G/NG-SDT, participants were instructed to complete a pre-designated route in as short time as possible, but avoiding any violations and crashes. Over the route, the participants encounter various scenarios, each of which contained a baseline scene (i.e. free driving situation) and a paired dilemma scene (i.e. situation with interference from other road users). During the dilemma scenes, the intended route of participants was blocked by other approaching road users, and they have to decide to go (i.e. take a risk) or to wait (i.e. show caution).

The primary measure of G/NG-SDT was the total number of Go decisions made in the dilemma scenes. Participant task performances and vehicle controls were also recorded across different scenarios and scenes. We hypothesized that high-risk drivers with more Go decisions also showed high risk propensity in the simulator and real road driving, as well as determined by instruments. It was also assumed that the behavioral assessments for these high-risk drivers significantly differed with those of low-risk drivers. Among these behavioral assessments, robust assessments were consistently distinguishable between high-risk and low-risk drivers in all scenarios and scenes.

@&#METHOD@&#

Eighty-four participants (aged from 21 to 44, M = 29.9, SD = 6.3; 67 males and 17 females) were recruited via the campus Bulletin Board System (n = 36) and driving school's contact list of licensed drivers (n = 48). All participants were required to have a minimum of three years of active driving experience with a valid license and more than 15,000 km of total driving distance during the previous three years. All participants received instructions about the experimental procedures used and signed the consent forms provided.

Eleven candidate scenarios of different road layouts and required routes were designed. Each scenario included a dilemma scene and a paired baseline scene composed of identical road layout and required routes. In the dilemma scene, an approaching road user (a vehicle or a pedestrian) obstructs the participant's intended route. In this situation, the participants have to make a decision before reaching the road user (as illustrated in Fig. 1
                        ). If the decision is not to go (No-Go), the participant has to slow down or stop entirely, taking the time to allow other road user go first before accelerating again. If the decision is to go (Go), the participant struggles for the right of way to pass, with a high chance of committing a traffic offense or causing a crash. In the baseline scene, no other road user appears and the participants can drive freely. In pilot testing, six informative scenarios were excluded from candidate scenarios as all pilot participants (n = 8, not included in formal experiment) made Go or No-Go decisions in their dilemma scenes.

Five scenarios (as illustrated in Fig. 2
                        ) were included in the G/NG-SDT, including: straight driving on a straight road, straight driving at a T intersection, straight driving at an X intersection, right turn at an X intersection and left turn at an X intersection. The dilemma scenes were detailed as below:

Straight driving (straight road): a car in front in the right lane is blocked by a bus stopping at a bus stop. The front vehicle merges from the right lane and obstructs the participant's intended straight route.

Straight driving (T intersection): a car in front appears on the right side, merging from a minor road onto the major road, obstructing the participant's intended straight route.

Straight driving (X intersection): an oncoming bus intending to turn left at an intersection obstructs a participant's intended straight route.

Right turn (X intersection): when the participant's vehicle is attempting to turn right, a pedestrian approaches from the near-side crosswalk, obstructing the intended route to the right of the participant.

Left turn (X intersection): when the participant's vehicle is attempting to turn left, an oncoming bus is going straight, crossing the intersection. The participant's intended route to the left is therefore blocked.

The aim of the G/NG-SDT was for all participants to minimize destination arrival times through identical routes, avoiding any violations and crashes. The route was a virtual urban road of 14 km, with the designed scenes located along it.

During the G/NG-SDT, the following instructions were provided: “Please drive according to the direction displayed on the screen and get to the destination as soon as possible. Meanwhile, please comply with the traffic rules and avoid any crashes. The reward of this task is inversely proportional to the completion time, from 0 (completion time is above 2500 s) to 20 RMB Yuan (approximately $3.3, completion time is less than 840 s). Each violation (exceeding the speed limit of 60 km/h, running a red light, crossing the yellow line) involves a 3 RMB Yuan ($0.5) penalty. Each crash (hitting other road users) involves a 5 RMB Yuan ($0.8) penalty”. If a crash occurred, the participant's vehicle was reset immediately to continue with the following route.

The G/NG-SDT was performed on a portable desktop simulator with a resolution of 1024 × 768 pixels on a 24-inch screen. It was placed 60 cm away from the participant's seat. The virtual environment image was generated by the Vega Prime (Presagis Inc., Canada), subtending 90°in a horizontal direction and 40°in a vertical direction. The simulator was operated through a G25 steering wheel and pedals (Logitech Inc., U.S.).

The decision-making in each dilemma scene was coded manually. The performances of the simulator task included violations, crashes, and completion time. Referring to the previous studies involving behavioral assessments (Minderhoud and Bovy, 2001; Stephens and Groeger, 2009; Yan et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2012), safety margin and longitudinal and lateral controls were recorded to quantify behavioral patterns. The assessment of safety margin to approaching road users, including minimum distance and minimum TTC (distance/relative velocity), were calculated over the segment from 150 m before to 100 m after the conflict point in each dilemma scene. The longitudinal controls were measured by average velocity, variance of velocity, percentage of gas, and brake pedals (from 0- no pressure, to 100%- full depth). Lateral controls were measured by average rotation velocity, steering angle (average absolute value, from 0° to 120°), and steering reversal rate (±10°threshold of reversal gap), over the same segments defined above, in both baseline and dilemma scenes.

The 27-item DBQ (T. Lajunen et al., 2004) was translated into Chinese version and validated to measure drivers' aberrant driving behavior (Xie and Parker, 2002). The propensity of violations, errors, and lapses were indicated by the average scores of corresponding subscales (five-point Likert scale, from 1-not show this behavior at all, to 5-always shows this behavior).

The 33-item DAS (J. L. Deffenbacher et al., 1994) was translated into Chinese version and validated to measure drivers' aggression (Li et al., 2014). Participants were evaluated on a five-point Likert scale (from 1-not at all, to 5-very much) to indicate the amount of anger they experienced when encountering a series of traffic situations. The scale showed satisfactory reliabilities for the total score (α = 0.83) in this study.

The BART (Lejuez et al., 2003, 2002) was used as a context-free paradigm to evaluate risk tendency. Within each trial of BART, four items were presented on the screen: a small balloon, a pump-button, a collection-button, and the number of pumps made in the current trial. The participants were instructed to press keyword buttons alternately (marked “pump” and “collect” accordingly) to pump the balloon or collect the score (equal to the number of pumps in the current trial). After each pump, the balloon increased in size proportionally and might explode randomly obeying a uniform distribution, from 1 to 10 pumps. If the balloon exploded, the score was zero. The aim for the participants in BART was to maximize their total score (i.e. pumping as much as possible and avoiding explosions) in a total of 80 trials. The pumps averaged from the trials without explosions indicated their risk tendency in the real world (Lejuez et al., 2003, 2002).

Upon arrival, the participants were required to report their demographic details (age, education), driving experience (driving frequency, driving years, annual distance), and on-road record of violations and crashes over the previous three years. Participants were then instructed to complete the DBQ, DAS, and BART (with 20 trails for training and 80 trails for data collection). Prior to the G/NG-SDT, a driving training session (approximately 15 min) was arranged for participants to become familiar with the simulator operation. After the G/NG-SDT, each participant received a compensation of RMB 60 Yuan (approximately 10 U.S. dollars) minus the penalties accrued (if any) during the course of the G/NG-SDT.

Participants were divided into high-risk drivers and low-risk drivers depending on the total number of Go decisions made. Independent t tests were conducted to examine the on-road riskiness measured via DBQ, DAS, and BART of the high-risk and low-risk drivers. The between-group differences for the assessments of safety margin and longitudinal and lateral controls were explored considering the effects of the specific driving situations. The group (high-risk vs. low-risk, between-group factors) × scenario (five scenarios, only dilemma scenes, within-group factor) ANOVAs were performed on the assessment of the safety margin. The group × scene (baseline vs. dilemma scenes, within-group factor) × scenario ANOVAs were performed on the assessments of longitudinal and lateral controls. Since the scenes differed greatly across the scenarios, the scene × scenario interactions on dependent variables were obvious with little realistic implications. To focus on the issue of between-group differences on the behavioral patterns during the G/NG-SDT, analyses of ANOVA only included the main effect of group, scene, and scenario, and the two-factor interactions of group with other independent factors. The robust version ANOVA was conducted to prevent the impact of inhomogeneity (Wilcox, 2012). Tukey corrections were used for post-hoc comparisons. The significance level was set at 0.05 for all analysis.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Fig. 3
                        
                         shows the decision-making results in the dilemma scenes for all participants. The mean and median of total Go decisions was 2.5 (SD = 1.2) and 2, respectively, which implied a balance point between two conflicting goals for the participants to achieve better performances in G/NG-SDT (i.e. short completion time with high-risk/long completion time with low-risk). To distinguish the individuals with risky traits, the participants were divided into two groups via the median split: high-risk (n = 40, Go decisions > 2) and low-risk drivers (n = 44, Go decisions ≤ 2).


                        Table 1
                         lists the number of Go decisions, demographics, driving experience, task performances, on-road records, and other instrument results of the different driver groups. There was no between-group significance in terms of age, gender, education, driving frequency, driving years, and annual driving distance. However, the on-road violation records for the high-risk drivers (M = 1.4, SD = 0.8) were significantly higher, t = 4.62, p < 0.01, than those for the low-risk drivers (M = 0.7, SD = 0.4). In addition, high-risk drivers had a significantly shorter completion time (M = 902.7 s, SD = 176.1) compared to low-risk drivers (M = 1104.1, SD = 162.3). No on-road crash was reported for all recruited participants.

During the G/NG-SDT, high-risk drivers demonstrated significantly higher violation frequencies (M = 1.4, SD = 0.8) and crashes (M = 0.5, SD = 0.9) than low-risk drivers (violations: M = 0.7, SD = 0.4; crashes: M = 0.2, SD = 0.3). Meanwhile, completion times for the high-risk drivers were shorter than for low-risk drivers, t = 5.72, p < 0.01.

As to the other instruments, high-risk drivers demonstrated significantly higher DBQ scores (t = 2.11, p = 0.04), DBQ-violations (t = 3.35, p < 0.01), and more BART pumps (t = 10.91, p < 0.01). The total number of Go decisions was not directly related to the scores of DBQ-errors, DBQ-lapses, and DAS, which did not demonstrate the between-group significance.

The assessments of safety margin for high-risk and low-risk drivers across the different scenarios are shown in Fig. 4. High-risk drivers demonstrated lower minimum distance, F(1, 405) = 9.63, p < 0.01, and shorter minimum TTC, F(1, 405) = 7.71, p < 0.01, (M = 8.9 m, SD = 4.5; M = 1.9 s, SD = 0.6) than those of the low-risk drivers (M = 14.9 m, SD = 5.9; M = 6.8 s, SD = 1.2).

The scenarios demonstrated that there was significant main effect on both minimum distance, F(4, 405) = 8.12, p < 0.01, and minimum TTC, F(4, 405) = 7.41, p < 0.01. The minimum distance during the straight road scenario (M = 22.6 m, SD = 11.8) was larger than those in other scenarios, p < 0.05. The minimum TTC on the straight road scenario (M = 5.9 s, SD = 2.9) was longer than that during the scenario involving straight driving at T intersections (M = 3.4 s, SD = 2.7) and X intersections (M = 3.6 s, SD = 2.6), p < 0.05. No significant group × scenario interaction was found for all assessments of safety margin.

The assessments of longitudinal controls for high-risk and low-risk drivers across scenes and scenarios are showed in Fig. 5
                        . Over all driving situations, high-risk drivers demonstrated significantly higher velocity, F(1, 810) = 9.14, p < 0.01, lower variance of velocity, F(1, 810) = 4.71, p = 0.03, higher percentage of accelerator pedal, F(1, 810) = 15.43, p < 0.01, and a lower percentage of brake pedal, F(1, 810) = 12.60, p < 0.01.

Lower velocity, F(1, 810) = 11.51, p < 0.01, larger variance of velocity, F(1, 810) = 9.68, p < 0.01, higher percentage of accelerator pedal, F(1, 810) = 13.31, p < 0.01, and higher percentage of brake pedal, F(1, 810) = 7.28, p < 0.01, were reported in the dilemma scenes compared to in the baseline scenes. The significant group × scene interactions were observed for velocity, F(1, 810) = 8.71, p < 0.01, variance of velocity, F(1, 810) = 12.25, p < 0.01, percentage of accelerator pedal, F(1, 810) = 10.91, p < 0.01, and percentage of brake pedal, F(1, 810) = 9.31, p < 0.01. The between-group differences for all longitudinal assessments were larger in the dilemma scenes than in the baseline scenes. The significance of between-group differences were reported in the dilemma scenes for all longitudinal assessments, p < 0.01; the between-group differences obtained in the baseline scenes were only significant for velocity, p < 0.01, and percentage of accelerator pedal, p = 0.02.

The significant main effects of scenario were observed for velocity, F(4, 810) = 7.92, p < 0.01, percentage of accelerator pedal, F(4, 810) = 7.91, p < 0.01, and percentage of brake pedal, F(4, 810) = 3.34, p = 0.01. For all participants over the scenes, higher velocity, p < 0.01, higher percentage of accelerator, p < 0.01, and higher percentage and brake pedal, p < 0.05, were observed during straight driving rather than turning. The significant group × scenario interactions were established for velocity, F(4, 810) = 2.52, p = 0.04, and variance of velocity, F(4, 810) = 2.66, p = 0.04: the between-group differences of velocity and variance of velocity were significant in all scenarios, p < 0.05; the largest between-group differences of both assessments were obtained during straight driving at T intersection, p < 0.01.

The assessments of lateral controls for high-risk and low-risk drivers across scenes and scenarios are shown in Fig. 6
                        . Over all driving situations, the high-risk drivers demonstrated significantly higher rotation velocity, F(1, 810) = 11.67, p < 0.01, larger steering angle, F(1, 810) = 8.71, p < 0.01, and more steering reversal rate, F(1, 810) = 6.82, p < 0.01, compared to low-risk drivers.

The larger steering angle, F(1, 810) = 7.31, p < 0.01, and more steering reversal rate, F(1, 810) = 8.66, p < 0.01, were established in the dilemma scenes rather than the baseline scenes. The significance group × scene interactions were observed for rotation velocity, F(1, 810) = 9.21, p < 0.01, steering angle, F(1, 810) = 17.22, p < 0.01, and steering reversal rate, F(1, 810) = 19.51, p < 0.01. The between-group differences for all lateral assessments were larger in the dilemma scenes than in the baseline scenes. The significant between-group differences were reported in the dilemma scenes for all lateral assessments, p < 0.01; the between-group differences obtained in the baseline scenes were only significant for rotation velocity, p = 0.02.

The significant main effects of scenario were established for rotation velocity, F(4, 810) = 12.82, p < 0.01, steering angle, F(4, 810) = 9.97, p < 0.01, and steering reversal rate, F(4, 810) = 8.67, p < 0.01. For all participants over the scenes, average rotation velocity, steering angle, and steering reversal rate were lower during straight driving than turning, p < 0.01. The significant group × scenario interactions were established for rotation velocity, F(4, 810) = 15.01, p < 0.01, steering angle, F(4, 810) = 8.69, p < 0.01, and steering reversal rate, F(4, 810) = 4.61, p < 0.01: the largest between-group differences for all lateral assessments were obtained in the scenario of left turn at an X intersection, p < 0.01; the significant between-group differences in all scenarios were only established for rotation velocity, p < 0.05.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The present study developed and validated a simulator-driving task, G/NG-SDT, to explore the decision-making and behavioral patterns of drivers. Specifically, the participants were encouraged to get more reward (shorter completion time) and avoid penalties (less violations and crashes) during the G/NG-SDT. It became challenging for them to balance the conflict goals and make decisions. As assumed, the Go decisions were significantly related to the risk-taking both in simulator tasks and during the real driving, as well as several existing instruments of risky driving. Additionally, the behavioral patterns were also statistically distinguishable between individuals with differed risky traits (i.e. high-risk vs. low-risk drivers), and with the considerable effects of specific situations with the interference of other road users (i.e. baseline vs. dilemma scenes) across varied road layouts and intended driving routes (i.e. scenarios).

In line with previous studies (Schwebel et al., 2007; Tom et al., 2007), the propensity to make Go decisions indicated a driver's likelihood to take risks. During the simulator task, high-risk drivers gave more priority to the motivated goal rather than to safety concerns. These drivers took less time to complete the task, but with more violations and crashes. They also demonstrated more violations in their driving history in the real world, higher scores of DBQ-violations, and more BART pumps. In contrast, the risky traits in the G/NG-SDT was not sensitive to DBQ-errors, DBQ-lapses or DAS, which measured unsafe driving related to the unintended consequences (Parker et al., 1992, 1995) and anger traits (Jerry L. Deffenbacher et al., 2001). These results suggest that such decision-making reflects the intended risk-taking of drivers derived from a deliberate plan, rather than other forms of risky driving caused by low task capacities or furious affective responses. Moreover, the link between risk-taking in G/NG-SDT and context-free BART implied that these high-risk drivers might also be involved in other risky activities, not limited to on-road situations only.

Compared to low-risk drivers, high-risk drivers demonstrated significant differences in several behavioral patterns in the G/NG-SDT: shorter minimum distance and minimum TTC, higher velocity and rotation velocity, lower variance of velocity, deeper accelerator pedal and less usage of brake pedal, larger steering angle, and more steering reversal rate. These results are consistent with previous studies based on driving data which suggest that risky drivers have high acceptance of small safety margins (Minderhoud and Bovy, 2001; Pollatschek et al., 2002; Yan et al., 2007), choose higher speeds, and control their vehicles recklessly (Stephens and Groeger, 2009; Yan et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2012). Additionally, as G/NG-SDT is a reward-motived task, the driving data was only recorded in selected segments, and drivers were classified based on their Go decisions. This made the between-group differences in behavioral assessment more obvious in the present study than in previous studies (Stephens and Groeger, 2009; Yan et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2012).

It should also be emphasized that the participants adopted different behavioral patterns according to the characteristics of the road layout and required route. This was supported by the significant main effect of scenario for all behavioral assessments, with the expectation in variance of velocity. To summarize, the participants showed higher velocity, deeper gas and brake pedal, lower rotation velocity, smaller steering angle, and less steering reversal rate during straight driving compared to turning. The longitudinal and lateral assessments were also largely determined by the interference of other road users, which were supported by the significant main effect of scene for all assessments, with an expectation in variance of velocity. Over all scenarios, the participants decreased longitudinal speed (higher variance of velocity, deeper usage of pedals) and adjusted the lateral position more frequently (larger steering angle and more steering reversal rate) when encountering other road users. As for rotation velocity, participants increased it in the dilemma scenes during straight driving and decreased it in the dilemma scenes while turning.

It is important to note that very few behavior assessments significantly differ between driver groups in baseline scenes. A possible implication is that drivers who show willingness to take risks might show similar behavioral patterns as other drivers during free driving, or in other equivalent situations of low demand or risk. This could be a considerable challenge to evaluate if risky driving is only based on ordinary driving data.

Nevertheless, the assessment of velocity, percentage of accelerator pedal, and rotation velocity were statistically distinguishable between groups in all scenes and all scenarios, to be qualified as the robust measures of risky driving. These robust behavioral assessments offer the possibility to identify risky individuals via driving data in more general driving situations, despite the effects of the character of traffic situations on individual differences. This implied the potential to diagnose the drivers with higher risk propensity just by mining the assessments of their behavior patterns. Although the present study was conducted in precisely controlled simulator task, the results were also expect to extended to the driving data recorded on the real roads.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Several limitations in this study should be highlighted. Firstly, the financial incentives were designed in the G/NG-SDT to motivate drivers' risk-taking, which were not representative of the motivations for the non-incentivized real driving. Thus, the risky decision-making and associated behavioral patterns achieved in this study might differ from that in the read roadway situations. Secondly, no participants in this study reported crashes in the real world, which means that the samples were not of very high risk than the drivers with accident involvements. More direct evidence is needed between crash involvements and risky traits, as well as behavioral patterns in simulator tasks and on the real roads. Thirdly, to validate the G/NG-SDT, driving history and several instruments were adopted. However, several studies also demonstrated the contribution of various personal traits to risky driving. Comprehensive analysis between personalities and risky traits could be necessary to compare different measures of on-road risk-taking, in either subjective and objective approaches (Schwebel et al., 2006). Fourthly, the drivers' skill level was not considered in the analysis part, which could affect drivers' behavioral assessments. However, due to no between-group difference was demonstrated for demographics and driving experiences, such effect on results was limited. Finally, the participants in this study were grouped via their median number of Go decisions to distinguish high-risk drivers from others, which possibly restricted the variances and might be less informative than other approaches, such as correlation or regression. However, the median split was adopted for classification with acceptable sample size (n = 84), which could have more strict significance conditions than correlation or regression (Iacobucci et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2012).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The G/NG-SDT proposed in this study used reward-motived simulator driving tasks to measure driver decision-making and related behavioral patterns across different driving situations, which were related to their intended risk-taking. Drivers with more Go decisions in G/NG-SDT also showed higher risk tendency on the road and in other related instruments, and demonstrated distinguishable behavioral patterns. Among all those examined, behavioral assessments, velocity, percentage of accelerator pedal, and rotation velocity were consistently distinguishable between high-risk and lower-risk drivers in all driving situations. In light of this, the G/NG-SDT, as well as other standardized simulator tasks, are feasible to identify risky drivers for more effective interventions.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was supported jointly by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant number 71371103 and 31271100, and the Open Funding Project of National Key Laboratory of Human Factors Engineering, under grant number HF2013-K-04. The authors would like to thank the Fengshun Driving School, Beijing, for their support in participant recruitment. We would also like to thank Peng Qijia and Tingru Zhang for their great work during pilot testing of the driving tasks.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

