@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Typing performance and body discomfort among overweight and obese office workers: A pilot study of keyboard modification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Alternative keyboards can receive positive gains without reducing worker productivity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Obese participants reported reductions wrist, upper back, and lower back discomfort.


                        
                        
                           
                           It took participants approximately 11 days to adjust to the alternative keyboard style.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Obesity

Body discomfort

Keyboard ergonomics

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Obesity in the workplace is associated with loss of productivity, high medical care expenses, and increased rates of work-related injuries and illness. Thus, effective, low-cost interventions are needed to accommodate the size of today's obese office worker while alleviating potential physical harm associated with musculoskeletal disorders. Utilizing a sample of 22 overweight and obese office workers, this pilot study assessed the impact of introducing an alternative, more ergonomically-sound keyboard on perceptions about design, acceptability, and usability; self-reported body discomfort; and typing productivity. Data were collected using self-reported questionnaires and objective typing tests administered before and after the intervention. The intervention duration was six weeks. After switching from their standard work keyboard to an alternative keyboard, all participants reported significant decreases in lower back discomfort (t = 2.14, P = 0.044); although obese participants reported significant decreases in both upper (t = 2.46, P = 0.032) and lower (t = 2.39, P = 0.036) back discomfort. No significant changes were observed in overall typing performance scores from baseline to follow-up. Findings suggest that such interventions may be introduced into the workforce with positive gains for workers without reducing short-term worker productivity.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Consistent with the obesity epidemic in United States experienced across all age groups (Committee on Accelerating Progress in Obesity Prevention and Institute Of Medicine, 2012; National Institutes of Health, 2005), the American workforce is becoming increasingly obese (Church et al., 2011; Rosen, 2008). These weight-related trends are attributed, in part, to the changing nature of work, which is increasingly being characterized by a reliance on computer-based technology and pressure for greater productivity in the workplace. Demands to meet employer expectations and high-paced business demands force employees to work longer hours, often in a seated position, which fosters longer durations of physical inactivity and subsequent obesity (Church et al., 2011; Benden, 2006; Smith et al., 2009; Juneau and Potvin, 2010). Sedentary behavior is widely recognized as a causal indicator of weight gain (Must and Tybor, 2005; Blanck et al., 2007; Pulsford et al., 2012), which can be exacerbated by employment-related responsibilities and activities such as computer use (Owen et al., 2012; Hamilton et al., 2008).

More than half of the current workforce is composed of office workers who are overweight or obese (Fastenberg, 2013; Witters and Agrawal, 2011). The consequences of this epidemic include loss of quality of life, high medical care expenses and per capita costs, loss of productivity, and high rates of work-related injuries and illness (Gates et al., 2008; Poston et al., 2011; Barkin et al., 2010). As an example, obese workers file more than twice the number of worker's compensation claims (Ostbye et al., 2007) with costs that are dramatically higher than that of normal-weight workers (Finkelstein et al., 2010). Additionally, that cost has been shown to increase as worker BMI increases, even among obese worker populations (Finkelstein et al., 2010). Further, obese individuals and those who sit for longer periods of time may experience more back pain and discomfort, relative to their lesser-weight counterparts (Gates et al., 2008). These issues have been attributed to the awkward posture and limb positioning assumed by these overweight and obese individuals as they sit at workstations less accommodating of their body type (Kaleta and Jegier, 2007).

Studies have shown that workers involved in heavy keyboard use are more likely to develop carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) (Fagarasanu and Kumar, 2003). Additionally, it has been shown that obese workers are more than twice as likely to develop CTS as compared to their normal-weight counterparts (Lam and Thurston, 1998). These results have been repeated in similar studies with results indicating that subjects with a BMI indicating obesity are significantly more likely to develop CTS; this association is even more strongly associated with women (Becker et al., 2002).

For these reasons, interventions including workspace modifications are needed to improve workplace environments to accommodate larger and heavier employees. However, a more holistic approach that includes invasive strategies is warranted to address issues with back pain and overall health and wellness. Less invasive strategies are preferable because they are less expensive to the employer and less likely to disrupt work-related productivity for a computer-reliant workforce (Mirtz and Greene, 2005). One such inexpensive and effective strategy may be the modification of computer equipment such as computer keyboards.

Keyboard modification (e.g., alternative-style keyboards that are split and/or adjustable) has been shown to reduce wrist and hand pain and discomfort for workers (Tittiranonda et al., 1999). This posture improvement is intended to minimize lateral arm positioning and reduce ulnar deviations of the hand, which reduce the risk of musculoskeletal disorders. Ergonomic keyboards are typically designed to place the wrists and forearms in a more neutral posture (Baker et al., 2007; Marklin and Simoneau, 2004) and can include slant/tilt features to alter key pressure and response.

The aim of an ergonomic keyboard is to reduce the overall impact of typing on the upper extremities. This is done by changing hand and arm posture to reduce arm abduction, forearm pronation, extension of the wrists, and ulnar deviation of the hands (Fagarasanu et al., 2005). Static posture in a seated position is known to evoke pain among computer users (Tittiranonda et al., 1999; Gerr et al., 2004), and evidence suggests prolonged exposure to improper posture with repetitive movements can cause irreversible musculoskeletal disorders (Dadwal et al., 2013; Gerr et al., 2004). While the relationship between exposure, body discomfort, and musculoskeletal disorders is relatively well understood, less is known about these effects among the obese worker population with greater need for postural accommodations population. The result of the anthropometric change in obese workers is greater joint angles for the hands and wrists and more pronounced upper arm abduction, all of which contribute to this increase in likelihood for development of musculoskeletal disorders (Gordon and Bradtmiller, 2012).

Since ergonomic (alternative) keyboards have quickly become the most frequently sold keyboards in the United States (Rempel, 2008), research has increasingly examined their effectiveness in terms of the keyboards' ergonomics and usability. Alternative keyboard use has been studied in relation to wrist/forearm posture, muscle activity, keystroke force, comfort, performance, and a myriad of other topics (Marklin and Simoneau, 2004; Marklin et al., 1999; Rempel et al., 2007, 2009; Smith et al., 1998; Swanson et al., 1997; Szeto and Ng, 2000). Studies have shown initial adoption of alternative keyboards is low because of their differentiation from traditional straight keyboards (Cakir, 1995; Tittiranonda et al., 1999). However, research suggests that even with an initial adoption bias, when used, overall productivity using alternative keyboards recovers to the initial rate of traditional straight keyboards within days (Swanson et al., 1997; Zecevic et al., 2000).

As postulated by the authors, Fig. 1
                      illustrates differing degrees of ulnar deviation between a normal-weight individual using a standard keyboard, an overweight/obese individual using a standard keyboard, and an overweight/obese individual using an alternative keyboard (i.e., adjustable open-angle keyboard). As seen in this figure, while the normal-weight individual using the standard keyboard experiences some degree of ulnar deviation, the degree of deviation is dramatically exacerbated among the overweight/obese individual using the standard keyboard. Additionally, as seen in this figure, ulnar deviation among overweight/obese individuals can be lessened if an alternative, split keyboard is introduced, which can alleviate the need for awkward arm positioning to account for larger torsos. Further, alleviating lateral arm positioning and associated ulnar deviation can reduce stress placed on an individual's arms, writs, hands, and back associated with unnatural posture.

Utilizing a sample of overweight and obese office workers, the purposes of this study were to: (1) explore perceptions about the design, acceptability, and usability associated with standard work keyboards among a sample of overweight and obese workers; (2) assess the impact of introducing an alternative, more ergonomically-sound keyboard on aspects of self-reported body discomfort and typing productivity. As related to these purposes, the authors hypothesized that switching to the alternative keyboard would: (1) improve perceptions about keyboard ease-of-use; (2) decrease self-reported body discomfort; (3) not influence typing productivity; and (4) have a greater impact on obese participants compared to their overweight counterparts.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Data for this pilot study were collected from a convenience sample of 26 Texas male and female workers between the ages of 18 and 60 years who were employed in a large gas and petroleum exploration and production company. Participants were voluntarily recruited using the employee website and workplace postings and announcements. There were no weight-related recruitment criteria to participate in the study. All participants were employed in their current position of at least six months and used a standard computer keyboard for four or more hours per day. Typical job responsibilities of participants included using keyboards for general correspondence and typing as well as numerical and graphical data input. To be included in this study, participants were required to have a typing word proficiency level of at least 30 words per minute (WPM) and report no upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders (UEMD) or associated symptoms. While four intervention participants were categorized as “normal weight” (i.e., body mass index [BMI] < 25 kg/m2), they were omitted from analyses because of this study's emphasis on overweight/obese status and insufficient cases for comparison purposes. This pilot study was conducted over a six-week period. Prior to week one, participants were informed about the study purpose and briefed about study procedures. Upon introducing the alternative keyboard at the beginning of week four, study investigators provided a brief training to participants about the available functions and correct use of this equipment. The intervention design and duration for this pilot study have been supported by previous studies deeming this period sufficient to allow for adoption of the alternative keyboard (Swanson et al., 1997; Zecevic et al., 2000; Smith et al., 1998). Participation in this study was voluntary and no incentives were provided to respondents for participating. Approval for this study was received from the Institutional Review Board of Texas A&M University.

Testing equipment included the standard flat/straight QWERTY keyboard (participants' current keyboard) and the Goldtouch® Adjustable Open Angle Keyboard (i.e., “alternative keyboard”, for the purposes of this study). The alternative keyboard allows for up to 30° of angle in the keyboard as well as 30° of vertical inclination. The vertical inclination is referred to as a “tent” effect. These adjustments allow the user flexibility in the three-dimensional adjustment of the keyboard to allow for optimal hand placement while typing. These movement capabilities are intended to allow the users to make angular adjustments to the keyboard to minimize wrist supination and both radial and ulnar deviation, all of which are key factors in development of distal upper extremity musculoskeletal diseases (Serina et al., 1999; Marklin et al., 1999) (see Fig. 2
                        ).

BMI was calculated from participants' self-reported height (in feet and inches) and weight (in pounds), which were converted to meters and kilograms, respectively. BMI levels were calculated by dividing weight by height and rounded to the nearest tenth as recommended by the original Quetelet calculation (Garrow and Webster, 1985). Participants' BMI was then categorized as overweight (BMI = 25–29.9 kg/m2) or obese (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) (WHO Expert Committee on Physical Status: the Use and Interpretation of Anthropometry, 1995).

At the beginning of week one (i.e., baseline), study investigators administered a survey instrument that collected participants' ratings about the design, acceptability, and usability associated with their standard work keyboard. An identical version of this survey instrument was administered at the end of the six-week study (i.e., post-intervention) to enable comparisons to be made after participants had used the alternative keyboard for approximately three weeks. This study utilized three items from these survey instruments, each measured using 5-point Likert-type scales scored 0 for “strongly disagree” and 4 for “strongly agree.” Participants were asked to rate their level agreement with the following ease-of-use-related items: It is difficult to reach some keys because the way they are arranged; I must maintain an awkward position while using this keyboard; and using this keyboard, I can type for a long period of time before getting uncomfortable.

A body discomfort survey (Congleton, 1983) was administered to each participant each week on during the last 3 h of the workday in which typing tests were administered. This survey assessed participants' comfort/discomfort for body parts including their neck, shoulders, upper arms, elbows, lower arms, wrists, hands, upper back, middle back, and lower back. This validated discomfort tool uses an 8 cm line for individual body parts. For each body part, subjects mark an “x” on the line for their corresponding level of discomfort. The placement of the mark is measured from the left or “origin” with the far left being “No Pain”, the midpoint being “Moderate Pain” and the far right being “Intolerable Pain”. This distance, measured to the nearest millimeter, was used for analysis. For the purposes of this study, only upper arms, elbows, lower arms, wrists, hands, upper back, middle back, and lower back variables were used. Comparisons of body discomfort were made based on test scores obtained from weeks three and six (i.e., comparing the final week of using their standard work keyboard to the final week of using the alternative keyboard). Body discomfort variables were measured as continuous variables.

Each week of the six-week study participants were given a typing test using Keyboarding Stills Test 2004 Typing/Data Entry version 2.0.1 software. The program provides text passages and calculates participants' results based on Gross Words Per Minute (WPM), Net WPM, Accuracy, Total Key Strokes, and Errors. Gross WPM was recorded as the total number of words typed per unit of time (minute) based on a standard 5-keystroke “word” standardization. Net WPM was calculated as the Gross WPM minus 2 words for each error made by the participant. Accuracy was recorded as the number of correct words typed divided by the total number of words typed per unit of time (minute). Total Keystrokes was recorded as the total number of keystrokes including errors per unit of time (minute). Errors were recorded as the total number of errors in word typing sequence per unit of time (minute).

Typing tests were administered to participants either during the first 3 h of the workday to obtain peak performance. In weeks one, two, and three, participants completed typing tests using their standard work keyboard and workspace arrangement. Participants were then given an alternative keyboard on Friday of week three. In weeks four, five, and six, participants completed the same typing tests during the first 3 h of the workday. Participants did not have access to their standard keyboards during workdays in weeks four, five, or six. Comparisons of typing proficiency were made based on test scores obtained from weeks three and six (i.e., comparing the final week of using their standard work keyboard to the final week of using the alternative keyboard). Gross WPM, Net WPM, Accuracy, Total Key Strokes, and Errors were measured as continuous variables.

All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS (version 21). Descriptive statistics were calculated for all study variables, which were examined in relationship to participants' BMI category (i.e., overweight, obese). Pearson's chi-square tests were performed to assess the independence between BMI categories and categorized variables. Independent sample t-tests were performed for continuous variables. To test the first hypothesis, paired t-tests were performed to compare mean differences between keyboard ease-of-use perceptions from week three to week six (Table 2). To test the second hypothesis, paired t-tests were performed to compare mean differences between body discomfort scores from week three to week six (see Table 3). Additionally, we conducted trend analyses to examine weekly mean body discomfort score changes from week 1 to week 6 (see Fig. 3
                        ). To test the third hypothesis, paired t-tests were performed to compare mean differences of typing performance items (i.e., Gross WPM, Net WPM, Accuracy, Total Key Strokes, and Errors) from week three to week six (see Table 4). Finally, to test the fourth hypothesis, all analyses were performed for all participants, then separately for overweight and obese participants.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Table 1
                      describes sample characteristics and other study variables by participants' BMI category. Data were analyzed from 22 overweight and obese workers. Of these participants, 45.5% were overweight (n = 10) and 54.5% were obese (n = 12). No significant differences were observed when comparing sample characteristics by BMI category. Over half of the participants were male (54.5%).

On average, participants reported having 10.91 (±8.27) days to adjust from their standard work keyboard to the alternative keyboard. Over 77% of participants reported the alternative keyboard was comfortable to use; more so among obese participants when compared to their overweight counterparts (i.e., 83.3% versus 70.0%, respectively).

As seen in Table 1, after using the alternative keyboard for three weeks, 18.2% of participants reported less difficulty reaching some keys because of the way they were arranged, 40.9% reported a decrease in awkward positioning while using the keyboard, and 59.1% reported improvement in being able to type for long periods of time without becoming uncomfortable. Improvements in participants' perceived ability to type for long periods of time before getting uncomfortable among obese participants (75.0%) compared to their overweight counterparts (40.0%) were also reported. No significant differences were observed comparing changes by overweight and obese status.

As seen in Table 2
                        , on average after switching from their standard work keyboard to an alternative keyboard, all participants reported significant increases in their ability to type for long periods of time before getting uncomfortable (t = −2.35, P = 0.028). No changes were observed when comparing perceived keyboard comfort changes among overweight participants. Conversely, obese participants reported significant increases in their ability to type for long periods of time before getting uncomfortable after switching from their standard work keyboard to an alternative keyboard (t = −3.56, P = 0.004).

As seen in Table 3
                        , on average after switching from their standard work keyboard to an alternative keyboard, no significant changes were observed when comparing upper arm, elbow, lower arm, wrist, or hand discomfort among participants. After the switch, all participants reported significant decreases in lower back discomfort (t = 2.14, P = 0.044). No significant changes were observed when comparing back discomfort among overweight participants. However, obese participants reported significant decreases in upper back (t = 2.46, P = 0.032) and lower back discomfort (t = 2.39, P = 0.036) after switching from their standard work keyboard to an alternative keyboard.

As seen in Fig. 3, trend analyses revealed general decreases in self-reported body discomfort scores for most body parts from week one to week six. Most notable decreases were observed for self-reported wrist and lower back discomfort. Relative to their overweight counterparts, obese participants reported more discomfort for most body parts upon entering the intervention and upon conclusion of the intervention. However, trends vastly differed between overweight and obese participants over the course of the study period. Compared to week three, average discomfort scores increased in week four for elbow, lower arm, and hand discomfort (the first week of alternative keyboard use); however, such increases typically subsided by week six.

As seen in Table 4
                        , no significant changes were observed in overall typing performance scores from baseline to follow-up (which indicates no reduction in performance after the alternative keyboard was introduced). However, observations were seen in pre-post trends when differences were compared by BMI category. Although there were more typing errors, overweight participants showed increases in Gross WPM, Net WPM, Accuracy, and Total Key Strokes after using the alternative keyboard for three weeks. Conversely, the same typing performance measures tended to decline among obese participants. It is important to note that obese participants on average scored better than their overweight counterparts on performance tests at week three and week six, although they had more typing errors.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study explored how overweight and obese office workers viewed the equipment they were using and the extent to which the introduction of alternative, more ergonomically-oriented equipment could improve work tasks and reduce body-part discomfort. Our results support prior investigations of ergonomic interventions reporting that physical work environment modifications are important because they can improve postures and decrease cumulative musculoskeletal stressors that lead to musculoskeletal trauma disorders (Brewer et al., 2006). Current study findings suggest that keyboard-related interventions may be introduced into the workforce with positive gains for workers without reducing short-term worker productivity. Study hypotheses were confirmed in that switching to the alternate keyboard improved participants' perceptions about keyboard ease-of-use, decreased their self-reported discomfort for certain body parts, and unaltered their typing productivity. Further, when comparing study outcomes by weight status, the intervention seemed to impact obese participants more significantly than their overweight counterparts.

After switching to the alternative keyboard for three weeks, study participants reported that they felt like they could work for longer periods of time without feeling the stress and discomfort of working, which confirms the first study hypothesis. While this is a positive result, the question inevitably arises whether this is a good result. While the need to minimize awkward postures and reduce musculoskeletal stress is always paramount, this result must be examined together with the study population. Is making it possible for obese and overweight office workers to sit for longer periods a good thing? Arguments could be made that the split adjustable keyboard, while showing positive results in reducing musculoskeletal stress (Anderson et al., 2009), should be included as part of a workstation revision, potentially with the inclusion of a stand-biased workstation (Benden, 2008).

As related to the second and fourth study hypotheses, results of the body-part discomfort surveys showed that obese study participants reported a significant decrease in upper and lower back discomfort when using the alternative keyboard. While participants' posture was not directly measured during this study, this result would imply an improved posture for the obese study participants. The significance of these results is consistent with the idea that as workers' BMI and weight increase, the diameter of their torso (both abdomen and chest) will also increase. This change will force the individual to have their arms in a more lateral position, rather than a more vertical position. When typing, this lateral movement in the positioning of the upper arms causes an ulnar deviation of the hand, which has been shown to significantly increase the risk of musculoskeletal disorders. Overall, ergonomic keyboards are designed to reduce this ulnar deviation and allow for a more neutral posture of the hands, wrists, arms, and back (Haynes and Williams, 2007). Considering reduced wrist discomfort was reported among obese participants in the current study, findings indicate that split adjustable keyboards allow overweight and obese users to adjust the keyboard angle so they achieve the more desired neutral posture to reduce the risk of musculoskeletal disorders.

Sometimes study results that aren't statistically significant reveal as much about their representative study populations as do statistically significant findings. This study is potentially one of those cases, which confirms the third study hypothesis. In interventions such as these where what can be seen as a radical change in the office ergonomic layout, particularly on the hardware side, performance is always a key component of measurement because the changes are usually made to improve the ergonomic layout and decrease the risk of musculoskeletal disorders or injuries (Brewer et al., 2006). The results of the typing performance measures showed that while overall for all participants, typing scores may have decreased numerically slightly, there was no statistically significance difference in their minimal decline. The same holds true for the subjects' performance measures when categorized by BMI status. While there may have been a minimal decline in the typing performance measures of the obese participants, it was not a statistically significant different from pre- to post-intervention. Also, for the overweight participants, their numerical increases in performance measures showed no significant difference from pre- to post-intervention.

As such, it appears that this study is a case when the findings of a study are in the non-findings. However, the absence of statistical significance does not indicate the absence of practical significance. For example, the decreased typing performance from pre- to post-intervention in terms of typing errors, while not pronounced, may have been attributed to the alternative keyboard adoption or key arrangement (note that the standard deviations for typing errors increased dramatically from week three to week six, which may indicate a subsample of participants had more difficulty adjusting to the alternative keyboard). Further, this study did not examine the use of alternative keyboard features (e.g., angle or vertical inclination, 10-key pad), which could have influenced adoption and discomfort. Additional studies are warranted to assess elements associated with the adoption of alternative keyboards on typing performance and if such factors are influenced by the unique characteristics of the worker, work environment, or alternative keyboard brand.

While there were some interesting findings revealed in this pilot study, there were some noticeable limitations. Primary among those was the small sample size. With only 22 study participants, the statistical power needed to detect significant results may have been reduced. Despite no weight-related recruitment criteria employed in this pilot study, it is of interest that 22 of the original 26 study participants were either overweight or obese. This may indicate self-selection bias or that this workplace employed more overweight and obese workers than the national average for American adults. Because participation in this study was voluntary and a convenience sample was used, participants may have been more motivated to adapt to and work with the adjustable keyboard than others who chose not to participate. This could suggest that other workers might not easily adapt to the adjustable keyboard or might find it less useable/desirable. Thus, findings may not be widely generalizable beyond this sample. There was also an oversight in the demographic collection that resulted in not having the exact ages of the study participants. Further, the specific role of the participant was not captured in the study questionnaire (e.g., supervisor, office assistant).

While fairly standard in any self-reported data, there is an inherent variability in the self-reported keyboard usability and body-part discomfort surveys. Additionally, the short study duration may have hindered our ability to adequately compare the adoption and relative advantage of the alternative keyboard among this sample. While some studies have shown alternative keyboard adoption to take as few as two days (Swanson et al., 1997), the eventual impacts of our intervention remain unknown based on participant performance and musculoskeletal discomfort. Although the follow-up questionnaire asked participants about the usability and ease-of-use of alternative keyboards at 6 weeks (i.e., three weeks after using the alternative keyboard), user rating-related questions did not specifically ask participants to rate the keyboard after full adoption. It is possible that the perceptions reported included those about the transition time, which may have influenced results. Also, it should be noted that at around 30 words per minute, this study population doesn't qualify as what would be considered as skilled typists but those who with a computerized work setting are now expected to engage in typing tasks.

Lastly, although it was assumed that a link exists between physical exposure to alternative keyboards, body discomfort, and musculoskeletal disorders, these relationships were not directly tested and were beyond the scope of this pilot study. For example, participants were not observed while using the alternative keyboard to assess the degree to which ulnar deviation was reduced. Future studies should examine these relationships to the extent possible by including full ergonomic evaluations for posture over time.

These study limitations highlight recommendations for future studies to include longer study durations, more extensive data collection and training activities, and a larger number of participants. Such modifications would allow researchers to achieve statistical power for study analyses, identify the relative advantage of alternative keyboard styles, and assess the appropriateness of assessment tools for working populations. Based on study findings, we recommend that adjustable keyboards be made available in office settings where workers are predominantly overweight or obese. Because this study had a limited sample size and only included overweight and obese participants, we are hesitant to recommend keyboard-related interventions be widely implemented among all working populations. While we hypothesize positive effects for other similar populations and normal-weight workers, further research is needed to confirm and expand upon the findings of this pilot study. However, with the increasing number of obese and overweight workers in the population and office ergonomic studies showing significant effect of an increased BMI on work-related musculoskeletal stress and discomfort (Sethi et al., 2011), it is our contention that alternative adjustable keyboards such as this can be a viable, low-cost alternative for working populations that do significant keying as part of their daily job tasks. As such, we recommend that future studies introduce this intervention in general office settings with workers representing varied health statuses (e.g., a full range of weight from normal to obese) and among those with varying levels of daily job-related computer utilization.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

A major conclusion worthy of further study is the fact that workers reported liking the new keyboard and that it was associated with reduced body discomfort, which have worker productivity and cost implications. Thus, future studies are warranted, especially those tracking long-term absenteeism, to assess any potential correlations or trends with the adjustable split keyboard intervention into a working population.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

