@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#FMS™ scores and low-back loading during lifting – Whole-body movement screening as an ergonomic tool?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Firefighters performed simulated occupational lifting tasks in a laboratory setting.


                        
                        
                           
                           Low-back loading was compared between firefighters who scored above and below 14 on FMS.


                        
                        
                           
                           No differences detected in peak low-back loading magnitudes between low- and high-scorers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Lumbar spines of low-scorers tended to be more flexed when peak loads were applied.


                        
                        
                           
                           The “margin of safety” may be lower in firefighters who score below 14 on the FMS.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Musculoskeletal injury prevention

Movement quality

Functional movement screen

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Previous research suggests that a general whole-body movement screen could be used to identify personal movement attributes that promote potentially injurious low-back loading patterns at work. The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between Functional Movement Screen™ (FMS) composite scores and the low-back loading response to lifting.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Fifteen men who scored greater than 14 on the FMS (high-scorers) and 15 height- and weight-matched low-scorers (FMS < 14) performed sagittally symmetric and asymmetric laboratory-based lifting tasks. A three-dimensional dynamic biomechanical model was used to calculate peak low-back loading levels, and the angle of the lumbar spine was captured at the instant when the peak compressive force was applied.
               
               
                  Results
                  Regardless of the lifting task performed, there were no differences in peak low-back compression (p ≥ 0.4157), anterior/posterior reaction shear (p ≥ 0.5645), or medial/lateral reaction shear (p ≥ 0.2581) forces between the high- and low-scorers. At the instant when peak compressive forces were applied, differences in the lumbar spine angle between high- and low-scores were not statistically significant about the lateral bend (p ≥ 0.4215), axial twist (p ≥ 0.2734), or flexion/extension (p ≥ 0.1354) axes, but there was a tendency for the lumbar spine to be more deviated in the low-scorers.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Using the previously established injury prediction threshold value of 14, the composite FMS score was not related to the peak low-back loading magnitudes in lifting. Though not statistically significant, the tendency for the lumbar spines of low-scorers to be more deviated when the peak low-back compression force was imposed could be biomechanically meaningful because spinal load tolerance varies with posture. Future attempts to modify or reinterpret FMS scoring are warranted given that several previous studies have revealed links between composite FMS scores and musculoskeletal complaints.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Previous work has shown that distal lower extremity joint dysfunction can influence peak low-back loading during lifting (Beach et al., 2013). Despite being a logical response to the elimination of biomechanical degrees-of-freedom in a closed kinetic chain task, this finding provides empirical support for the notion that a general whole-body movement screen could expose personal movement qualities that promote potentially injurious low-back loading patterns at work. When the body is viewed as a “movement system”, such qualities may represent inherent structural or functional attributes that effectively limit the movement strategies available and thus influence how individuals consciously or subconsciously interact with their environment when engaged in physical activity (Davids et al., 2003). It is therefore conceivable that a tool devised to appraise whole-body movements could be used to project the low-back loading response to lifting.

The Functional Movement Screen™ (FMS) is a popular tool proposed to reveal a host of undesirable personal movement attributes (e.g., joint mobility restrictions, bilateral asymmetries, postural control deficits, and pain-producing movement patterns) (Cook et al., 2006a, b; Cook et al., 2010). Using standardized verbal instructions, testing apparatus, and grading criteria, the ability to move freely, symmetrically, and without pain is appraised via visual inspection of whole-body movement behavior during FMS task performance. Patterns of movement coordination and control that differ overtly from those deemed normal or desirable are purported to indicate the presence of undesirable personal attributes that could, if left unchecked, promote potentially injurious movement patterns in life.

Although FMS scores have not been consistently linked with musculoskeletal injury reporting (Schneiders et al., 2011), there may be benefit in including the FMS as part of a comprehensive injury prevention and management program for firefighters (Butler et al., 2013; Peate et al., 2007). Peate et al. (2007) found that full duty firefighters with a musculoskeletal injury history were 1.68 times more likely to “fail” the FMS than were firefighters without an injury history; “failing” was operationally defined as achieving a composite FMS score of 16 or less (out of 21). This value is higher than the statistically derived cut-point (FMS ≤ 14) reported originally based on data from a professional American football team (Kiesel et al., 2007). In support of the statistically-derived cut-point, Butler et al. (2013) found that the probability of missing training time (due to musculoskeletal pain) was greater in firefighter recruits with FMS < 14 than in those with FMS ≥ 14. Scoring 14 or less on the FMS has also been linked with pain and injuries in collegiate athletes (Chorba et al., 2010) and military service personnel (Lisman et al., 2013; O'Connor et al., 2011). Given that personal movement constraints can influence joint loading throughout the kinetic chain (Beach et al., 2013), a tool such as the FMS may help to identify firefighters who are at greater risk of (re-)injuring their low-backs when lifting, a common and costly problem in the fire service (Walton et al., 2003).

This study was designed to compare the low-back loading response to lifting between two groups of height- and weight-matched career firefighters. Firefighters who scored greater than 14 on the FMS were allocated to the first group, and size-matched counterparts who scored less than 14 were assigned to the second group. Based on the reasoning outlined above, it was hypothesized that the peak low-back loading response would differ between the high- and low-scorers. In an exploratory analysis performed a posteriori, the data were re-analyzed to examine if performance on individual FMS tasks was related to low-back loading during lifting. It was hypothesized that, with respect to the study purpose, performance on individual tasks may be better suited to reveal undesirable movement attributes than would others.

@&#METHODS@&#

In a larger unpublished study examining the influence of different exercise-based interventions on various fitness and low-back loading outcomes (Beach, 2012), biomechanical data were collected from 60 men from the Pensacola Fire Department (PFD, Pensacola, FL, United States) while they performed a battery of laboratory tasks. Due to equipment malfunction, datasets from two subjects could not be used in this investigation. All subjects signed an informed consent document that had been approved by the University of Waterloo's Office of Research Ethics, the Baptist Hospital Institutional Review Board, and the City of Pensacola.

Of the 58 subjects from which complete datasets existed, 15 individuals achieved composite FMS scores greater than 14 and were assigned to a high-scoring group. From the remaining subjects (N = 43), 15 height- and weight-matched individuals with composite FMS scores less than 14 were assigned to a low-scoring group. A cut-off score of 14 was used to assign subjects to high- and low-scoring groups based on previous research which indicated that the probability of missing work- or sport-related training activities due to musculoskeletal complaints is greater in individuals who score less than 14 on the FMS (Butler et al., 2013; Chorba et al., 2010; Kiesel et al., 2007; Lisman et al., 2013; O'Connor et al., 2011). Physical characteristics of the 30 subjects included in this study and their FMS scores are presented in Table 1
                        .

Although the intention was to include data from as many subjects as possible in this study, the number of high-scoring individuals and the desire to compare a balanced group of size-matched individuals limited the total sample size to 30. Size-matching was preferred to permit a direct between-group comparison of low-back loading magnitudes without the need to utilize scaling or normalization methods. Such methods would have been necessary to account for inter-subject differences in low-back loading that would have been due to differences in height and body mass.

In a separate session performed on a separate day prior to the biomechanical data collection (described below), subjects were videotaped while performing the FMS tasks. Two digital video cameras (Basler Inc., Exton, PA, United States) were connected to a data acquisition computer running Vicon Nexus Motion Capture software (Version 1.5, Vicon, Oxford, United Kingdom); the software was used to control the synchronization, capturing, and storage of the video files. Video cameras were arranged at right angles to one another to capture FMS tasks from both frontal and sagittal plane perspectives. FMS tasks were performed four times in total – two repetitions of each FMS task were performed while subjects faced the frontal plane camera and two repetitions were performed while the subject faced away from the frontal plane camera. In this way, sagittal plane videos were recorded from both the left and right sides of subjects with posterior and anterior views.

The FMS was administered and graded exactly as directed by Cook et al. (Cook et al., 2006a, b; Cook et al., 2010). FMS tasks included: deep squat (DSQT); hurdle step (HSTP); in-line lunge (ILNG); shoulder mobility (SHLD); active straight-leg raise (ASLR); trunk stability push-up (PSHP); and rotary stability (RTRY). For a detailed description of each task readers are directed to the writings of Cook et al. (Cook et al., 2006a, b; Cook et al., 2010). A four-point scoring system was used to grade FMS task performance. Scores ranged from 0 to 3, with 3 being the best score. If pain was perceived during task execution, a score of 0 was assigned. If an individual was able to execute an FMS task but compensated (as per the grading criteria), a score of 2 was assigned. A score of 1 indicated that the FMS task could not be executed as instructed, and a score of 3 indicated that the FMS task was performed exactly as instructed (i.e., without any observed movement compensations). Where applicable (HSTP, ILNG, SHLD, ASLR, RTRY), FMS tasks were performed bilaterally. If there was a bilateral asymmetry (i.e., right- and left-side scores are not equal), the lower score of the two sides was recorded. Three tasks (SHLD, PSHP, RTRY) included additional “clearing” movements, graded as positive or negative. Clearing movements were included to detect pain-producing movements or postures (e.g., spinal flexion/extension); if a positive clearing movement was noted (pain reported), then a score of 0 was recorded for the associated FMS task. If the clearance movement was negative (no pain reported), then the original FMS task score was retained. The total (composite) FMS score was calculated by adding the scores of individual FMS tasks; the best total score that could be attained on the FMS was 21 (perfect score = score of 3 × 7 FMS tasks). As instructed by Cook et al. (Cook et al., 2006a, b; Cook et al., 2010), only the “best” (highest-graded) repetition was included in the composite score. All grading, performed by a single member of the research team who had over eightyears experience and training in FMS administration and interpretation, was performed post-collection via video observation. Composite FMS scores are reliable when graded by experienced observers on the basis of video recordings (Gribble et al., 2013; Minick et al., 2010).

In the biomechanics laboratory, subjects performed 24.7 kg and 9.3 kg symmetrical (sagittal) and asymmetrical lifting tasks (Fig. 1
                        ). Lifting exertions were performed at a self-selected pace, and three repetitions of each lifting condition were collected for analyses. Order of exposure was randomized between subjects and between 30 and 60 s of recovery time was provided between exertions.

To capture body segment kinematics in the laboratory, custom moulded rigid bodies – each with five reflective spherical markers attached – were strapped to the feet, shanks, thighs, pelvis and trunk of subjects using double-sided tape and Velcro® straps. In a static (quiet standing) calibration trial collected prior to lifting, additional markers were taped to the skin overlying anatomical landmarks; these calibration markers were used to define the medial and lateral endpoints of modeled body segments. Marker position data were digitized at a frame frequency of 160 Hz using a 10-camera Vicon motion capture system (Vicon, Oxford, United Kingdom) and low-pass filtered at 6 Hz using a zero-lag, fourth-order digital Butterworth filter before being used in subsequent kinematic and kinetic analyses.

As shown in Fig. 1, subjects performed the lifting tasks while standing on two force platforms (Bertec Corporation, Columbus, OH, United States). Using Vicon Nexus motion capture software (Version 1.5, Vicon, Oxford, United Kingdom), force platform signals were digitized at a rate of 2400 Hz and synchronized (spatially and temporally) with the marker position data. In the asymmetrical lifting condition, the initial position of the crate was standardized within and between subjects at approximately 45° with respect to the mid-sagittal plane of the subjects. In the sagittal lifting condition, the crate was positioned directly in front of the subjects.

Anatomical landmark data were used in Visual3D™ software (Version 4, C-Motion Inc., Germantown, MD, United States) to create body segment-fixed coordinate systems. Proximal endpoints of the thighs and shanks were located “functionally” by having subjects perform 10 repetitions of standardized open kinetic chain rotations about the hips and knees (Begon et al., 2007). Calculations of these functionally-derived segment endpoints were also performed in Visual3D™ (Schwartz and Rozumalski, 2005) as was the creation of landmarks used to define the frontal plane of the shank and thigh segments. Effectively, the procedures above yielded a linked-segment representation of modeled body segments.

“Bottom up” inverse dynamics analyses (Faber et al., 2010) were implemented in Visual3D™ to calculate instantaneous reaction forces and net joint moments of force about the origin of the pelvis segment coordinate system during lifting. Positions and orientations of each modeled body segment were recorded using the default six degree-of-freedom optimal tracking algorithms in Visual3D™ (Cereatti et al., 2006). The origin of the pelvis segment coordinate system was calculated as the mid-point between iliac crests, and a least-squares plane fit to the locations of iliac crests and greater trochanters represented the frontal plane of the pelvis segment. The component of the reaction force acting normal to the frontal plane of the pelvis was assumed equivalent to anterior/posterior reaction shear force acting at the L4/L5 joint, and frontal plane component of the net joint moment was assumed equivalent to the lateral bend moment about the L4/L5 joint. Body segment mass and inertial parameters incorporated in the inverse dynamics analyses were calculated based on the default procedures in Visual3D™, wherein published anthropometric data (Dempster, 1955) and geometric models of body segments are used.

Orthogonal components of the three-dimensional L4/L5 net joint moment were input into a third-order polynomial (McGill et al., 1996) to calculate the L4/L5 joint compressive force while lifting. The polynomial was derived to estimate the L4/L5 joint contact (“bone-on-bone”) compressive force given a three-dimensional net L4/L5 joint moment. The L4/L5 bone-on-bone shear force was not quantified in this investigation, although anterior/posterior and medial/lateral shear components of L4/L5 joint reaction forces were calculated based on the inverse dynamics procedures described above. Since previous research has demonstrated associations between occupational L4/L5 joint reaction shear force exposures and occupational low-back pain reporting (McGill et al., 1998; Norman et al., 1998), it was not deemed necessary to employ more sophisticated musculoskeletal modeling techniques (e.g., (Arjmand et al., 2010; Granata and Marras, 2000; Staudenmann et al., 2007)) in this experiment.

Event detection algorithms were generated in Visual3D™ by tracking the motion of the model centre-of-mass, trunk segment kinematics, and the L4/L5 joint compression force waveform. Events were created to signify the initiation and termination of each lift. Lift initiation (“START”) was defined as the frame preceding the descent towards grasping the crate (i.e., the last upright standing frame before bending forward), and lift termination (“END”) was defined as the frame at which the subject returned to upright standing whilst holding the crate. A third event, within the window bounded by the lift initiation and termination end-points, was defined to signify the frame at which the peak L4/L5 compression force was calculated (“PEAK”). To verify that events were defined as intended, model animations and the abovementioned kinematic and kinetic time-series data were visually inspected in Visual3D™.

From the time-series data associated with each lifting exertion (between lift START and lift END), peak L4/L5 joint compression and anterior/posterior (A/P) and medial/lateral (M/L) reaction shear forces were calculated. An additional variable of interest, the absolute value of the lumbar spine angle (angular displacement of the thorax with respect to the pelvis) at PEAK frame, was also calculated based on the knowledge that intervertebral joint failure load tolerance is reduced in non-neutral postures (Gallagher et al., 2005; Gunning et al., 2001; Howarth and Callaghan, 2012). The orientation of the lumbar spine in a relaxed upright standing trial was defined as zero degrees about the flexion/extension, lateral bend, and axial twist axes, and the lumbar spine angle was calculated based on the following rotation matrix decomposition sequence: flexion/extension (sagittal plane) → lateral bend (frontal plane) → axial twist (transverse plane).

Peak L4/L5 loading magnitudes and the corresponding lumbar spine angles, the average of three repetitions, constituted the dependent variables in the statistical analyses. Using a general linear model, between-subject (FMS group = high- vs. low-scorers) and within-subject (mass lifted = 24.7 vs. 9.3 kg) comparisons were made. The symmetrical and asymmetrical lifting positions were analyzed separately. Interaction effects (group × mass) were also included in the model for each of the lifting positions, but were not statistically significant for any of the dependent variables examined (p > 0.1230). In all statistical tests (described above and below), p-values less than 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

To ensure that experimental design goals were achieved, general linear models with one between-subject factor were used. Specifically, it was confirmed that the composite FMS scores were indeed different between the high- and low-scoring FMS groups (p < 0.0001), and there were no statistically significant between-group differences in mean age (p = 0.6008), height (p = 0.9722), or mass (p = 0.8751). Since there were no statistically significant differences in these physical characteristics, between-group comparisons in the unscaled magnitudes of peak low-back loading values were deemed permissible.

It was decided a posteriori to explore whether relationships existed between the scores of individual FMS tasks and the low-back loading response to lifting. To accomplish this, the data were re-analyzed using a mixed model procedure. The dependent variables were comprised of peak L4/L5 load magnitudes (joint compression, A/P reaction shear, M/L reaction shear) and lumbar spine angles at PEAK frame (flexion, lateral bend, axial twist). Independent variables consisted of subject characteristics (age, height, mass), lifting demands (position and mass), and FMS tasks (DSQT, HSTP, ILNG, SHLD, ASLR, PSHP, RTRY). By re-analyzing the data using a multivariate approach, the full dataset could be incorporated into one procedure. This not only permitted investigation of the relationship between individual FMS task scores and low-back loading during lifting, but it maximized statistical power with the existing dataset.

All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS system software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, United States).

@&#RESULTS@&#

When performing the lifting tasks, peak loads imposed on the low-backs of individuals who scored less than 14 on the FMS (low-scorers) were not significantly different (p ≥ 0.2581) from those applied to the low-backs of height- and weight-matched high-scorers (i.e., individuals who scored greater than 14 on the FMS) (Fig. 2
                        ).

Although the lumbar spine posture was not statistically different between high- and low-scorers about the lateral bend (p ≥ 0.4215), axial twist (p ≥ 0.2734), or flexion/extension (p ≥ 0.1354) axes at PEAK frame (i.e., when peak L4/L5 joint compression demands were imposed) (Table 2
                        ), the tendency for the lumbar spine to be between 3.4 and 6.3° more flexed in low-scorers at PEAK frame is noteworthy.

Significantly greater peak L4/L5 joint compression (p < 0.0001) and A/P reaction shear (p ≤ 0.0021) forces were documented when subjects lifted the heavier of two masses (24.7 kg vs. 9.3 kg) (Fig. 2). However, a statistically significant effect of mass lifted on peak L4/L5 M/L reaction shear forces was only observed when performing asymmetrical lifts (p = 0.0094).

When lifting the lighter of two masses, subjects exhibited significantly greater lumbar spine flexion at PEAK frame in the symmetrical (p = 0.0052) and asymmetrical (p = 0.0008) conditions, but between-mass differences in PEAK frame lateral bend and axial twist postures were not statistically significant or considered biomechanically trivial (Table 2).

The low-back loading response to lifting was unrelated to scores on any of the individual FMS tasks: DSQT (p = 0.8946); HSTP (p = 0.9330); ILNG (p = 0.6193); SHLD (p = 0.3675); ASLR (p = 0.7665); PSHP (p = 0.6000); RTRY (p = 0.4013).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Although whole-body movement screening has been proposed as a way to predict who might sustain musculoskeletal injuries when performing physically demanding occupational or athletic tasks, achieving a composite score above or below 14 on the FMS was not related to the peak low-back loading levels imposed during simulated workplace lifting tasks. There was, however, a tendency for the lumbar spines of low-scorers (FMS < 14) to be more deviated when the peak low-back compressive force was applied. Taken together, these findings provided weak support for the hypothesis that subjects belonging to the high-scoring group (FMS > 14) would load their low-backs differently when lifting than would size-matched low-scorers.

A previously reported injury prediction cut-point (composite FMS score <> 14) was used to distinguish between individuals who did and did not demonstrate a general ability or preference to move and control their bodies in ways regarded as “normal” or “desirable”. Although FMS grading criteria are indeed congruent with (and in many cases based on) current research- and clinically-informed recommendations and opinions offered in respected texts (Kendall et al., 2010; McGill, 2007; Sahrmann, 2002, 2010), FMS scores have not yet been evaluated with respect to their ability to measure normal or desirable movement per se. Rather, previous researchers used receiver operating characteristic curves to identify the composite score that best distinguished, by maximizing classification sensitivity and specificity, between individuals who did or did not miss athletic (Kiesel et al., 2007) or occupational (Butler et al., 2013) training time due to musculoskeletal complaints. Although links between musculoskeletal injury and joint mobility restrictions, bilateral asymmetries, postural control deficits, and pain are certainly plausible, it does not necessarily follow that an indicator of injury risk can be used as a valid surrogate measure for such characteristics. FMS scores might also or instead reflect aspects of some other underlying processes or constructs that may or may not be related to these undesirable personal movement attributes; performers' knowledge of grading criteria has been demonstrated to influence FMS scores (Frost et al., 2013), for example. Given this limitation, the negative findings of this study do not necessarily suggest that a general whole-body movement screen could not be used for the purpose proposed here; results could be alternatively interpreted to suggest that further investigation is warranted to better administer and interpret the FMS if intended to serve such purposes.

Apart from the potential FMS measurement validity issues introduced above, an additional issue must be considered with respect to the dichotomization of study subjects into low- and high-scoring groups. In pain-free individuals, composite FMS scores less than 21 (a perfect score) indicate that during at least one FMS task, performers exhibit movements different from those deemed normal or desirable. If the argument is granted that such deviations are indeed abnormal and perhaps unfavorable, then strictly and hypothetically speaking, any composite FMS score less than 21 could be problematic. Because there were no perfect scorers in this study, it was not possible to compare the low-back loading response to lifting between individuals who did (FMS < 21) and did not (FMS = 21) exhibit atypical/undesirable movements. Instead, subjects were categorized as low- or high-scorers using a composite FMS score of 14 based on the most objectively determined and frequently reported FMS cut-point reported to date (Butler et al., 2013; Chorba et al., 2010; Kiesel et al., 2007; Lisman et al., 2013; O'Connor et al., 2011). However, in a study examining the relationship between composite FMS scores and injury history and lost work time in a sample of 433 full duty firefighters, Peate et al. (2007) indicated that a higher cut-point (FMS ≤ 16) best distinguished between individuals with and without previous injuries. On the other hand, results of a study conducted by O'Connor et al. (2011) suggest that it may be inappropriate to dichotomize FMS data in this way given that the relative risk of reporting injuries during training was greater in both low-scoring (FMS ≤ 14) and very high-scoring (FMS ≥ 18) candidates. It is therefore plausible that a different outcome would have resulted in this study had different FMS cut-points been implemented. But, it was not possible to test the cut-points reported by Peate et al. (2007) or O'Connor et al. (2011) given that only 3 out of the 60 subjects who enrolled in this study achieved a composite FMS score of 17 or greater. Moreover, while the range of composite FMS scores in this study (10–18) is similar to that reported previously (11–20) in a sample of 209 active, “healthy” adults (Schneiders et al., 2011), it is acknowledged that the findings of this study could have been different if the participants exhibited a greater range or different distribution of composite FMS scores.

In this investigation the FMS was used as a tool to appraise general whole-body movements. It was not originally intended to link scores on specific FMS tasks with the low-back loading response to lifting. This initial decision was based on the authors' understanding that the FMS was not designed to selectively assess or diagnose specific movement impairments nor is there evidence to suggest that it should or could be used in this manner. The FMS is instead promoted as a tool to appraise general whole-body movements based on the notion that individuals should be able to move freely, symmetrically, and without pain (Cook, 2003; Cook et al., 2010). Using the FMS in this general way could partially explain why links between composite FMS scores and musculoskeletal complaints were not uncovered in unpublished studies conducted on college (American) football players (Krackow, 2001), high school and collegiate basketball players (Munce et al., 2012; Sorenson, 2009), firefighter candidates (Burton, 2006), recreational runners (Hoover et al., 2008), and a sample of collegiate athletes from seven sports (Winke et al., 2012). It could be argued, for example, that performance on specific FMS tasks might be better able to predict how individuals would move and load their musculoskeletal system when performing occupational or athletic tasks that are kinematically similar. Based on this reasoning, it was decided a posteriori to compare the results of individual FMS task scores to the low-back loading variables studied. Though the results of this post hoc exploratory analysis should be interpreted with caution due to the small sample size and because the study was not designed for this purpose, there was no evidence to suggest that any single FMS task score could project the low-back loading response to lifting. Perhaps future research with a greater number of participants could address this issue by including activity- or population-specific FMS cut-points together with other biomechanical measures that have been linked with low-back disorders (e.g., cumulative spinal loading, trunk angular velocities and accelerations, etc.) (Marras et al., 1995; Norman et al., 1998).

It is interesting to note that although peak low-back loading levels were not significantly different between the high- and low-scorers in this study, the lumbar spines of low-scoring subjects were an average of 3.4–6.3° more flexed than those of high-scorers when the peak L4/L5 compression force was imposed. While these differences were not statistically significant, they could be biomechanically meaningful given the angles at which they occurred (i.e., due to the non-linear relationship between spine flexion, passive tissue stress, and failure tolerance). From an upright standing neutral posture, the maximum angles to which pain-free adult men can flex their lumbar spines approaches 70° (McGill et al., 2003, 1999). Since the lumbar spines of study subjects were flexed to between 47 and 60° when the peak compressive force was applied (Table 2), differences between high- and low-scorers would thus have occurred when their lumbar spines were flexed to greater than 70% of their maximum range-of-motion (assuming that the subjects were representative of a “normal” population). This suggests that the “margin of safety” in the low-scorers could have been less than that in the high-scorers due to increased passive tissue loading (Adams and Dolan, 1991; McGill et al., 1994) and/or decreased load-bearing capacity of the intervertebral joints (Gallagher et al., 2005; Gunning et al., 2001; Howarth and Callaghan, 2012). In other words, small changes in lumbar spine flexion that occurred near end range-of-motion could have lead to relatively large increases in passive tissue stress and decreases in the load-bearing tolerance of the spine. Unfortunately, maximum lumbar flexion angles were not measured in this study, and it is therefore possible that between-group differences in maximum lumbar flexion range-of-motion could have limited the potential biomechanical significance of the findings. Namely, low-scorers may have had greater lumbar flexion range-of-motion than did their high-scoring counterparts, and thus passive tissue loading and load tolerance could have been similar between the groups.

Results of this investigation lend weak support for the possibility that general whole-body movement screening could be used to identify personal attributes that have the capacity to influence injury potential at work. In athletic populations, it has been shown that individuals who exhibit postural control deficits during pre-participation testing are more likely to suffer injuries than are individuals without such deficits (Hewett et al., 2005; Zazulak et al., 2007). Based on sound biomechanical arguments to explain such findings (Hewett and Myer, 2011; Powers, 2010; Zazulak et al., 2008), it is reasonable to suggest that general whole-body movement screening could also be used to predict who might get injured when performing physically demanding jobs. As indicated above, the challenge is to devise movement screening tasks that are capable of identifying, with adequate levels of specificity and sensitivity, factors known or hypothesized to influence injury potential. In this regard, there remain many opportunities to conduct future research aimed at improving the implementation and interpretation of existing or future movement screens (i.e., validation studies); results of this study together with those in the literature reviewed above indicate that such research is warranted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Using a previously established injury prediction threshold value of 14, the composite FMS score was unrelated to peak low-back loading magnitudes during lifting. However, there was a tendency for the lumbar spines of low-scorers (FMS < 14) to be more deviated when the peak low-back compressive force was applied, possibly reducing their “margin of safety” in comparison to high-scorers (FMS > 14). Future attempts to modify or reinterpret FMS scoring are justified given that several previous studies have revealed links between composite FMS scores and musculoskeletal complaints.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank the Pensacola Fire Department personnel who took part in this study, members of the Athletes' Performance Institute for their assistance, and the Andrews Research and Education Institute for the use and maintenance of the biomechanics laboratory, testing equipment, and administrative support. The authors would also like to thank Drs. Stuart McGill, Clark Dickerson, Joan Stevenson, and Philip Bigelow for their comments on earlier drafts of this manuscript, and Ming-Chang Tsai for his statistical assistance. Funding for this research was provided by the Centre of Research Expertise for the Prevention of Musculoskeletal Disorders (CRE-MSD). Dr. Jack Callaghan is supported by a Canada Research Chair (CRC) in Spine Biomechanics and Injury Prevention.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

