@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Patient acuity as a determinant of paramedics' frequency of being exposed to physically demanding work activities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Patient acuity (call urgency) is a determinant of paramedics' physical demands.


                        
                        
                           
                           Urgent calls required more physically demanding actions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Moderately urgent calls required the longest time to transfer care at the hospital.


                        
                        
                           
                           Urgent calls are perceived as more emotionally, clinically and physically demanding.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Emergency medical services

Paramedics

Physical demands

Injury prevention

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  The purpose of this investigation was to examine if paramedics' frequency of being exposed to highly physically demanding activities, or their perception of physical, clinical, and emotional demands were altered by patients' acuity level, operationalized using the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS).
               
               
                  Methods
                  Physical demands descriptions (PDD) were compiled from thirteen services across Canada. The observation sessions took place during a minimum of two full-shift (12-h) ride-outs at each service. Data were obtained from 53 ride-outs, which included a total of 190 calls.
               
               
                  Results
                  Higher urgency calls (CTAS level I or II) required significantly more stretcher handling, equipment handling, and intravenous (IV) work, also prompting higher ratings of perceived clinical, physical, and emotional demand. Independent of CTAS level, stretcher loading with patient (15.0%), horizontal patient transfer (13.7%), and pushing/pulling the stretcher with patient (13.1%) were identified as the most physically demanding tasks.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Patient acuity is an important determinant affecting the frequency for which paramedics are exposed to work tasks with inherent ergonomic hazards (e.g., handling a stretcher with a patient). Patient acuity also affects paramedics' perceived clinical, physical, and emotional demands of a call.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Paramedics, who provide emergency care to many Canadians each year, are responsible for assessing a patient's condition and providing treatment in the pre-hospital setting (Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care, 2007). Treatments can include, but are not limited to: cardiopulmonary resuscitation; spinal immobilizations and, the administration of intravenous medications and oxygen. These actions, however, can expose paramedics to situations that often challenge their physical health, as indicated by the high prevalence of burnout and injury reported within the profession (Aasa et al., 2005; Hegg-Deloye et al., 2014; Maguire et al., 2005). Evidence suggests paramedics are seven times more likely to claim an injury than the average worker, where most injuries are directly attributable to the physical aspects of the job (Maguire et al., 2014). Further, the likelihood that a paramedic will suffer a musculoskeletal injury, particularly at the lower back, is increasing (Robert et al., 2015).

Paramedic work requires a combination of prolonged sedentary time while waiting for a call, followed by bouts of highly physical demands when responding to a call (Coffey et al., 2016; Gamble et al., 1991). Despite the high variability in the tasks performed for any given call, there are certain actions that are common and may also expose paramedics to physical ergonomic hazards. When responding to a call, paramedics are often required to perform stretcher and patient related lifting tasks requiring considerable trunk flexion, lateral bend, and twisting (Prairie and Corbeil, 2014), well-established physical ergonomic hazards associated with an increased likelihood of low back injury (Marras et al., 2006). Further, lifting patients from the floor to the stretcher and loading the stretcher into the ambulance can cause loading on the back that can exceed the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) action limit (Cooper and Ghassemieh, 2007; Lavender et al., 2000). Indeed, lifting and pushing stretchers and stair-chairs increase paramedic's likelihood of sustaining an injury to the low back and arms (Hignett, 2015). Furthermore, perhaps not surprisingly, paramedics also perceive loading/unloading the stretcher, carrying patient care equipment, and pushing/pulling the stretcher as the most physically demanding tasks (Coffey et al., 2016a,b). Mechanical exposures sustained by paramedics as they perform specific activities like loading the stretcher with a patient into the ambulance may directly affect the likelihood of a paramedic sustaining an injury. While ongoing initiatives explore opportunities to reduce the mechanical exposures associated with these tasks (Sommerich et al., 2015) and to explore opportunities to improve lifting strategies (Arial et al., 2014), it is also useful to better understand upstream factors that determine the frequency of paramedics' exposures to these higher risk work activities.

Patient acuity provides an upstream work organization-based factor that may affect the nature of patient care required when attending to a call, also affecting the frequency of being exposed to high demand activities. Emerging evidence demonstrates that paramedics are exposed to more trunk motion, and may even adopt alternative strategies when providing pre-hospital care in more urgent situations (Prairie and Corbeil, 2014). Considering these emerging data from a single paramedic service, it is useful to determine if these findings can be generalized to the broader paramedic sector. Additionally, identifying how patient acuity level affects paramedic's frequency of exposure to high demand work activities can inform injury prevention initiatives. For example, supplementary rest breaks could be introduced to those exposed to consecutive high acuity calls. Lastly, improving our understanding of upstream factors that influence exposure to high demand activities, and ultimately mechanical exposures on the body that have well established relationships with injury, may strengthen opportunities to develop better models to estimate key exposures such as cumulative low back load, over the course of a work period. Equipped with models that are more inclusive of organizational and mechanical factors, such as discrete event simulation (Rego-Monteil et al., 2016), we can more readily explore a range of possible intervention, selecting those that maximize performance, but minimize injury risks.

In Canada, at the point of contacting 9-1-1 the patients' acuity is assessed using the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS). CTAS is a tool that enables emergency departments to prioritize patient care requirements and ensures the patients most in need receive care first (Beveridge et al., 1998). CTAS I (resuscitation) and II (emergent) levels indicate the patient has a condition that is a threat or a potential threat to life, limb, or function. Most CTAS I patients are non-responsive with absent or unstable vital signs, whereas CTAS II conditions can include head injury, severe trauma, and chest pain. CTAS III (urgent) calls include conditions that could possibly progress to a serious problem requiring emergency intervention, such as moderate trauma, asthma, and gastrointestinal bleed. Lastly, CTAS IV (less urgent) and V (non-urgent) calls include conditions such as minor trauma, ear ache, back pain, and headache (Beveridge et al., 1998). Since exposure to physically demanding tasks are known to increase injury risks (Cooper and Ghassemieh, 2007; Lavender et al., 2000), it is important to determine if the frequency of exposure to physically demanding paramedic activities are affected by the CTAS level of a call. Current research suggests paramedics are more likely to adopt poor postures and use a greater range of trunk motions in more urgent situations (i.e., CTAS I or II), but findings vary based on the specific task being studied; current evidence is based on relatively small sample sizes (Doormaal et al., 1995; Prairie and Corbeil, 2014).

A number of studies have considered the relationship between paramedics' perceived ratings of demand and the actual demands faced. Findings suggest that paramedics' perceived workloads are generally in agreement with the objectively assessed workload (Doormaal et al., 1995). As such we also explore paramedics perceived ratings of demand; physical, clinical, and emotional to provide a surrogate and general measure of workload.

This study aimed to describe the typical physical demands exposure profile for a call and to determine if exposures to physically demanding activities were determined by patient acuity (using CTAS). Additionally, we aimed to gather paramedic's perceived ratings of clinical, physical, and emotional demand, further exploring to determine how patient acuity may affect their ratings.

A descriptive cross-sectional study design was employed to address the study objectives. Within this design, a total of 57 full-shift (12-h) observations were documented from 13 paramedic services across Canada. This process allowed us to capture data from 237 unique calls, where observers focussed their analysis on one attending paramedic. All observations within a service were typically conducted within a one-month period, where efforts were made to observe both day and night shifts. The total duration of the study was approximately one year.

Thirteen paramedic services from across Canada agreed to participate in the study. To ensure a wide geographical and demographical representation of data, the services were located in both rural, suburban and metro areas, including services from the east, west and central regions of Canada. One to five active-duty paramedics, hereafter referred to as ‘observers’, from each participating service volunteered to learn how to conduct field observations and to gather the physical demands data. All observers completed at least two full-shift ride-outs, observing the attending paramedics as they performed their duties. Table 1
                         summarizes the number of shifts and calls documented within each service, along with the approximate call volume of each service. Specific details about participating services are not provided to maintain anonymity. Queen's and Wilfrid Laurier University's Research Ethics Boards approved the study, and all observers provided informed consent to participate and to act as the data-gathering agent.

The observers were trained to accurately identify physical demands and to quantify relevant aspects of each demand during a 6-h Physical Demands Description (PDD) workshop. The workshop was based on the Occupational Health Clinics for Ontario Workers Incorporated (OHCOW) PDD manual (OHCOW, 2014) where a similarly derived approach has previously been shown to be effective at preparing trainees to effectively observe and report on physical demand elements (Coffey et al., 2016). Following the training, observers documented physical demand elements in a standardized recording booklet developed and provided by the research team. The booklet included spaces to record details about specific physical demand elements including: stretcher handling, patient handling, patient assessment, equipment handling, etc. The observers were asked to record quantifiable measures associated with each physical demand element, such as distance travelled while carrying equipment, number of stairs climbed, and the duration for which certain postures were held (e.g., kneeling), in as much detail as possible. In addition observers were also asked to record basic call information (i.e., time of the call, dispatch code, etc.), patient demographics (i.e., age, gender, weight, etc.) and CTAS level to provide more context for each unique call. At the completion of each call, observers asked attending paramedics to indicate which task they found most physically demanding during that call. In addition, using a 0–10 visual analog scale attending paramedics were asked to indicate their overall perceived ratings of clinical, physical, and emotional demand associated with the call. At the end of the observation shift the completed booklets were returned to the research team for analyses.

The data from each booklet was transcribed and input into an Excel spreadsheet. The research team recorded both the frequency and duration or distance, as reported, for each physical demand component. Descriptive statistics, including means and standard deviations were computed for all physical demands data. In addition, call response characteristics including time call received, crew mobile, arrive at scene, arrive at patient, depart scene, arrive at destination, transfer of care, and patient demographics were also recorded, as excerpted from the ambulance call report, in order to gain a better representation of each call. These data were used to determine the driving demands (to and from the scene), the time spent on scene, and the time spent in off-load delay.

Since calls of certain CTAS levels (particularly CTAS I) were underrepresented in the data, data were re-organized based on call urgency, where calls supporting patients assigned to CTAS I or II were considered high urgency, CTAS III calls were considered medium urgency, and CTAS IV or V calls were considered low urgency.

Considering the higher frequency of CTAS III calls, data distributions did not meet normality assumptions required to support the use of parametric testing. Therefore, this study used the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance by ranks method to identify significant differences (main effect of call urgency), where significance was established at p<0.05. Mann-Whitney U tests were applied post-hoc to identify where specific differences occurred when the Kruskal-Wallis indicated a significant main effect. All statistical testing was conducted using IBM SPSS Statistical Software (Armonk, NY, USA).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Physical demands data were obtained from 190 calls, of which 21% were high urgency (CTAS I or II), 53% were medium urgency (CTAS III), and 26% were low urgency (CTAS IV or V). In 47 of the 237 calls observed, patients were either not at the scene, or refused care, leaving 190 calls where some form of patient care was provided. The following data regarding call response characteristics and patient demographics provide context for the physical demands data presented in Section 3.2. The effect of urgency on call response characteristics (e.g., driving to the call, at the scene, driving from the call, etc.) are shown in (Table 2
                        ). A call began at the time paramedics were dispatched and lasted until the call was either terminated or there was a transfer of patient care at the final destination (e.g., hospital, nursing home, patient's home). “Driving to Scene” referred to the amount of time spent in transit in the ambulance travelling to the scene of a call following notification from the ambulance dispatcher. “Time on Scene” referred to the amount of time spent at the scene providing patient care. “Driving from Scene” referred to the amount of time spent in transit driving the ambulance from the scene to the final destination with the patient. “Offload delay” was the time spent at the hospital waiting for the transfer of patient care to hospital staff. Offload delay was the only call anatomy component affected by call urgency. Calls where patient acuity was assessed as CTAS III (medium urgency) required the longest off-load delay times, 20% longer than high urgency calls, and 85% longer than low urgency calls (Table 2).

Second, we considered if patient demographics (age, weight, and height) varied based on call urgency. No significant differences in patient demographics were detected when considering call urgency levels as shown in Table 3
                        .

Paramedics were exposed to physically demanding activities including the use of a stretcher, stair chair, scoop board, wheelchair, and/or equipment handling activities in most calls. Table 4
                         describes the frequency of activity and associated distances for stretcher handling related activities. The frequency of exposures to stretcher handling activities per call, including: loading/unloading a stretcher with a patient; pushing/pulling a stretcher with a patient, or empty; and, raising/lowering an empty stretcher were all significantly affected by call urgency. As a general trend, more urgent calls typically resulted in higher exposure frequencies. Table 5
                         describes the frequency and associated distances (or number of stairs traversed) for stair chair, scoop board, and wheelchair handling related activities. The frequency of exposure to these activities was less than the frequency of exposure to stretcher handling related tasks. Additionally, call urgency did not have a significant effect on paramedics' exposures to stair chair, scoop board, and wheelchair handling related activities. Table 6
                         describes the frequency for which paramedics handle common equipment including the Zoll, A1000 bag, and Oxygen/Flynn Bag. For background, the Zoll is a cardiac monitor used to measure physiological vital signs; the A1000 bag is used to carry intravenous catheters, syringes and medications; and the Oxygen/Flynn bag is used to carry tools to intubate and monitor airways. Call urgency significantly affected equipment bag handling, where paramedics were required to handle equipment bags more frequently in more urgent calls.

Paramedics were also exposed physically demanding activities related to mobility and finger dexterity including walking, climbing stairs, crouching/squatting, kneeling, and needle/intubation work. While the frequency of crouching/squatting or kneeling was less that once per call, on average, paramedics walked approximately 38–55 m per call and traversed 9–12 steps per call (Table 7
                        ). Call urgency did not have an effect on any of the aforementioned mobility-related demands; however, call urgency did have a significant effect on the frequency of conducting needle/intubation work. The frequency of intravenous (IV) needle/intubation tasks per call was significantly greater in more urgent calls.

At the conclusion of each call, paramedics indicated their perceived rating of clinical, physical, and emotional demand associated with the call. They also identified the activity that they deemed to be most physically demanding during the call. Paramedics' perceived ratings of clinical, physical, and emotional demand were significantly affected by call urgency. More urgent calls were perceived as more demanding across all three metrics (Table 8
                        ). Further, paramedics most often identified stretcher loading with patient (15.0%), horizontal patient transfer (13.7%), pushing/pulling the stretcher with patient (13.1%), and carrying equipment (12.4%) as the most demanding tasks associated with a given call (Fig. 1
                        ). Tasks labelled as “Other” (11.7%) included: crouching, kneeling, standing, vehicular patient extrication, and navigating around snowbanks.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study builds upon previous research describing the physical demands of paramedic work, extending our knowledge base by identifying patient acuity level as a determinant of the frequency of paramedic's exposures to high demand paramedic work activities. The calls observed in this study included emergent (i.e., cardiac arrests) and urgent situations (i.e., motor vehicle accidents), as well as less urgent calls, such as flu-like symptoms and patient transfers, where the urgency of the call did have an effect on the frequency of exposure to select physical demand elements. Exposure to high demand paramedic work tasks, like stretcher handling, increases the likelihood of paramedic injury (Hignett, 2015), where these data highlight how patient acuity is a determinant affecting the frequency of exposures to these high demand work tasks. Gaining a better understanding of how paramedics' demands vary with the types of calls they attend is important, particularly when aiming to derive evidence-informed strategies to minimize the accumulation of fatigue and to reduce injury risks.

Based on the calls observed in this study, higher urgency calls required paramedics to perform high physical demand activities more often than lower urgency calls. The significantly higher stretcher handling counts observed during higher urgency calls are important since stretcher load with patient, stretcher push/pull with patient, and stretcher raise/lower were among the top five tasks also perceived to be most physically demanding. Stretcher loading is particularly concerning because it can produce loads on the back that can exceed the NIOSH recommended action limit (Cooper and Ghassemieh, 2007; Lavender et al., 2000). Combining the evidence regarding spine loading and stretcher handling from these previous studies with our findings regarding the frequency of exposure to stretcher handling suggests that paramedics likely experience spine loads above threshold limit values more often during higher patient acuity calls, such that responding to CTAS I or II call likely increased the overall dose of physical ergonomic hazard exposure relative to a CTAS IV or V call. This is in agreement with previous research (Prairie and Corbeil, 2014), where our data are inclusive of thirteen different services spanning unique geographies and including both urban and rural based settings.

Paramedics are also required to lift and carry patient care equipment where equipment handling was performed more often in higher relative to lower urgency calls. Carrying equipment was the fourth most commonly reported physically demanding task in our study and the second most commonly reported in previous research. The mechanical loading on the body due to carrying equipment depends on the weight of the equipment, which varied across services depending on how supplies are packaged and the type of bag; however, the average weight of a cardiac monitor, airway bag, and medication bag were 12.0, 8.8, and 8.7 kg, respectively. Thus, lifting, lowering, and carrying these bags more frequently results in a greater dose of mechanical exposure. While it may be feasible to distribute this added physical work through collaboration with other emergency responders such as police or fire; unlike the United States where paramedics and fire often respond together (Corbett, 2009), paramedics in Canada are often deployed independently.

Average IV needle intubation frequency per call increased as call urgency increased. This is not surprising since patients with more urgent issues are more likely to need medications, fluid replacement delivered through an IV, or intubation at the scene or on the drive to the hospital. While IV needle intubation may not be as physically demanding as stretcher handling at least from a mechanical loading perspective, it does require the ability to control fine movements of the hand and digits. Although finger and hand repetitive strain related injuries remain uncommon among this occupational group, the increased fine motor dexterity requirement could become a limiting factor affecting patient care quality in that event that a paramedics ability to exhibit this finer level of dexterity more frequently, for example during consecutive high urgency calls.

More than half of the patients treated by the paramedics observed in this study were categorized as CTAS level III, or medium urgency. Interestingly, the data indicate that the average offload delay time for a CTAS III call was significantly longer than that for a lower or higher urgency call. This can likely be explained by the fact patients in high urgency calls require immediate care and are therefore prioritized by hospital staff, facilitating a timely transfer of care. Conversely, patients in low urgency calls may be placed in the Emergency Department waiting room, where their care can be transferred to either the Triage Nurse or Charge Nurse, which in turn would also facilitate a timely transfer of care. Patients in medium urgency calls, however, were likely not prioritized to a higher CTAS level by hospital staff, and their presenting symptoms were such that they could not be transferred to the waiting room area of the Emergency Department and warranted remaining on the ambulance stretcher. This likely resulted in the paramedics waiting longer with the patient until they could be transferred to a hospital stretcher. While high urgency calls require paramedics to complete physically demanding activities more often, medium urgency calls seem to present an opportunity for some degree of recovery, waiting on offload delay. However, the physical rest afforded would be highly dependent on the nature of patient care required during this time.

A notable finding of our study indicates that paramedics' perceptions of emotional, clinical and physical demands are affected by call urgency. With each increase in call urgency level, paramedics' perceived ratings of clinical demand was significantly higher, reflecting the greater severity of the patient's condition. Interestingly, paramedics also perceive high or medium urgency calls to be significantly more physically and emotionally demanding than low urgency calls. We postulate that paramedics report a higher level of physical demand due to more frequent exposure to highly demanding work activities like loading a stretcher into the ambulance. The increase in perceived physical demand, in concert with an increase in the frequency of exposure to high demand activities is consistent with previous research indicating that the perception of physical workload was typically consistent with actual physical workload (Doormaal et al., 1995; Prairie and Corbeil, 2014). Although this paper is not focused on the psychological impact of different types of calls, the effect of call urgency on perceived emotional demand should not be overlooked, especially with the relatively high prevalence of mental distress and burnout among paramedics (Van Der Ploeg and Kleber, 2003). Significant relationships have been observed between the level of work-related psychological demands and the physical pain a paramedic experiences, demonstrating the importance of paramedics' mental health (Adib-Hajbaghery and Zohrehea, 2013). The similarity in perceived emotional demand ratings between high and medium urgency calls may be attributable to the coping mechanisms paramedics are taught to use during high urgency calls (LeBlanc et al., 2011; Williams, 2013).

The effect of call urgency and the frequency of exposure to high demand paramedic activities could be used by emergency medical services to enhance dynamic mobile deployment models. That is, services could strategically deploy paramedics to certain calls based on the demands of their most recent calls. For example, if a crew has just responded to one or two high urgency calls, dispatch could redeploy that crew to a low urgency patient transfer or repatriation. Or, this functionality could be achieved using existing dynamic mobile deployment software models leveraging “big-data”, by tracking areas where high urgency calls and low urgency calls are most likely to occur then rotating crews between these regions depending on the types of calls they have previously responded to. Although, it is important to note that the specific nature of care required for each call will ultimately dictate the associated physical demands, where this is evidenced by the high variability in our dataset. As an example, in a motor vehicle accident police and fire may also be on scene and available to share the physical workload associated with transferring an urgent patient from the scene. The ability to share the workload may decrease the frequency for which the attending paramedics are exposed to high demand activities. In this situation the ability to infer the physical demand exposures on paramedics based only on CTAS would be limited. Therefore, implementing this type of strategic deployment based solely on an indicator such as CTAS could help support paramedics' physical and mental health, but it is not without limitation.

The most physically demanding tasks identified by paramedics vary between studies. This is likely due to the difference in operating procedures in different locations. For example, in Canada there may be fewer opportunity for paramedics to share lifting duties with other professionals since they are more likely to respond independently, as opposed to receiving support from the fire department as is more common in the United States (Corbett, 2009). In this study, stretcher tasks and equipment carrying were selected as the most physically demanding tasks, which is similar to a recent study of paramedics in Canada (Coffey et al., 2016a,b). By contrast, in the United States, horizontal transfers and patient carries downstairs using a backboard, stretcher, or stair chair were identified as the most demanding task (Lavender et al., 2000). Knowledge of critically demanding job elements is important when designing pre-hire physical ability tests.

While this study generated a rich dataset of physical demands and paramedic perceptions of demand, based on nearly 200 unique calls, it is not without limitation. While the participatory design of this study provided a novel approach to gather physical demands data without jeopardizing patient safety or confidentiality, it is possible that our observers may have missed some of the physical demand elements, suggesting that these data are conservative estimates. However, this participatory approach allowed for a considerable amount of data to be collected across several different services overcoming sample size and single service limitations in previous research (Doormaal et al., 1995; Prairie and Corbeil, 2014). It is also important to note that nearly 40% of our data were obtained from a single service. Service A had a secondary need for physical demands data and offered additional support to gather a larger sample specific to their location. The types of calls, patients, and equipment used were consistent with other services so we do not believe that these data skew our overall results. Other challenges encountered included the researchers' difficulty in reading the observer's handwriting while organizing the data from the calls and in interpreting the various terms different services use to refer to equipment pieces. While all efforts were made to clarify these written expressions, in some cases this transcription process may have resulted in small errors. Providing observers with the opportunity to type their physical demand observations, including the provision of a “standard terminology” resource, is recommended for future studies. Lastly, recall bias may have affected paramedics' perception of demands, particularly where a call was of greater length (e.g., long distance to drive, complicated on-scene care, long off-load delay). Despite these limitations, this study is the first to characterize the physical demands of paramedics based on call urgency level using a participatory approach. Although this study has identified call urgency as an important determinant of the demands paramedics face on the job, future studies should aim to identify other determining factors, such as how the season may affect paramedics' physical demands.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this large sample of observations, we have identified level of call urgency (i.e., CTAS level) as an important determinant of the demands faced by paramedics. Specifically, calls of higher urgency involve greater exposure to tasks that paramedics perceive to be most physically demanding, namely stretcher and equipment handling. Further, paramedics perceived higher urgency calls to be significantly more clinically, physically, and emotionally demanding than lower urgency calls. Moving forward, it will be useful to investigate if higher urgency calls, where physical demand exposures are increased, are more likely to increase risks of fatigue and/or injury. Regarding the availability of paramedics to respond to calls, the data also show that CTAS level III calls are the most common call type and also involve the longest offload delay time, which has important implications for the availability of paramedics to respond to other calls. Overall, these findings provide novel information about the relationship between patients' acuity level and the physical demands of paramedic work. This understanding may help support future initiatives to ensure paramedics have adequate capacity to meet those demands, and perhaps to consider how to improve dynamic mobile deployment models to incorporate and balance physical demand exposures.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This study was funded with support from the following: MITACS-Accelerate; the Ontario Association of Paramedic Chiefs (OAPC), and the Canadian Safety and Security Program (CSSP) which is led by Defence Research and Development Canada’s (DRDC) Centre for Security Science, in partnership with Public Safety Canada.

The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of the paramedics that were willing to engage in this participatory project, conducting physical demand observations within their respective services. We would also like to extend a thank you to the Chief's, Deputy Chief's, and other management representatives that worked to facilitate this research initiative.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

