@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of the safety and usability of touch gestures in operating in-vehicle information systems with visual occlusion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We investigate the applicability of touch gestures in IVISs from the viewpoints of both driving safety and usability.


                        
                        
                           
                           Panning gesture is the only touch gesture that can be applicable to operate IVISs while driving.


                        
                        
                           
                           Flicking gesture is likely to be used if the screen moving speed is slower or if the car is in heavy traffic.


                        
                        
                           
                           Pinching gesture might not be appropriate to operate IVISs while driving in the safety and usability aspects.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

In-vehicle information systems

Touch gestures

Occlusion technique

Visual distraction

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Nowadays, many automobile manufacturers are interested in applying the touch gestures that are used in smart phones to operate their in-vehicle information systems (IVISs). In this study, an experiment was performed to verify the applicability of touch gestures in the operation of IVISs from the viewpoints of both driving safety and usability. In the experiment, two devices were used: one was the Apple iPad, with which various touch gestures such as flicking, panning, and pinching were enabled; the other was the SK EnNavi, which only allowed tapping touch gestures. The participants performed the touch operations using the two devices under visually occluded situations, which is a well-known technique for estimating load of visual attention while driving.
                  In scrolling through a list, the flicking gestures required more time than the tapping gestures. Interestingly, both the flicking and simple tapping gestures required slightly higher visual attention. In moving a map, the average time taken per operation and the visual attention load required for the panning gestures did not differ from those of the simple tapping gestures that are used in existing car navigation systems. In zooming in/out of a map, the average time taken per pinching gesture was similar to that of the tapping gesture but required higher visual attention. Moreover, pinching gestures at a display angle of 75° required that the participants severely bend their wrists. Because the display angles of many car navigation systems tends to be more than 75°, pinching gestures can cause severe fatigue on users' wrists. Furthermore, contrary to participants' evaluation of other gestures, several participants answered that the pinching gesture was not necessary when operating IVISs.
                  It was found that the panning gesture is the only touch gesture that can be used without negative consequences when operating IVISs while driving. The flicking gesture is likely to be used if the screen moving speed is slower or if the car is in heavy traffic. However, the pinching gesture is not an appropriate method of operating IVISs while driving in the various scenarios examined in this study.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In-vehicle information systems (IVISs) in automobiles are becoming more and more complex due to their increasing levels of functionality, which are related to multimedia services. IVISs include various functions such as navigation, music or video players, and TV, as well as standard radio or air conditioning controllers. However, multitasking such as manipulating IVISs while driving can cause interference between the primary driving tasks and the secondary IVIS operating tasks. For example, performing a search for music (Mitsopoulos-Rubens et al., 2011; Young et al., 2012) or navigation (Choi et al., 2013) while driving increased the amount of time that drivers spent with their eyes off the roadway and decreased their ability to maintain constant lane position. These types of interference might be heightened when the two tasks require the use of the same driving modalities (Brookhuis et al., 1991; Tsimhoni et al., 2004), i.e. the visual, auditory, cognitive, and physical dimensions. Thus, operating an IVIS while driving can divide drivers' attention, thereby degrading their performance in terms of both driving the car and manipulating the IVIS (Alm and Nilsson, 1995; Horrey et al., 2006; Janelle et al., 1999; Salvucci, 2001) and inducing accidents (Stutts et al., 2001). Therefore, many automobile design guidelines have recommended that manipulating several disruptive IVIS functions (e.g. scrolling through a map or searching for an address) while driving should be prohibited (CEC, 2007; Green, 1999; JAMA, 2004).

Traditionally, touch screens or physical controllers such as hard buttons or knobs (e.g. BMW iDrive) have been used to operate IVISs. Recently, a touchpad located in the steering wheel has been used to improve the usability of IVISs (Kim et al., 2009). Also, many studies have focused on non-touch or touchless gestures based on vision techniques. Manipulating IVISs with non-touch gestures may cause less interruption to primary driving tasks, thereby lessening the task load and allowing the task completion time to decrease significantly (Karam and Shraefel, 2005; Karam et al., 2009; Pirhonen et al., 2002).

In comparison with hard buttons or touch pads, touch screens are being applied in IVISs because they allow direct manipulation of devices. Moreover, operating with finger gestures enables interaction between users and interfaces to be more intuitive and efficient. However, touch screens may be cumbersome because of the lack of touch and kinesthetic cues, which are highly important in the safe control of cars (Burnett and Porter, 2001; Burnett and Irune, 2009). Lacking such characteristics, the operation performance on unsealed roads or conditions of high vibration will become impaired (Salmon et al., 2011). Particularly, touch gestures on touch screens have limitations because there are difficulties in providing visual cues and tactile feedback for the gestures on the screen (Stößel and Blessing, 2010). Bjørneseth et al. (2012) showed that traditional touch-screen button and menu interaction was quicker and less erroneous than multi-touch gestures in a safety critical maritime domain. Bach et al. (2008) demonstrated that controlling IVISs using touch buttons was more rapid and efficient than manipulating such systems with hard buttons or touch gestures. On the contrary, the study insisted that touch gestures demanded less visual attention from users. Alpern and Minardo (2003) showed that handling IVISs using simple touchless gestures, rather than working with the hard buttons, could allow drivers to focus more on their driving activities. Due to this benefit of the decreased demand on visual attention, many automobile manufacturers are beginning to apply touch or touchless gestures in the manipulation of their IVISs. In particular, touch gestures such as flicking, panning, and pinching are likely to be used widely in IVISs because such gestures are already widely used in smart phones and tablet PCs. Rydström et al. (2012) showed that a touch screen interface based on simple tapping operations was better for alphanumeric input tasks, but was worse for continuous adjustments and list scrolling. Touch gestures such as flicking and panning might make worse tasks better. However, the effects on safe driving of operating IVISs using these touch gestures remain unknown.

In order to verify whether these touch gestures are appropriate for operating IVISs while driving, the following three aspects should be considered. First, each glance duration for a touch gesture should not require more than 1.5 s, so that drivers are not visually distracted from their driving task. Time is required to visually pay attention to IVISs during the performance of touch gestures, but not to cognitive or manual processing. Drivers tend to restrict their eyes-off-the-road-time to 1.5 s (Rockwell, 1988); the possibility of car accidents increases as this time increases over 2.0 s (Klauer et al., 2006; Zwahlen et al., 1988). ISO15005 also recommends that the time that drivers' eyes dwell on the IVIS should be less than 1.5 s (glance duration = transition time + dwell time; ISO15007-1, 2002). In particular, operating IVISs using touch gestures should not require drivers to pay continuous visual attention to the device (ISO15005, 2002). Therefore, an evaluation of the visual attention demanded by a device is essential in order to reveal the safety of using touch gestures while driving. There is a “15-Second Rule” that is a simple heuristic for evaluating attention load on a task (Green, 1999). This heuristic indicates that tasks that can be completed within 15 s in a stationary car may be safe without an increased risk of car accidents while driving.

Furthermore, the visual occlusion technique is being widely applied for the evaluation of the visual demands in the automobile industry (Young et al., 2003; Stevens et al., 2004; Gelau and Krems, 2004; Foley, 2008). While driving, drivers' eyes primarily focus on the road and sometimes on the IVIS. While drivers keep their eyes on the road, they cannot watch the IVIS. Using the occlusion technique, this typical scenario can be simulated by occluding the participants' eyes so that they cannot continuously watch the device. The use of this technique is much simpler and easier than the development of a driving simulator (Young et al., 2003); furthermore, in order to compare the results of the current study with the experimental results from other studies, the occlusion technique is required because it enables comparisons of standardized experimental methods (Pettitt, 2008). Several studies have demonstrated that the visual occlusion technique is valuable in evaluating drivers' visual attention load because this technique resulted in loads similar to those found in real driving environments (Baumann et al., 2004; Gelau et al., 2009). Due to these benefits, the technique is occasionally used in the automobile industry in order to determine what functions should be allowed or prohibited while driving. When using the technique, Horberry et al. (2008) recommended that only younger/middle-aged participants (broadly 17–66 years old) should be used in the occlusion measurement in order to minimize inter-subject variability. Brook-Carter et al. (2009) suggested that the proper sample size was 14 in spite of the size's dependency on the variability of the occluded task; within-participant basis was more consistent than between-participants basis.

Second, the touch gestures themselves should be intuitive so that drivers can imagine and recall them easily. For example, users can easily associate the ‘sweep up/down’ finger gestures with scrolling operations; in the same manner, they can also associate ‘sweep left/right’ gestures with the back or forward operations of touch browsers (Ecker et al., 2009). However, unlike the case of touch buttons, providing affordable and intuitive cues for touch gestures on a display is often not achievable because such gestures are not static but dynamic. For example, the zooming function in maps, in which users apply a pinching gesture, is not easily adopted without cues for the gestures; however, the visualization of certain cues on the map can become unnecessary and distracting after users learn the gestures. However, gestures such as flicking, panning, and pinching may be intuitively used in IVISs because such gestures are used widely in smart phones; thus, users already know these gestures without cues.

Third, the hand or finger positions required to make the gestures should be comfortable. Generally, for smart phones or tablets, the users' wrists are not likely to be stressed because the angle between their wrist and the display surface is almost parallel. However, the angle of an IVIS display on a dashboard in automobiles is usually between 30° and 75°, thereby forcing the users' wrists to bend more when using touch gestures; users thus can become uncomfortable.

The purpose of this study is to verify the safety and usability of operating IVISs using touch gestures while driving. For this purpose, an experiment was performed in which the three gestures commonly used in smart phones, i.e. flicking, panning, and pinching, were compared with simple tapping operations in standard IVISs. The participants performed tasks like scrolling through a list, moving a map, and zooming in/out of a map with two devices that could be operated only by touch gestures or common touch buttons. Then, the usability and safety of the flicking, panning, and pinching gestures were evaluated in terms of the abovementioned three aspects of visual attention, intuitiveness, and operational usability. In order to measure the visual attention load required for each gesture while driving, the visual occlusion technique was employed in the experiment. Initial gestures performed by the participants and their wrist motions were analyzed to evaluate the intuitiveness and usability of each touch gesture.

@&#METHODS@&#

In this experiment, two devices were employed as experimental systems. The first was an Apple iPad (9.7 inch tablet; Apple, USA), on which multi-touch interactions and gestures are possible. The second was the EnNavi (7 inch navigation system; SK M&C, Korea), on which only tapping is possible. Fig. 1
                         shows the different interaction methods of the two devices for scrolling through a list, moving a map, and zooming in/out of a map.


                        Fig. 2
                         shows the overall experimental environment. In order for the environment to be similar to that of real driving conditions in automobiles, the devices were located at the top of the center console to the right of the participants (Fig. 2c). According to Wittmann et al. (2006), this location is one of the best and is also consistent with that of general car navigation system positions in South Korea. Furthermore, the seat for the participants was approximately 700 mm from the devices, which is recognized as a standard distance between drivers and IVIS displays in existing automobile guidelines (Ross et al., 1996; Stevens et al., 2002). Furthermore, all participants put on a seat belt to maintain the distance from the display throughout the experiment (Fig. 2f).

In this experiment, the visual occlusion technique, which simulates a driver's driving tasks by periodically covering the participants' eyes with shutter glasses (SG), was employed (Young et al., 2003; Stevens et al., 2004; Foley, 2008). In this study, shutter glasses that could be set to open or close for from one to four seconds with intervals of 0.5 s (Fig. 2e) were developed; both the open and closed times of the shutter glasses were set at 1.5 s, as specified in the ISO-16673 (2007) standard.

The operational usability of touch gestures can be affected by the horizontal angle of the touch screen. The comfortable horizontal angles of touch screens are commonly known to be 30° or 45°; a 70° angle could cause users to become uncomfortable (Sears, 1991). However, this guide might be applicable only to common tapping operations, not to touch gestures. Accordingly, the horizontal angle of the IVIS display was used as an experimental factor in this study, and it was possible to adjust the display to 45° or 75° using an angle controller (Fig. 2d).

In order to analyze the time taken per unit operation and the bending angles of the participants' wrists, all participants' interactions with the IVIS were video-recorded using two camcorders (Fig. 2b) connected to the TEMPLO motion analysis software within a computer (Fig. 2a).

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

Sixteen people participated in this experiment. Eight participants ranged in age from 20 to 39 years old (4 male, 4 female; average age = 27.5 years); the others were aged from 40 to 59 (4 male, 4 female; average age = 47.4 years). The age range was determined by Horberry et al. (2008)'s recommendation and primary drivers' ages. The participants had driving experience of more than 1 year and thirteen participants were smart phones users.

The age group (20–39 and 40–59) was adopted as a participant factor, as well as the device (iPad vs. EnNavi). The age group was involved because the familiarity with touch gestures and IVISs might depend on age. Additionally, the visual occlusion (with SG vs. without SG) and the display angle (45° and 75°) were also adopted as situational factors that were used to evaluate the operational usability of each touch gesture. The ‘with SG’ condition in the visual occlusion factor indicates that the participants performed tasks while wearing the shutter glasses. This corresponds to driving conditions. On the contrary, the ‘without SG’ condition indicates that the participants performed tasks without wearing the shutter glasses.

All factors had two levels. Thus, a 2n-factorial confounding design was employed in this experiment. Each participant performed two random tasks with different devices (iPad or EnNavi) placed at the same display angle (45° or 75°) under different visual occlusion conditions (with or without SG). Thus, the devices and visual occlusions were within-subject factors, and the display angle was a between-subjects factor. The participants were randomly assigned to each experimental condition so that each condition was balanced in terms of age group and gender.


                           Fig. 3
                            shows two scenes in which a participant performed two task sets with each device under different conditions. Each task set consisted of three tasks such as scrolling through a list, moving a map, and zooming in/out of a map. The tasks were primary; no sort of driving task was included because, in this study, the visual attention load during driving could be measured using the visual occlusion technique. Thus, each participant performed six tasks (2 task sets × 3 tasks). An example of the task sets used in the experiment is as follows: (1) “Find Gangnam Station in the current address list” using tapping button or flicking gestures after executing a list screen, (2) “Find exit 6 of Gangnam Station by moving the map” using tapping button or panning gestures, and (3) “Zoom in to exit 6 of Gangnam Station as much as possible” using tapping button or pinching gestures. Two different scenarios were prepared to have similar task loads and were randomly assigned to each task set, thereby preventing transfer and learning effects by the experimental order.

In order to verify the applicability of the touch gestures for operating the IVISs while driving, the task completion time, unit operation time, visual attention load, and minimum wrist bending angle (up/down, left/right) were measured. These measures were derived from the three aspects for valid touch gestures during driving, which were explained in Section 1. In addition, whenever a task was finished, all participants were asked to evaluate the task load using the 7 scale NASA task load index (TLX). Furthermore, the touch gestures that the participants used were observed and recorded during the experiment. After all tasks were completed, the participants were interviewed about the necessity of the flicking, panning, and pinching gestures. They were asked whether operating IVISs with each type of touch gestures were more valuable than those with simple tapping operations.

The performance measures are explained in further detail here. The task completion time is the total sum of the time taken to complete each task of scrolling through a list, moving a map, and zooming in/out of a map. The unit operation time for a task is defined as the task completion time divided by the total number of touch operations. That is, the unit operation time is equal to the average time taken per operation. The visual attention load while driving is usually measured using the R value (occlusion coefficient), described below after experiments that used the visual occlusion technique (Gelau et al., 2009). If the R value is greater than or close to 1, it indicates that a high level of visual attention while driving can be required to operate the IVIS.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       R
                                       =
                                       
                                          
                                             TSOT
                                             
                                                
                                                   (
                                                   
                                                      Total
                                                      
                                                      shutter
                                                      
                                                      open
                                                      
                                                      time
                                                   
                                                   )
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          /
                                          
                                             TTT
                                             
                                                
                                                   (
                                                   
                                                      Total
                                                      
                                                      task
                                                      
                                                      time
                                                   
                                                   )
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        

In the above equation, the total task time (TTT) is equal to the task completion time in the ‘without SG’ condition; the total shutter open time (TSOT) is the total sum of the time while the shutter glasses are open in the ‘with SG’ condition. In this experiment, the TSOT was calculated using the task completion time in the ‘with SG’ condition divided by two because both the closed and open times of the shutter glasses were the same.

The wrist up/down and left/right bending angles while operating the IVIS using touch gestures were analyzed with the TEMPLO motion analysis software (CONTEMPLAS GmbH, Germany) after the participants' wrists were video-recorded using the two camcorders located at the upper and right sides of the participants (Figs. 2b and 4
                           ). The wrist bending angles of each participant were measured ten times at random points in the recorded video and then the minimum angle of these was defined as the minimum wrist bending angle. As shown in Fig. 4, as the bending angle values decreased, wrists became more bent and thereby could induce more positional inconvenience.

As explained previously, the participants performed a post-hoc evaluation of the task workload using a 7 scale NASA TLX after each task was completed. The NASA TLX consisted of six questions relevant to mental demand, physical demand, temporal demand, performance, effort, and frustration (Hart and Staveland, 1988); the average value was defined as the overall workload. As the value decreased, it indicated that the task workload was lower.

@&#RESULTS@&#

With regard to all the tasks, the task completion time for the EnNavi was larger than that for the iPad. The Mann–Whitney U tests showed that the time differences between the two devices were significant in moving a map (U = 46.0, p = 0.001) and in zooming in/out of a map (U = 75.5, p = 0.047). However, the task completion time in scrolling through a list was not significantly different between the two devices (U = 89.0, p = 0.148). As can be seen in Fig. 5
                        , the differences of task completion time between the two visual occlusion conditions (with or without SG) were dependent on the devices. With EnNavi, the differences in scrolling, moving, and zooming tasks were not significant (U = 23.0, p = 0.382, U = 44.0, p = 0.234, U = 32.0, p = 1.000, respectively). On the contrary, the differences became bigger with the iPad (U = 20.0, p = 0.234, U = 12.0, p = 0.038, U = 9.0, p = 0.015, respectively). This result indicates that the tapping operations on the EnNavi were less interrupted by the shutter glasses because they required less visual attention.

On average, the task completion times for scrolling through a list, moving a map, and zooming in/out of a map in the ‘without SG’ (non-driving) condition were 22.69 s, 80.66 s, and 29.78 s on the EnNavi and 11.56 s, 13.38 s, and 9.56 s on the iPad, respectively (Fig. 5). According to Green's (1999) “15 Second Rule”, the touch gestures on the iPad can be interpreted as being safe while driving because all average task completion times in the non-driving condition were less than 15 s. This interpretation will be further discussed in Section 4.

In scrolling through a list, the flicking gesture used on the iPad took more unit operation time than did tapping the ‘up/down’ touch buttons on the EnNavi (F(1,26) = 11.830, p = 0.002; 3.91 s vs. 2.45 s on average). In particular, wearing the SG further increased the unit operation time, as can be seen in Fig. 6
                           (F(1,26) = 9.567, p = 0.005; 4.00 vs. 2.37 on average). The average unit operation time of the flicking gesture on the iPad was 4.82 s, but the pure operation time was likely to be close to 2.41 s (= 4.82 s/2) because the open and closed times of the shutter glasses were equal (1.59 s = 3.18 s/2 in the case of EnNavi). This result implies that the dwell time for a flicking gesture on an iPad is most likely to be greater than 1.5 s. Thus, the flicking gesture might not be appropriate for operating IVISs while driving safely because drivers should not be distracted from a driving task for more than 1.5 s (ISO15005, 2002). Meanwhile, there were no significant differences in the unit operation times between the two age groups (F(1,26) = 2.558, p = 0.122) or between the two display angles (F(1,26) = 0.203, p = 0.656). There were no interaction effects among these variables.

A significant difference of the unit operation time for moving a map was only shown in the age factor (F(1,26) = 6.280, p = 0.019). There were no significant differences in the unit operation times between the two visual occlusion groups (F(1,26) = 0.082, p = 0.777) or between the two display angles (F(1,26) = 1.338, p = 0.258).

In both age groups, the panning gesture on the iPad required a slightly longer time than did tapping the touch buttons on the EnNavi (F(1,26) = 3.345, p = 0.079; 3.18 s vs. 2.52 s on average); the 40–59 age group required a longer unit operation time than did the 20–39 age group (3.31 s vs. 2.39 s on average; Fig. 7
                           ). The average of the pure unit operation time of the panning gesture with the SG was 1.59 s (= 3.18 s/2). Because this time is close to 1.5 s (the criterion for the dwell time explained previously), the panning gesture is likely to be safe while driving.

The existence of visual occlusion (F(1,26) = 15.319, p = 0.001) and age group (F(1,26) = 7.332, p = 0.012) variables had statistically significant effects on the unit operation time for the zooming in/out of a map function. However, there were no significant differences in the unit operation times between the two device groups (F(1,26) = 0.864, p = 0.361) or between the two display angles (F(1,26) = 0.842, p = 0.367).

As can be seen in Fig. 8
                           , wearing the SG (i.e. with SG) increased the zooming operation time (2.28 s vs. 3.97 s on average). Interestingly, tapping the touch buttons on the EnNavi required more time in the ‘without SG’ context, but the pinching gesture took longer in the ‘with SG’ context due to the interruptions of the occluded shutter glasses. This implies that the pinching gesture requires visual attention of more than 1.5 s (recall that the open and closed times of the shutter glasses were 1.5 s). Furthermore, the average unit operation time of the pinching gestures in the ‘with SG’ condition was 4.12 s; thus, the open time of the visual occlusion was 2.06 s (= 4.12 s/2). This result also implies that the dwell time for the pinching gesture while driving is most likely to be greater than 1.5 s. Thus, pinching gestures might not be appropriate for operating IVISs in safe driving. Similarly, tapping the touch buttons on the EnNavi might not be safe while driving (1.91 s = 3.82 s/2).

The 20–39 age group required more time in the zooming in/out of a map on the EnNavi (2.73 s vs. 2.12 s), but the 40–59 age group required a longer time with the iPad (EnNavi 3.66 s vs. iPad 3.98 s). This might result from the differences in the participants' familiarity with other touch devices such as smart phones, in which pinch-in/out gestures have already been included. This interpretation was supported by the result of a pre-questionnaire about familiarity with touch devices (20–39 age group: 3.75 vs. 40–59 age group: 2.75/5-scale Likert).

As can be seen in Table 1
                        , the pinching gesture on the iPad is more likely to require a high visual attention load while driving because its R value (occlusion coefficient) is larger than 1. However, scrolling through a list using flicking or tapping gestures may require a slightly higher visual attention load because its R values are close to 1 regardless of the device (EnNavi 0.92 vs. iPad 0.80). The reason for this is that scrolling through a list requires the user to find a target from many items. Thus, more visual attention may be required as the font size within the list is generally smaller.

The map moving task exhibited the lowest R values, as shown in Table 1. This might result from the fact that tapping (EnNavi) or panning (iPad) anywhere within a map provides users with a high degree of operational freedom. This is also related to Kim et al.'s (2010) finding that the time to touch a button decreased as the touch button size increased, thereby allowing the driving tasks to be less distracting and safer.

The minimum wrist up/down bending angle in scrolling through a list differed significantly depending only on the display angle (F(1,24) = 19.468, p = 0.000). There were no significant differences in the minimum wrist up/down bending angle between the two device groups (F(1,24) = 2.251, p = 0.147), between the two visual occlusion groups (F(1,24) = 2.498, p = 0.127), or between the two age groups (F(1,24) = 0.076, p = 0.785). A weak interaction effect between visual occlusion and age was found (F(1,24) = 3.381, p = 0.078).

When the horizontal display angle was 75°, the participants' wrists were severely bent upward when operating the two devices, as can be seen in Fig. 9
                            (a larger angle value results in less wrist bending). Furthermore, when the angle was 45°, the minimum wrist bending angle for the flicking gesture on the iPad was larger than that for tapping the touch buttons on the EnNavi (152.3° vs. 144.5° on average). This indicates that the flicking gesture can allow the user's wrist to be less bent than is the case when tapping the touch buttons.

Meanwhile, with regard to the minimum wrist left/right bending angle, there were no significant differences or interaction effects in any of the conditions (F(1,27) = 0.044, p = 0.835; F(1,27) = 0.728, p = 0.401; F(1,27) = 0.010, p = 0.923; F(1,27) = 1.255, p = 0.272 on the differences between the devices, visual occlusions, display angles, and ages, respectively).

The minimum wrist up/down bending angle for the map moving task also differed significantly depending on the display angle (F(1,25) = 21.216, p = 0.000). There were no significant differences in the minimum wrist up/down bending angle between the two device groups (F(1,25) = 0.161, p = 0.692), between the two visual occlusion groups (F(1,25) = 0.476, p = 0.496), or between the two age groups (F(1,25) = 0.002, p = 0.965).

In moving a map, the participant's wrist for the display angle of 75° was also more highly bent than it was at the display angle of 45° (Fig. 10
                           ). Interestingly, the slopes between the two graphs in Fig. 10 indicate that, in comparison with the EnNavi, the iPad was highly affected by the display angle: panning gestures were more sensitive to display angle than were simple tapping operations.

With regard to the minimum wrist left/right bending angle, only the interaction effects between the visual occlusion and device were significant (F(1,25) = 4.834, p = 0.037), in contrast to the insignificant differences depending on the main factors (F(1,25) = 1.197, p = 0.284; F(1,25) = 1.796, p = 0.192; F(1,25) = 0.032, p = 0.860; F(1,25) = 0.868, p = 0.360 on the differences between the devices, visual occlusions, display angles, and ages, respectively). When the participants performed the moving a map task without SG, user's wrist was bent more to the left or right while operating EnNavi. However, participant's wrist was bent more when operating the iPad with SG.

The device (F(1,26) = 3.991, p = 0.056) and display angle (F(1,26) = 15.898, p = 0.000) exhibited statistically significant effects on the minimum up/down wrist bending angle in the map zooming task. On the contrary, there were no significant differences in the minimum wrist up/down bending angle between the visual occlusion groups (F(1,26) = 0.150, p = 0.702) or between the two age groups (F(1,26) = 0.454, p = 0.506).

In comparison to tapping the touch buttons on the EnNavi, the pinching gestures on the iPad caused participants' wrists to bend upward more (141.3° vs. 134.0° on average). In particular, the weak interaction effect between device and display angle (F(1,26) = 3.351, p = 0.079) indicated that during the pinching in/out of the map on the iPad, the participants' wrists were significantly bent when the display angle was 75°, although there was no large difference between the two devices when the angle was 45° (Fig. 11
                           ). This implies that the 75° display angle can induce greater inconveniences when users employ pinching touch gestures.

With regard to gender, when operating an iPad, males' wrists were bent more than were females' wrists. In particular, when males in the 20–39 age group pinched a map on the iPad, their wrists were significantly bent (males in 20–39 age group had a figure of 126.7° vs. that of the others, which was 141.3° on average).

When participants were zooming in/out of the map, the minimum left/right wrist bending angles in the two devices were also significantly different (F(1,27) = 4.239, p = 0.049), unlike the case of tasks of scrolling through a list or moving a map. With regard to visual occlusion, display angle, and age, the differences were not significant (F(1,27) = 1.668, p = 0.207; F(1,27) = 0.839, p = 0.368; F(1,27) = 0.003, p = 0.955, respectively). The pinching gestures on the iPad caused the participants' wrists to be bent more to the left or right, compared with the case of the EnNavi (137.0° vs. 144.6° on average). Despite the insignificant interaction effect, Fig. 12
                            indicates that wearing SG (i.e. in driving conditions) might induce the participants to bend their wrists more to the left or right.

The set of NASA TLX points (7 scale), evaluated by participants after finishing their experimental tasks, did not satisfy the normality assumption; thus, the Mann–Whitney U and Kruskal–Wallis non-parametric tests were employed. The results showed that the iPad required a lower workload than did the EnNavi (U = 1068.5, p = 0.000; 4.19 vs. 5.17 on average). The workloads among the three types of gestures were not significantly different (H(2) = 3.192, p = 0.203). In addition, the 20–39 age group experienced a higher workload than did the 40–59 age group (U = 1861.5, p = 0.003; 4.93 vs. 4.44). In particular, in the 40–59 age group, the workload when using the iPad was lower than that when using the EnNavi (iPad 3.78 vs. EnNavi 5.11). This indicates that the flicking, panning, and pinching gestures are not as burdensome as the touch button gestures.

While the participants performed their tasks with each device, the initial touch gestures that they used were observed. The purpose of observing these initial touch gestures was to inspect their mental models of touch gestures.

In scrolling through a list with the iPad, both age brackets initially used flicking gestures (16/16 persons). Interestingly, with the EnNavi, five out of eight people in the 20–39 age group attempted first to flick the list despite the existence of the up/down touch buttons and the scroll bar within the screen (6/16 persons regardless of the age group).

In moving a map, most participants used gestures analogous to panning gestures as their first operation (15/16 persons with EnNavi, 16/16 persons with iPad), regardless of the device. This might be because the panning gestures were familiar to them and because there were no visual affordances (e.g. arrow buttons) on the map screen in either device. In the zooming in/out of a map task, almost half of the participants initially used pinching gestures (7/16 persons) despite the existence of ± touch buttons on the EnNavi. With the iPad, most participants initially used pinching gestures (13/16 persons).

After completing all tasks, the participants were asked to evaluate whether the touch gestures such as flicking, panning, and pinching were necessary for the operation of IVISs while driving. Overall, the participants accepted the necessity of the touch gestures (12/16, 14/16, 9/16 persons on flicking, panning, pinching, respectively). The 20–39 age group provided more positive responses than the 40–59 age group (87.5% vs. 58.3%); however, there were differences according to the type of gestures. Most participants stated that both flicking and panning were necessary, but several stated that the pinching gesture was not necessary (5/8 persons in the 40–59 age group). The reason that these participants gave this opinion was that a touch button (e.g. +, −) could allow the drivers to be more focused on driving rather than the gesture (4/5 persons).

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION@&#

Nowadays, many manufacturers in the automobile industry are interested in applying touch gestures for the operation of their in-vehicle information systems (IVISs). In this study, an experiment was performed to verify the applicability of the touch gestures currently used in smart phones to the operation of IVISs while driving. In the experiment, two devices were used: one was an Apple iPad with various touch gestures such as flicking, panning, and pinching enabled; the other was the EnNavi, which only uses tapping touch buttons for its operation. The visual occlusion technique was employed to measure the visual attention load required for each gesture while driving. Through the experiment, representative tasks, including scrolling through a list, moving a map, and zooming in/out of a map, using the two devices were compared.

The experimental results show that all average task completion times for touch gestures on the iPad under the ‘without SG’ condition were less than 15 s. This can be interpreted as showing that the gestural operations in the iPad are safe while driving according to Green's (1999) “15-Second Rule”. However, Baumann et al. (2004) demonstrated that task performances in visually occluded conditions (while driving) could be significantly degraded despite the tasks' adhering to the 15-Second Rule. They explained that the reason for this lay in the difficulty in splitting a task into several subtasks within a 1.5 s period (general criteria of shutter open times in the visual occlusion technique), particularly when the tasks were being performed with dynamically changing information. Accordingly, considering only the 15-Second Rule, it is difficult to conclude that the touch gestures used for the iPad operation are safe.

In scrolling through a list, the flicking gestures on the iPad required more time than did the tapping operations on the EnNavi. And, the pure operation time of flicking on the iPad was greater than 1.5 s. Because tapping the touch buttons is discrete but flicking the list requires continuous finger manipulation, the eye dwell time required for flicking while driving was likely to exceed 1.5 s, which is an important criterion from the ISO guidelines (ISO15005, 2002). Thus, flicking gestures might not be suitable for operating IVISs safely while driving. However, many participants answered that the flicking gesture was necessary for operating the IVIS while driving (12/16 persons). The participants stated that the flicking gesture allowed more rapid movements of the list, thereby enabling the target to be located faster (i.e. the total task completion time with the flicking gesture was shortened, as presented in Fig. 5). Furthermore, the participants in the 20–39 age group stated that the flicking gesture was more convenient because they were already familiar with it from their smart phones. Interestingly, both the flicking gesture and the simple tapping operation required a slightly higher visual attention load (R = 0.80 vs. 0.92 in Table 1). Thus, the flicking gesture in scrolling through a list is likely to be applied in the operation of IVISs while driving if the flicking speed is optimized to fit real driving situations. In other words, it may be necessary to decrease the flicking speed in IVISs compared with that in smart phones and tablets in order to provide safer driving conditions.

Similarly, most participants responded that the panning gestures were necessary to operate IVISs while driving (14/16 persons). They also initially attempted to move the map using the panning gestures regardless of their age, gender, or type of device. Furthermore, the unit operation times and visual attention load for the gestures did not differ from those of the simple tapping operation used in existing car navigation systems (Table 1). Thus, the panning gesture is likely to be applied well in the operation of IVISs while driving.

However, it was found that the pinching gesture might not be an appropriate method of operating IVISs while driving. The unit operation time of this gesture was similar to that of the tapping operation (Fig. 8) but required higher visual attention load in driving (wearing SG) conditions (R = 1.04 in Table 1). Furthermore, contrary to the other gestures, several participants answered that the pinching gesture was not necessary in operating IVISs (20–39s 2/8; 40–59s 5/8 persons).

According to the NASA TLX results, the flicking, panning, and pinching gestures were not as burdensome as the simple tapping operations. Moreover, the results of observing the participants' initial gestures showed that the touch gestures were intuitive to most users. This might be because users were already familiar with the gestures on their smart phones. However, all the touch gestures induced severe up/down bending of the wrist for the 75° display angle. What was worse, the pinching gesture on the iPad caused users' wrists to be bent more to the left or right. The display angle of common car navigation systems tends to be more than 75°, because of optimal viewing angle for drivers' eyes, reflection of sunlight, and space limits in cars are important. Thus, touch gestures can cause severe fatigue on a user's wrist. In order for the gestures to become usable in IVISs, the display angle should become slightly smaller or adjustable.

In summary, within the limit of this study, the panning gesture is the only touch gesture that should be applied in the operation of IVISs while driving. Furthermore, the flicking gesture might be applied if the screen moving speed is well fitted to the driving situations. However, the pinching gesture is not appropriate for operating IVISs while driving for the various reasons explained above.

This study revealed the types of touch gestures that can be applied in the operation of IVISs while driving from the viewpoint of fewer negative influences on both gesture usability and driving safety. However, this study has several limitations. First, the study did not control the screen sizes or user interfaces (UIs) of the two devices used in the experiment. Despite the existence of identical contents and maps, the two devices had slightly different screen sizes and list layouts. Thus, the interface differences might have affected the experimental results. For example, different numbers of items within a list and different heights of the lists would have been likely to affect the task completion time in scrolling through the list. Moreover, the size of the touch buttons on the EnNavi and the different hardware performances might also be influential. Therefore, to draw final conclusions on the applicability of touch gestures for operating IVISs while driving, it will be necessary to reinvestigate with the same interfaces (considering the effects of different button sizes) on the same devices in the future. Second, the visual attention load data, derived from the visual occlusion technique in this experiment, may differ slightly from that obtained using a real driving environment. This is because the occlusion technique is less demanding than a real traffic situation (Baumann et al., 2004). To overcome this limitation, imposing additional cognitive load on participants during the occlusion intervals is required (Gelau and Schindhelm, 2010). Moreover, the drivers' eyes-off-the-road-time is not constant but variable depending on the road situation. However, the occlusion technique had a limitation in that the vision/occlusion cycle forces the participants to use the IVIS at a predetermined pace (Park, 2009). Accordingly, it is necessary to undertake additional studies with similarly conditioned devices under real driving conditions or car simulation environments. Finally, the rapid flicking speed in common smart phones required participants' continuous eye tracking, thereby demanding high attention load in this study. However, this study did not reveal whether the flicking speed really affected the attention load. The optimal flicking speed for specified driving conditions will be studied further.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This study was performed as a part of the R&D project “Evaluation of HMI and development of Guidelines for AVN HMI Design”, funded by Hyundai-Kia Motors. We would like to sincerely thank Prof. Wan-chul Yoon at KAIST and senior engineer Hyeon-seung Yang at Hyundai-Kia Motors.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

