@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Towards a new paradigm: Activity level balanced sustainability reporting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Novel analytical framework.


                        
                        
                           
                           Real-life based case studies.


                        
                        
                           
                           Critical discussion of current practice.


                        
                        
                           
                           Approaches for advancing sustainability reporting.


                        
                        
                           
                           Roles for ergonomics professionals to combat global warming by compelling attention to human factors.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Triple bottom line

Global reporting initiative

Sustainability reporting

Human factors

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Technoeconomic paradigms based economic growth theories suggest that waves of technological innovations drove the economic growth of advanced economies. Widespread economic degradation and pollution is an unintended consequence of such growth. Tackling environmental and social issues at firm levels would help us to overcome such issues at macro-levels. Consequently, the Triple Bottom Line (TBL) reporting approach promotes firm level economic, environmental and social performances. Incorporating Zink's (2014) 3-pillar presentation model, this paper indicates that economic, social and environmental performances tend to be reported at firm level. All three pillars are not covered evenly at the activity levels. Thus, a loophole is identified whereby excellent environmental performance at activity levels could potentially leave poor social performance undisclosed. A refinement of the TBL paradigm, whereby all three pillars are covered at the activity level, is suggested, to enhance sustainability reporting.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

According to technoeconomic paradigms (TEPs) based economic growth theories, waves of technological innovations that drove economic growth of advanced economies in recent centuries (Daniels, 2005; Göransson and Söderberg, 2005) inadvertently unleashed large scale pollution and environmental destruction. Left unaddressed, these externalities could render planet earth inhospitable to human life. Sustainable development, defined as ‘development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’ (United Nations, 1987), has emerged as a key to containing this widespread macro-level environmental damage.

These environmental issues could be addressed at micro-levels, where firms could degrade the environment in a pursuit of profits, neglecting various unrecorded negative externalities. Economic profits could be boosted by cutting back on investments on safety, health and general well-being of workers and the general community. Customarily, commercial firms have considered investors, creditors and other contributors of capital as their most important stakeholders. The accounting discipline has traditionally focused on producing formal financial statements that serve the needs of these providers of capital, reporting little, if any, information on externalities that impact the society at large (Hines, 1988; Baker and Bettner, 1997). Concerns regarding the limitations of this capitalist orientation led to calls for new holistic reporting frameworks that cover various externalities, including the firms’ impact on the environment and social factors.


                     Elkington's (1997) Triple Bottom Line (TBL) reporting conceptualises the disclosure of firms' performances in economic, environmental and social arenas. The Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) proposes an extensive number of metrics that can be used to report the environmental and social performance of various organisations (www.globalreporting.org/Pages/default.aspx, accessed 14th March 2015). Ideally, such disclosures would expose firms' shortcomings in their environmental and social performances. These exposures would, in turn, compel firms to pay attention to their shortcomings. Ultimately, such moves would lead to improvements in the firms' economic and environmental performance. Currently, some firms release sustainability reports based on the GRI ideology.

Contemporary best practice in sustainability reporting is characterised by holistic firm-level reporting. However, such holistic coverage does not extend to the activity level. Firms could conceivably select a particular set of activities to report excellent environmental performance (e.g. firm wide recycling programmes) and a different set of activities to record superb social performance (e.g. excellent retirement benefits). Such reporting could theoretically belie poor human rights records. For instance, recycling of industrial waste involves the handling of hazardous waste and work postures that could lead to health issues. As such, the promotion of recycling activities should be associated with firm-level investments in recycling-linked safety training (including ergonomically safe work practices), staff with relevant certifications for establishing and enforcing staff safety protocols and recycling-specific protective gear. Disclosures regarding the success of recycling initiatives without related information on relevant staff health and safety issues limit the usefulness of such disclosures. In the worst case, such firm-level reporting could be meaningless, since there is no real optimisation in achieving sustainability in the human factor dimensions. This paper suggests that this limitation can be overcome by compelling holistic reporting of economic, environmental and social performance at the activity levels. A new paradigm that compels holistic reporting at the activity level would be able to enhance the effectiveness of sustainability reporting in addressing micro-level environmental and social issues.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

TEP based economic growth theories indicate that since the 1700s, technological innovations that enhanced productivity drove the economic growth of today's advanced economies (Freeman and Peréz, 1988; Grubler and Nowotny, 1990; Ayres, 1988). The macro-level pollution and environmental degradation resulting from these activities, however, have become an issue (Daniels, 2005). A firm's activities contribute to the negative externalities attributed to each firm. The firms' contributions to pollution, when summed up at the national level, constitute the macro-level environmental issues that are ascribed to TEP based economic growth models. Therefore, it would be possible to tackle the macro-level environmental issues by containing the environmental impacts at the firm level. Consequently, Triple Bottom Line (TBL) and Global Reporting Initiatives (GRI) movements address environmental and social issues at the firm level. The TBL and GRI are detailed below.

Accountants have traditionally focused on reporting economic performance, covering revenues, costs, profits, assets and liabilities of firms. The information needs of capitalists, particularly investors, are emphasised. The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) promulgates global accounting International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs). IASB's conceptual framework points out that the objective of financial reporting is to provide information that “is useful to existing and potential investors, lenders and other creditors …” in making resource allocation decisions (Ernst and Young, 2010).

Current IFRS regulations do not mandate disclosures regarding the costs of pollution and environmental degradation caused by firms’ activities, which are ultimately borne by the wider society. Nevertheless, Mathews (1993) indicates that organisations must consider the impact of their activities on the wider community. Brady (2003) comments that social and environmental credibility are very important for large firms. Ernst and Young (2002, p.5), based on an interview of senior executives of the Global 1000 companies, conclude that “corporate …. environmental and social behaviour can have a material impact on business value”.


                        Elkington's (1997) triple bottom line (TBL) philosophy conceptualises the reporting of economic, environmental and social performance of firms (Brown et al., 2006), offering an approach for addressing the social responsibility of corporations. Zink (2014) visualises a reporting presentation that pays explicit attention to all three dimensions and mentions that inter-dimensional impacts must also be considered. In practice, firms have voluntarily disclosed information pertaining to all three conceptual dimensions, in annual reports, stand alone documents and websites. Such social and environmental reports have grown in volume and complexity. In tandem with the “growth in stand-alone social and environmental reporting practices, initiatives to develop voluntary reporting standards to guide organizations in initiating and implementing these reporting practices (have) developed” (deVilliers et al., 2014, p.4). Global Reporting Initiative's (GRI) reporting standards are amongst the most widely used for reporting environmental and social performance of corporations (Buhr et al., 2014; deVilliers et al., 2014). The GRI standards provide a large number of metrics that firms could select to indicate firm specific environmental and social performance.

From an implementation perspective (that is, in terms of information that has been reported), firms have been criticised for applying GRI based standards in a non-integrated manner. For instance, in reporting firm level initiatives regarding worker safety (e.g. free medical checkups and vaccinations for staff), the firm might fail to disclose the specific costs incurred for this socially agreeable activity, which could shed light on the depth of the firm's commitment to its social responsibilities. Though GRI based reports “might have contained a wealth of information about a reporting organisation's social, environmental and economic impacts, practices and policies, because of the level of detail in the report” readers have difficulties connecting the related metrics to gain a complete insight of the organization performance (deVilliers et al., 2014, p.4).

Recent literature considers several corporate social reporting frameworks, including the balanced scorecard, TBL, sustainability reporting and integrated reporting (deVilliers et al., 2014). The balanced scorecard, originally conceived as a reporting tool for internal use of management within the firm (Kaplan and Norton, 1996), has had very little coverage within the scope of sustainability reporting, which is intended for stakeholders outside the firm. The current paper integrates the “balanced reporting” ideology, in that several dimensions must be considered simultaneously in an integrated fashion, within sustainability reporting operational and implementation frameworks. Various criticisms have emerged regarding the implementations of these operational frameworks in practice. These are discussed in the following section.

The criticisms of sustainability reporting can be broadly divided into the methodology argument (Tullberg, 2012), the isomorphism critique (Higgins and Larrinaga 2014) and the “corporate rhetoric problem” (Cooper and Owen, 2007).

With regards to the methodology argument, Tullberg (2012) indicates that sustainability reporting tends to suffer from the “incommensurability argument” when comparing two vastly different factors together. Tullberg gave the example of comparing or aggregating the positive effects of addressing water pollution with the increase in proportion of women employees. Firm-level reporting tends to be narrow in scope because aggregating the vastly different sustainability factors at the firm-level obscures the “true picture” of the organisation's sustainability (Jupe, 2007; O'Dwyer et al., 2005). In relation to the TBL approach, “businesses that start with a genuine commitment to enhancing their sustainability efforts can be distracted as the inter-relationships among the dimensions are masked by the apparent independence of the three “bottom lines”. There is neither demand to analyse inter-relationships nor pressure to consider how the impacts from one dimension affect the others” (Brown et al., 2006, p. 25). The vast amount of information in current practice results in information overload for the users (Fries et al., 2010). Hopwood, Unerman and Fries (2010) indicate that GRI compliant reports should enable readers to systematically link information across various impacts, since the dimensions are interconnected and impacts on one dimension would usually also have impacts on other dimensions. For instance, an aggressive zero waste initiative could dramatically reduce the waste sent to refill. However, if sufficient expenses were not undertaken to provide proper ergonomics and other safety training and equipment (including protective gear) to ensure the safety of employees involved in recycling, and the worker safety metrics related to this specific activity are not provided, then the reduction in waste could be masked by higher profits due to a lack of investment in worker safety in relation to the recycling activity, that could have negatively impacted employee health and safety. The recent integrated reporting initiative, is meant to address this lack of integration of all three dimensions in current environmental and social reporting, has also been criticised for failing to indicate the interconnected impacts on the different dimensions. In this context, deVilliers et al. (2014, p.20) consider that research is scarce on the new integrated reporting framework, important key questions that can help policymakers to advance environmental and social reporting includes: “ How and to what extent are integrated reporting processes truly integrated and are these processes truly embedded in organisations' management control systems?”.

Within the ergonomics literature, Thatcher and Yeow (2016) indicate a nested hierarchy of systems that offers a means for exploring the linkages between the sub-systems that are the components of a larger eco-system. The activities of the firm can be viewed as being nested within the large system of the firm, which is turn, is nested within the larger eco-system of the planet. As such, an examination of environmental and social reporting at the activity level would help to provide insights that could move the practice of integrated report forward. This system of systems, which forms the basis of the analysis undertaken in this paper, is discussed in detail in the conceptual framework (section 2.4) of this paper.

The isomorphism critique employs the institutional theory to explain contemporary sustainability reporting. Higgins and Larrinaga (2014) contend that it is not rational management decisions but rather the institutionalisation of the reporting practices of “peers” that guide the sustainability reporting of firms. The mimetic mechanisms (DiMaggio and Powell, 1991) of institutional theory indicate that firms would copy and imitate one another, especially perceived best practice, in their sustainability reporting rather than coming up with reports that address firm-specific concerns. A consequence of this theory is that all organisations would tend to report financial, environmental and social performance at the firm level, following conventional practice, without considering activity level reporting that could provide better links between the three dimensions and reduce information overload, resulting in reports that are easier to comprehend.

The “rhetoric problem” claims that sustainability reporting is used by firms as a legitimacy tool, to create a positive image of the firm (Cho et al., 2015). Social reporting is voluntary and the managers of the firm can choose what aspects to publish (Owen and Swift, 2001; Brown et al., 2006). The stakeholders have only limited input into sustainability reporting and assurances (O'Dwyer and Owen, 2005). As a result, sustainability reporting only focuses on the positive environmental and social news of the firm's actions (Hahn and Lülfs, 2014). In essence, the “TBL” and “sustainability reporting” terminologies have been criticised as catchphrases employed to merely symbolize a connection between businesses and the society's concerns about environmental and social issues, while continuing business as usual (Brown et al., 2006; Milne et al., 2009; Buhr et al., 2014; deVilliers et al., 2014). Environmental and social performance reporting at the activity level would help to clarify the inter-dimensional impacts of various environmentally friendly initiatives undertaken by a firm, and help separate rhetoric from the fact.

In essence, this paper offers that, due to the criticisms discussed above, there is a need for sustainability reporting at the activity level. This would alleviate the methodological problem by providing more detailed reporting for each of the firm's activities instead of aggregating the impact of all of the activities at the firm-level. Reporting at the activity level would also help to address the isomorphism critique as different firms would need to report the impacts of their activities in their own contexts rather than just following whatever other firms are doing. Finally, reporting at activity level may somewhat help reduce the “rhetoric problem” because firms are required to report the inter-dimensional impact of their activities rather than choosing to report only the aggregates of the dimensions at the firm level, without meaningful connections. The objective of this paper is to empirically examine the limitations of firm level reporting, where the inter-linkages between the financial, social and environmental dimensions are not explicitly reported. This paper recommends balanced activity level sustainability reporting to overcome this limitation.

The following case studies examine current best practice in sustainability reporting, and reveal limitations in applications of the TBL in choosing to report only the aggregates of the dimensions at the firm level, without meaningful connections.

This study applies Zink's (2014) visual conceptualisation of the TBL, that performance of firms must be considered from three dimensions (financial, environmental and social), and also considers that inter-dimensional interactions must be taken into account and a systems based perspective could help to move sustainability reporting forward. It also incorporates Thatcher and Yeow's (2015) reasoning that activities that may have a positive impact on one aspect of a system (e.g. recycling that reduces waste and saves money) may have a negative impact on another aspect (e.g. a negative impact on health and safety of employees involved in recycling), to analyse current corporate social and environmental reporting and incorporates their system of systems perspective. Fig. 1a and b explain this conceptual framework.

Integrating Zink's (2014) and Thatcher and Yeow's (2015) perspectives, this study examines whether the inter-dimensional impacts are captured in the activities disclosed in corporate environmental on social reports, particularly the impact on the human factor (e.g. employee safety, health and well being). The overall findings indicate that there is little attention paid to the inter-dimensional impacts. TBL reporting (including the application of Zink's (2014) three pillar visual presentation) is recommended at the activity levels to overcome this issue. Capturing these interrelated impacts at the activity level makes the reports easier to understand (addressing the information overload criticisms). Since the inter-dimensional impacts will also aggregate to the father (firm) and grandfather (macro or global ecology) levels, the reporting of the inter-related impacts at the micro activity levels will also provide a means for identifying and overcoming negative impacts at the activity levels. This will reduce the firms' negative TBL impacts at the firm and global levels. Firms could complement firm level reporting with activity level based balanced disclosures (for example, in case studies formats for various activities), so as to provide the complete picture.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

A case study methodology has been used to examine current sustainability reporting. Given the lack of mandatory standards, sustainability reporting practices could vary across firms. In heterogeneous environments, research methods that capture firms' idiosyncratic orientations, such as case studies, are suitable. Recognising the increasing importance of TBL based reporting, some professional bodies have established awards for best sustainability reporting. Award winning sustainability reports reflect best practice that could serve as examples for other firms worldwide. A consequence of Higgins and Larrinaga's (2014) isomorphism critique is that sustainability reporting practice could, in theory, widely follow perceived best practice. And perceived best practice could be indicated by award winning sustainability reports. As such, this study focuses on award winning sustainability reports.

Since 1950, Sydney based Australasian Reporting Awards (ARA) Limited, run by volunteer professionals from business, government and not-for-profit organizations, has recognized excellent annual reports of profit and non-profit based firms (ARA, 2014b). The awards focus on annual reports since “the annual report especially, is an essential mechanism of accountability, a vital element in the governance process” (ARA, 2014c).

In the 2014 ARA ceremony, conducted in association with CPA (Certified Practising Accountants) Australia, outstanding sustainability reporting was recognised through awards for excellence in sustainability reporting, in the private and public sector categories, respectively. The relevant criteria covered completeness (weighted at 40%, including clarity of presentation and the extent to which “all significant impacts are presented”), credibility (weighted at 35%, including “assurance, from the presentation of evidence, that organisational structures, processes and controls are in place to enable the organisation to accurately present information on its impacts” and “the extent to which there is evidence that, where appropriate, the internal systems and information have been tested and the views of external parties have been incorporated into the report”) as well as communication (weighted at 25%, “extent to which the sustainability report communicates to the declared target audiences”), ARA, 2014c.

Seven (three public sector and four private sector based) finalists vied for best sustainability reporting honour in the private sector. The public sector finalists included Watercare Services, Main Roads Western Australia and New Zealand Superannuation Fund and the private sector finalists comprised of CLP Holdings, National Australia Bank, Toyota Motor Corporation Australia and Telstra Corporation. Watercare Services won the award in the public sector category and CLP Holdings emerged the winner in the private sector category (ARA, 2014a).

All of the seven finalists were shortlisted for this study. The objective of this study is to examine firms that undertake activities contributing to large scale pollution and environmental degradation and examine how the impacts of such activities, which are under the firms' direct control, are reported in their published sustainability reports. As such, the scope of this study excludes bank and investment houses that could enforce sustainability indirectly (such as policies to avoid funding organizations that contribute to pollution) rather than by directly readjusting current processes to counter global pollution. Therefore, the New Zealand Superannuation Fund and National Australia Bank were excluded. An underlying assumption of sustainability is that the selected firm should expect to continue its business operations, especially activities that potentially contribute to pollution, in the foreseeable future. Toyota's decision to stop manufacturing cars in Australia (http://www.scmp.com/business/companies/article/1425192/australia-loses-last-carmaker-toyota-plans-exit-2018) in 2017, after six decades of producing cars in Australia, is inconsistent with this assumption. Thus, Toyota Australia was excluded from this study. All of the remaining four firms were included in this study.

Sustainability reports that won the latest edition of the ARA awards (at the time of this writing) were chosen to ensure currency. The relevant information was published in the annual reports, stand-alone sustainability reports and company websites, with pertinent cross-references. The sources for the analysed information are given in the analysis.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results of this study are presented below. Section 4.1 introduces the four cases. Section 4.2 analyses the sustainability reporting at firm level, for all four cases, based on Zink's (2014) graphical presentation model. Sections 4.3 and 4.4 analyse the observed disclosures pertaining to the social and environmental dimensions, respectively, at the activity level.

Hong Kong based CLP Holdings produces and sells electricity. Coal, natural gas, nuclear and renewable energy sources (hydro, solar, wind, biomass) are used to generate electricity in China, Australia, India, Taiwan and Southeast Asia. The earnings of privately owned CLP Holdings amounted to HK$8.312 billion (US$1.07 
                              1
                            billion) as at 31 December 2012 (CLP AR, 2012, p.3). CLP Holding's 2012 report won accolades for reporting complex information of the large and diverse business in a manner that a non-technical reader can follow (CLP, 2014).

Watercare supplies water and treats wastewater in Auckland, New Zealand. Wholly owned by the Auckland Council, Watercare is not profit driven (Watercare AR, 2013). In 2013, total revenues of 483 million and a net after tax surplus of 40 million (New Zealand dollars) was recorded (US$328 million and US$27 million, respectively
                              1
                           
                           
                              1
                              Based on currency converter at http://www.currency-converter.com/(accessed on 25th,Oct., 2015).
                           ). Watercare's 2013 report was praised for its clarity (Watercare, 2014).

Public sector based Main Roads Western Australia, the custodians of Western Australia's State road network (Main Roads AR, 2013), focuses on planning, building and maintaining Western Australian roads. Main Roads manages over AUS$41 billion in assets (US$30 billion
                              1
                           ), catering for all road users in the state. Main Roads' annual report directly addresses sustainability issues at even the policy level, following a sustainable policy that “is committed to creating lasting benefits through an integrated consideration of the social, environmental and economic aspects” and seeking to “manage, operate and develop a road transport system that meets the needs of today, without compromising the natural, human and financial capital on which future generations will depend” (Main Roads AR, 2013, p. 3).

Telstra is an Australian based telecommunications and information service company. Internationally, the firm's businesses include a mobile operator in Hong Kong, China-based search and advertising and Telstra Global's search and advertising business. It reported AUS$25.5 (US$19 
                              1
                           ) billion of sales revenue and AUS$3.9 (US$2.8 
                              1
                           ) billion net profit in 2013 (Telstra AR, 2013, p.2).

In all of the cases, sustainability reporting, based on Zink's (2014) three pillar-based graphical presentation, indicates balanced sustainability reporting (that is, information is reported regarding financial, environmental and social performance) at the firm level. At the activity level, the coverage is not balanced.

Firm level analysis has been depicted.

The financial reporting for all of the cases is extensive, conforming to relevant accounting standards. However, the financial reports generally provide details of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities at firm levels. The different activities are associated with different occupational hazards (i.e. factors impacting the human factor) and environmental considerations. The observed sustainability reporting could be enhanced by indicating how the specific occupation hazards related to the reported firm-level activities have been addressed via corresponding activity specific financing, social (human factor based) and environmental disclosures. Table 1
                         indicates the observed social disclosures related to the reported activities. Tables 2–5
                        
                        
                        
                         analyse the firms’ environmental/social disclosures in relation to activity-specific occupational hazards. The summaries below each table highlight some key activity-specific occupational hazard related financial and social disclosures that could enhance the sustainability reporting.


                        Table 1 presents the observations in the social/human factor dimension.

In essence, the disclosures generally refer to firm level initiatives, with limited addressing of activity specific concerns. Section 4.4 examines this reporting limitation in greater detail.


                        Tables 2–5 provide observation of the activity level disclosures, against the backdrop of relevant activity related occupation hazards.

There is limited linkage of the social disclosures (e.g. stated emphasis in health and safety) to the financial and environmental disclosures, that show the addressing of activity specific concerns. For example, information regarding the expenses expended in safe nuclear waste disposal (e.g. disclosures of expenses specifically for safety gear to combat radiation risks and training in safe nuclear waste handling), ISO certifications in energy generation plants, free immunisations and healthcare systems set up to specifically address the hazards related to LED would add depth to the sustainability reporting.

This sustainability reporting could be enhanced through information regarding expenses incurred to train workers in safe work practices in recycling and biosolids disposal, including investment in related safety clothing and equipment. Furthermore, information on the establishment of healthcare systems specifically designed to handle recycling linked worker health concerns would have added value to this reporting.

The trend noted in Tables 2 and 3 is also apparent in the disclosures observed in Table 4, wherein firm level disclosures are made with little information on the resources spent on addressing activity specific occupation hazards/concerns. As such, information regarding expenditures in employee safety training, protective equipment and emergency healthcare provisions specific to unhealthy air emissions would improve the usefulness of this sustainability reporting.


                        Table 5 examines an area where the firm's responsibility generally extends beyond the premises of the firm. For instance, biodiversity work involves the deployment of employees in remote locations, where the firm's in-house healthcare systems might not be readily accessible, particularly in emergencies. Information on costs incurred and steps taken to ensure employee safety and healthcare needs, specifically in relation to biodiversity work, would enrich this sustainability reporting. Furthermore, information on costs incurred and steps taken to address potential emergencies such as chlorine spills that could adversely affect the environment, would be useful in further cementing the firm's commitment to sustainability.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The macro-level (parent system) impacts include widespread environmental degradation and global warming resulting from TEP driven economic development, that contribute to worldwide worker/human safety and health issues. Micro-level, or firm level, impacts (child systems), which influence the macro-level, would be captured in firm level TBLs or sustainability reports. However, the activities of firms (grandchild systems), rather than firms, specifically, contribute to environmental and social problems. Once environmental and social issues are addressed at the activity level, there will be overall improvement at the firm (child) and national (parent) levels. National level improvements, in aggregate, will result in global improvements. The different activities of the firm represent siblings systems. Thus, activity level sustainability reporting of siblings systems at the grandchild level will effectively address global pollution and human safety and health issues. Thus, this study suggests balanced activity level sustainability reporting, aiming to improve global level environmental issues by addressing them at the activity levels.

Holistic TBL based sustainability reporting should incorporate economic (financial), ecological (environmental) and social (human factor) pillars. The case studies indicate extensive firm level sustainability reporting, covering all three pillars (Fig. 2
                     ). However, different activities are used to indicate each pillar. Conceivably, an activity that signifies excellent environmental protection (e.g. extensive recycling of waste) may be conducted with little protective gear and other measures that safeguard worker safety and long-term health. Furthermore, limited investment into such safety measures might be hidden when only the environmental impact of this activity is discussed, without consideration of the associated social and economic impacts. In the worst case scenario, the appearance of excellence resulting from firm level reporting may actually promote seemingly environmentally sound activities that, in fact, contribute to social issues.

This is a shortcoming of current sustainability reporting frameworks that promote reporting at the firm level. A new reporting paradigm that compels firms to cover all three of Zink's (2014) pillars at the activity level will help to overcome this shortcoming. Future iterations of the GRI frameworks could recommend firm level policies of covering all three pillars at the activity level.

The implications of this study and relevant policy recommendations are discussed below.

The findings indicate that activities that could ensure environmental protection while paying little attention to human safety and long term health could potentially be promoted in firm-level sustainability reporting frameworks. Holistic sustainability reporting practices that provide a balanced coverage of Zink's (2014) 3 pillars, at the activity level, are recommended, to overcome this shortcoming. Furthermore, activity level reporting would also show up the linkages between the different dimensions while reducing the clutter of voluminous information associated with firm level reporting, addressing the information overload criticisms.

Each of the firms' activities would have unique health and safety impacts. For example, in firms that use nuclear fuels the impact of potentially harmful radiation on employees and the general public needs to be addressed. Thus information on measures to continuously measure radiation levels in the plant and the vicinity and processes to monitor radiation exposure, will shed light on the steps taken to protect the health of individuals associated with this activity. Safety measures specific to this activity, including safety drills and emergency evacuation procedures, and regular inspections of radiation monitoring equipment that prevent potential reliance of faulty readings, would provide information on key concerns regarding human safety. Information on radiation related continuous staff training and certification that ensures that the staff is always fully prepared and knowledgeable in handling various activities in a manner that protects their long-term health and safety, would enable stakeholders to assess the firm's attention to worker well-being in this specific environment. Finally, information on special protective gear that protects workers from radiation in hazardous situations, such as during maintenance or attending to unexpected system breakdowns, would provide insights into the firm's commitment to addressing activity specific health and safety issues. Within the economic pillar, the amount spent on each of these activities would provide information regarding potential under spending, at the expense of worker health and safety, in this specific activity.

Considering another activity, such as reduction of air emissions, worker safety issues will involve exposures to gases such as SO2 and NOx. As such, health related issues will involve steps and processes to monitor exposures to these gasses, emergency procedures for dealing with over exposure, the availability of trained personnel for establishing, implementing and monitoring compliance with this air emissions related safety protocols. Information on worker training and certification, as well as relevant safety gear and equipment for addressing air emissions related safety issues, would enable readers of sustainability reports to assess the attention paid to the human factors within this activity. Information on the expenditures incurred for each of these activities would shed light on the depth of the firm's commitment to the well-being of its employees in this specific activity.

Ergonomics professionals indicate that attention to human factors can improve human well-being, operations system performance (Nuemann and Dul, 2010), and contribute to sound business strategies (Dul and Nuemann, 2009) and firms’ bottom lines. Various inputs of ergonomics professionals, that improve the well-being of employees whilst improving the bottom line in different activities, can be disclosed via pertinent activity level social and economic performance indicators. Such disclosures will enrich activity level sustainability reporting.

A shortcoming of this approach is that small and medium scale enterprises (SMEs), may find these disclosures too costly to produce. Recognising such resource constraints, Samudhram et al. (2014) suggest that strategies that require relatively low levels of human capital related expenditures, which lead to high levels of benefits, would be suitable for SMEs. In this context, ergonomics professionals could provide inexpensive workshops and publicize pertinent metrics, which SMEs could adopt at low costs, to indicate their compliance with the TBL philosophy. This process would compel SMEs to pay attention to the well being of their human factors, which would in turn have a positive impact on overall business performance. Such attention to human factors, aggregated at macro levels, would help to address national level social issues.

The first limitation of this study is that the reporting of this relatively small number of firms might not be representative of sustainability reporting in the wider population. The extant literature, however, indicates the prevalence of institutional isomorphism in the practice of current environmental and social reporting (Higgins and Larrinaga, 2014), whereby all firms appear to follow similar practices. Moreover, this study indicates that the firms appear to be reporting on similar items to a large extent, such as recycling, and all of them have similar limitations, in that they focus on firm level reporting, rarely covering inter-dimensional links and generally providing unbalanced activity level reporting. Further indications of the operation of the isomorphism theory is evident in the fact that this relatively small sample size, in fact, indicates all of the wide gamut of outlets (annual reports, sustainability reports and websites) described in the literature for sustainability reporting (e.g. Fries et al., 2010).

A consequence of institutional isomorphism is that other firms not covered in this study are likely to follow the practice of perceived best practice, as such the conclusions of this study are likely to be applicable to the other firms as well.

A second limitation is that there could be firms that fall far below this perceived best practice, and such “deficiencies” in holistic reporting cannot be captured by looking at only best practice. The objective of this study, however, is to examine current best practice and related criticisms, and conceptualise a way forward. An underlying assumption is that firms with “deficiencies” in sustainability reporting could look to the sustainability award winners for guidance in best practice. The objective of this paper is go forward beyond best practice, to study the criticisms of current perceived best practice and offer a way to improve best practice.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Current sustainability reporting initiatives contain a loophole that allows firms record excellent environmental performance without revealing the related potential negative impacts on human factors and costs incurred, if any, to mitigate such impacts. Zink's (2014) 3-pillar graphical presentation framework, applied at the activity levels, would help to address this loophole. Ergonomics professionals could contribute economic sub-sector specific metrics on worker and community health and safety, which can be incorporated into holistic activity level sustainability reporting. As such, ergonomics could lift current sustainability reporting practices to the next level by promoting a balanced activity based sustainability reporting paradigm.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors gratefully acknowledge an e-science research grant from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, Malaysia, which supported this research.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

