@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Thermal environment in eight low-energy and twelve conventional Finnish houses

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Perceived IEQ was as slightly better in the low-energy than conventional houses.


                        
                        
                           
                           The occupants want lower room temperatures than ISO 7730 optimal temperature.


                        
                        
                           
                           The occupants adjust room air temperatures to their liking in single house.


                        
                        
                           
                           Significant difference between the mean temperature and humidity was not found.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Air temperature

Relative humidity

Measurements

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  We assessed the thermal environment of eight recently built low-energy houses and twelve conventional Finnish houses. We monitored living room, bedroom and outdoor air temperatures and room air relative humidity from June 2012 to September 2013. Perceived thermal environment was evaluated using a questionnaire survey during the heating, cooling and interim seasons. We compared the measured and perceived thermal environments of the low-energy and conventional houses. The mean air temperature was 22.8 °C (21.9–23.8 °C) in the low-energy houses, and 23.3 °C (21.4–26.5 °C) in the conventional houses during the summer (1. June 2013–31. August 2013). In the winter (1. December 2012–28. February 2013), the mean air temperature was 21.3 °C (19.8–22.5 °C) in the low-energy houses, and 21.6 °C (18.1–26.4 °C) in the conventional houses. The variation of the air temperature was less in the low-energy houses than that in the conventional houses. In addition, the occupants were on average slightly more satisfied with the indoor environment in the low-energy houses. However, there was no statistically significant difference between the mean air temperature and relative humidity of the low-energy and conventional houses. Our measurements and surveys showed that a good thermal environment can be achieved in both types of houses.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The Finnish Ministry of the Environment has issued new energy efficiency regulations for new and renovated buildings (Finnish Ministry of the Environment, 2011). The purpose of the new regulations is to promote energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy in buildings, simultaneously reducing their energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions. According to the regulations, new buildings must be built as nearly zero-energy buildings (nZEB) after 2020. In addition, these regulations must already be implemented in new state buildings in 2019.

Thermal conditions play a major role in living comfort, indoor environmental problems and symptoms related to the indoor environment (Jaakkola and Heinonen, 1989). Thus, a pleasant air temperature is one of the main goals of ventilation and heating system design and use. A given space has an optimum operative temperature, which corresponds to predicted mean vote (PMV) = 0 (ISO 7730, 1994). The PMV scale is used to evaluate how occupants perceive their sensation of thermal comfort. Predicted percentage of dissatisfied (PPD index) is also used to evaluate the quantitative predictions of the number of thermally dissatisfied people. For example, in winter, when people are dressed in clothes with a thermal insulation of 1 clo and a person's metabolic rate is 1 met, the optimal operational temperature is 23 °C. In summer, when people are dressed in clothes with a thermal insulation of 0.5 clo, the optimal operational temperature is 26 °C. These values are valid when relative humidity is 50% and mean air velocities do not exceed 0.1 m/s. Table 1
                      provides examples of PMV values (ISO 7730, 1994). A metabolic rate value of 1.0 met corresponds with sitting quietly, reading or writing. When relative humidity is below 50%, the optimal room temperature is 0.3 °C higher for each 10% of relative humidity.

In Finland, the guideline values for dwelling air temperature are given in the Housing Health Code (Housing Health Code, 2014) and National Building Code D2 (National Building Code 2003). Target values for thermal environments are given in the Finnish Classification of Indoor Environment (FiSIAQ, 2008). According to the Housing Health Code, a tolerable air temperature level is 18 °C and a good level 21 °C. This temperature should not exceed 23–24 °C during the heating season. It can exceed 26 °C only if this is due to outdoor conditions.

According to the National Building Code, the design value of air temperature is 21 °C for the heating season and 23 °C for the summer season. The temperature should not normally be greater than 25 °C during the occupancy period. However, the air temperature may exceed this value by a maximum of 5 °C if the average outdoor air temperature over a maximum period of 5 h is above 20 °C.

The Finnish Classification of Indoor Environment gives more detailed requirements for thermal environments. It has three categories: S1: “individual or the best quality”, S2: “good” and S3: “satisfactory” indoor environment. Target air temperature values are given as operative temperatures (Table 2
                     ).

The energy efficiency demands of new buildings require improved thermal insulation and tightness of the building envelope, and efficient heat recovery of ventilation systems. In addition, renewable energy such as wood, solar energy and geothermal heating are recommended for use in new buildings. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of the energy efficiency regulations on thermal environments in recently built low-energy houses, and to compare the results with those of conventional houses.

Seven low-energy and ten conventional houses were selected for the study. One low energy apartment block and two conventional apartment blocks were also included. The low-energy houses and the apartment blocks were built in 2009–2012. Their computationally demanded heat loss was less than that of the buildings that were built in accordance with the regulations of the 2010 building code (National Building Code 2010 D3). The conventional houses and apartment blocks were built in 1959–2011, in accordance with the valid building code that applied to building permission of houses and apartment blocks at that time. The buildings were maintained and repaired but not altered or extended. Fig. 1
                         presents typical examples of low-energy and conventional houses and apartment blocks studied.

The living area of the low-energy houses was on average 151 m2 or 46 m2 per person. They were equipped with mechanical supply and exhaust ventilation that had a cooling system. Floor heating or heating ventilation were the main heating systems in most of the low-energy houses. All single houses were also equipped with a fireplace. Adjustable curtains and blinds were used to regulate thermal environment. Permanent, external solar shading was also utilized. The cooling energy of supply air was produced by a heat pump or by circulating cooling liquid in the ground. More detailed information of the low-energy houses studied is given in Table 3
                        .

The living area of the conventional houses was on average 134 m2 or 54 m2 per person. The houses were equipped with mechanical supply and exhaust ventilation, mechanical exhaust ventilation, or a natural ventilation system. Electric or water radiators were the main heating systems in most of the conventional houses. All single family houses were equipped with fireplaces. Curtains and blinds were utilized. There were no renovations that affected energy efficiency. More detailed information of the conventional houses studied is given in Table 4
                        .

The primary energy demands of the five low energy houses (2009–2011) and five older conventional houses (1974–2011) was known. The average calculated primary energy demand was 120 kWh/m2 a (85–136 kWh/m2 a) in the low energy houses, and 323 kWh/m2 a (203–577 kWh/m2 a) in the conventional houses (Holopainen et al., 2015).

Air temperature was measured using two sensors and relative humidity using one or two sensors (TinyTag View 2) in the living room and bedroom. Data loggers saved values at 15 min intervals. Outdoor air temperature was measured either by our own TinyTag loggers or temperature data was collected from the weather station of the Finnish meteorological institute (Finnish Meteorological Institute, 2014). The measurements began in July 2012 and finished in October 2013. We tested the statistical difference between the mean temperatures and also the relative humidities of the low-energy and the conventional houses using the MATLAB program (version R2013a). The test was carried out with two-sample t-tests for equal means using the MATLAB test2 function (p < 0.05).

Air flow rates of supply and exhaust terminal units were measured using Swema 125 air flow hood and Swema 3000 (Swema, 2014).

The air tightness of the houses was measured using the Minneapolis Blower Door Systems (Blower Door, 2014). The measurements were carried out according to standard SFS-EN 13829 and ISO 9972. The test pressure differences varied between 10 Pa and 50 Pa, steps 10 Pa.

Perceived indoor environment quality was assessed using a questionnaire survey developed by the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (FIOH). The questionnaire is based on the Swedish standardized MM-40 questionnaire (Andersson, 1998, Reijula and Sundman-Digert, 2004), and addresses the environmental problems (temperature, draught, dry, or stuffy air, etc.) of the past three months. The questionnaire has no questions concerning symptoms and psychosocial factors. Environmental problems that had occurred weekly or occasionally were elicited and collected. The survey was carried out during the cooling and heating season in the winter and autumn of 2013, respectively.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The air tightness of the low-energy house envelope (so-called n50 value) was on average 0.5 h−1, with a pressure difference of 50 Pa. The air exchange rates of the houses, which were evaluated from supply and exhaust air flows, were on average 0.4 h−1, corresponding to 0.3 dm3 s−1 m−2.

The airtightness of the conventional house envelope was on average 4.1 h−1, with a pressure difference of 50 Pa. The air exchange rate of the houses were on average 0.4 h−1, corresponding to 0.3 dm3 s−1 m−2.


                        Table 5
                         presents the measured air temperatures during the winter (Dec. 2012–Feb. 2013) and summer (Jun. 2013–Aug. 2013), Tin (mean, standard deviation and range) and the mean value of outdoor air temperature Tout.

All means were calculated over 24 h. The mean air temperature was 22.8 °C (21.9–23.8 °C) in the low-energy houses, and 23.3 °C (21.4–26.5 °C) in the conventional houses during the summer. In the winter, the mean air temperature was 21.3 °C (19.8–22.5 °C) in the low-energy houses and 21.6 °C (18.1–26.4 °C) in the conventional houses. The mean supply air temperature of the three low-energy houses was 18.3 °C (16.1–21.6 °C) during the summer.


                        Table 6
                         presents the air temperatures measured during the autumn (Sep. 2012–Nov. 2012) and the spring (Mar. 2013–May 2013), Tin (mean, standard deviation and range) and the mean value of outdoor air temperature Tout.

The mean air temperature was 21.5 °C (19.8–22.7 °C) in the low-energy houses, and 22.2 °C (18.4–25.2 °C) in the conventional houses during the autumn. In the spring, the mean air temperature was 21.9 °C (20.6–22.8 °C) in the low-energy houses and 22.1 °C (19.2–26.1 °C) in the conventional houses.

The mean air temperatures of the low-energy and the conventional houses did not differ significantly. However, the mean air temperatures of the single family house (RefH 1and RefPH 9) differed significantly (Tables 5 and 6).


                        Figs. 2 and 3
                        
                         present the variation of indoor, outdoor and supply air in a low-energy and a conventional house during the winter and summer seasons. Both houses were located in the Helsinki metropolitan area.


                        Table 7
                         presents the measured relative humidity during the winter (Dec. 2012–Feb. 2013) and summer (Jun. 2013–Aug. 2013), the statistical quantity of relative humidity in room air RHin (mean, standard deviation and range) and the mean value of relative humidity in outdoor air RHout.

The mean value of the relative humidity in room air was 53% (45–59%) in the low-energy and conventional houses during the summer. In the winter, the measured mean room air relative humidity was 28% (24–39%) in the low-energy houses and 26% (19–42%) in the conventional houses.


                        Table 8
                         presents the measured relative humidity during the autumn (Sep. 2012–Aug. 2012) and spring (Mar. 2012–May 2013), the statistical quantity of relative humidity in room air RHin (mean, standard deviation and range) and the mean value of relative humidity in outdoor air RHout.

The mean value of the relative humidity in room air was 52% (35–51%) in the low-energy and 43% (34–59%) in the conventional houses during the autumn. In spring, the measured mean room air relative humidity was 34% (28–57%) in the low-energy houses, and 29% (21–43%) in the conventional houses. The mean values of the relative humidity of the low-energy and the conventional houses did not differ significantly.


                        Figs. 4 and 5
                        
                         show the perceived indoor environment quality during the winter and summer. In general, occupants perceived indoor environment quality as slightly better in the low-energy houses than in the conventional houses. The perceived thermal conditions of the low-energy and conventional houses also showed minor differences: in the winter, people in the conventional houses more often made complaints concerning temperature. In the summer, the air temperature was perceived as too high every week only in the conventional houses.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In most of the low-energy and conventional houses studied, the average air temperature met the guideline values of the Housing Health Code and National Building Code D2, as well as the target values for the thermal environment given in the Finnish Classification of Indoor Environment.

The low-energy houses were airtight according to measurements, and the houses' envelopes had good thermal insulation, both of which enable a good thermal environment for occupants. The houses were equipped with an external solar shading and cooling system to prevent overheating during summer. Therefore, the air temperature roughly followed the supply air temperature in the low energy houses (see Fig. 3). Fig. 6
                      shows supply air temperature as a function of the outdoor air temperature in low-energy house LowH 1 during the period Jun. 2013–Aug. 2013. LowH 1 supply air was cooled during most of the summertime.

In a Swedish study (Rohdin et al., 2014), occupants complained about cold floors and varying air temperature more often in passive houses than in conventional buildings. In addition, they complained more often about excessively high air temperatures in the passive houses. According to the authors, the houses were not equipped with external shading. These complaints are contradictory to the results of our study (see Figs. 4 and 5), in which occupants perceived the thermal environment as generally more comfortable in the low-energy houses than in the conventional houses. The conventional houses were not equipped with a cooling system, and therefore, air temperature was difficult to control during warm summer days.

Thermal and moisture conditions in the single family conventional houses were studied in Finland during 2002–2004 (Vinha et al., 2014). In the winter, the air temperature was on average 21.7 °C, and relative humidity 23% in the mechanically ventilated houses. In the summer, the air temperature was on average 24.6 °C and the relative humidity 51%. The mean air temperature and relative humidity were approximately the same in the conventional houses of our study.

The perception of thermal comfort is a personal matter. In our study, some occupants preferred slightly cool temperatures while others liked warmer temperatures. The range of means was about 18–26 °C in this study. According to the Finnish Housing Health Code, 18 °C is tolerable, and according to ISO 7730, a temperature of about 26 °C is acceptable in the summer and 23 °C in the winter (PPD < 6%). In one conventional house in our study (RefPH 1), the mean air temperature exceeded 26 °C in both the summer and the winter because occupants liked warm air temperatures. Occupants in apartment blocks can usually regulate air temperatures by 1 °C with a water circulation heating system. In single family houses, air temperature can be controlled to an even greater extent.

The occupants in one low-energy apartment block (LowBF 8 h1) complained about uncomfortably low air temperature during the winter. The rented apartment was equipped with its own ventilation heating system, the supply air temperature of which was limited to a maximum of 19 °C. Because of this low air temperature, the occupant had to warm the room air using the kitchen's electric stove after showers and when dressing her child. The occupants were intending to apply for a new apartment due to the uncomfortably cold air temperature. Therefore, it is important that occupants can adjust the air temperature to a comfortable level.

Several studies have shown that older occupants prefer higher air temperatures than younger occupants (Hwang and Chen, 2010, Schellen et al., 2010). The age of adult occupants was on average 38 and 44 years in the low-energy and conventional houses, respectively. In this study, the age of occupants was 55 and 60 years in the coldest house (RefH 1) and 40, 45 and 10 years in the warmest house (RefPH 1). The occupants in the RefH 1 single house said they adjusted air temperature to save energy, whereas occupants in the RefPH 1 semi-detached house reported raising the air temperature for comfort reasons. Therefore, in some special cases, energy saving was accepted as a more important reason for adjusting air temperature than that of having a comfortable thermal environment.

The standard deviation of air temperature was on average 0.8 °C in the low-energy houses, and 1.2 °C in the conventional houses in the summer. In the winter, the standard deviation of the air temperature was on average 0.6 °C in the low-energy houses, and 0.8 °C in the conventional houses. Fig. 7
                      presents the variation of the air temperature expressed as a standard deviation of the air temperature in a low-energy and a conventional house during the heating and cooling season. Fig. 8
                      shows this during the interim seasons.

Relative humidity was approximately 30 percentage points lower in the winter than in the summer in the low-energy and conventional houses. As previous studies have shown, high air temperature causes low relative humidity in room air. We also found this in our study. However, many other factors may affect room air relative humidity; for example, living habits and the use of ventilation. Avoiding excessively high air temperatures is important as regards energy consumption, material emission and symptoms caused by dry air.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The results show that the low-energy houses had a good thermal environment for occupants. The mean air temperature was lower in the low-energy houses than the conventional houses in the winter and summer. The standard deviation of air temperature was lower in the low-energy houses than in the conventional houses both in the summer and winter. No significant difference, however, was found between the low-energy and conventional houses' mean temperature and relative humidity. Some families prefer lower air temperature than others and direct comparison of air temperatures given by regulations and guidebooks is not always possible. Occupants adjust air temperatures to the values they like. In single family houses air temperature can be controlled to a much greater extent than in apartment blocks. In low-energy houses, air can be cooled through geothermal energy at a low cost.

Due to the cold winters, all houses are quite well insulated and three-pane windows have been used for decades. New low-energy houses are extremely well insulated and more airtight than conventional houses. Almost all single family houses are equipped with Finnish masonry heaters as a reserve source of energy.

According to the questionnaire, occupants perceived indoor environment quality as slightly better in the low-energy houses than in the conventional houses. In the summer, air temperature complaints were more common in the conventional houses than in the low-energy houses. During the study, summer time was neither particularly warm nor hot. The perceived thermal conditions of the low-energy and conventional houses also differed in the winter.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The study was the part of RYM Indoor Environment programme. The authors warmly thank Tekes – the Finnish Funding Agency for Innovation, and the companies that supported the studies. The authors also thank the low-energy and conventional houses' owners for their co-operation.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

