@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of flooring on required coefficient of friction: Elderly adult vs. middle-aged adult barefoot gait

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Barefoot gait on carpet revealed higher required coefficient of friction than vinyl flooring.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results of the present study showed different behavior between EA and MA subjects with respect to RCOF.


                        
                        
                           
                           Females presented higher RCOF values during heel contact.


                        
                        
                           
                           Friction on barefoot gait is affected by flooring types, gender and age.


                        
                        
                           
                           Carpet was the safer flooring in terms of required coefficient of friction.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Gait

Elderly

Barefoot

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of flooring on barefoot gait according to age and gender. Two groups of healthy subjects were analyzed: the elderly adult group (EA; 10 healthy subjects) and the middle-aged group (MA; 10 healthy subjects). Each participant was asked to walk at his or her preferred speed over two force plates on the following surfaces: 1) homogeneous vinyl (HOV), 2) carpet, 3) heterogeneous vinyl (HTV) and 4) mixed (in which the first half of the pathway was covered by HOV and the second by HTV). Two force plates (Kistler 9286BA) embedded in the data collection room floor measured the ground reaction forces and friction. The required coefficient of friction (RCOF) was analyzed. For the statistical analysis, a linear mixed-effects model for repeated measures was performed. During barefoot gait, there were differences in the RCOF among the flooring types during the heel contact and toe-off phases. Due to better plantar proprioception during barefoot gait, the EA and MA subjects were able to distinguish differences among the flooring types. Moreover, when the EA were compared with the MA subjects, differences could be observed in the RCOF during the toe-off phase, and gender differences in the RCOF could also be observed during the heel contact phase in barefoot gait.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The causes of falling are multifactorial and can be due to individual limitations, environmental conditions or the interaction of both effects. Among the individual limitations that can increase the probability of falls are balance and gait disorders, side effects of certain medications and the effects of aging (Salzman, 2010; Silva-Smith et al., 2013). In particular, many falls experienced by older adults occur when a change in body position is required, such as walking on different flooring (Soriano et al., 2007).

Previous research has investigated the effects of age on the ability to walk on different flooring, e.g., carpet versus vinyl (Willmott, 1986; Dickinson et al., 2001). However, contradictory results were found depending on the gait velocity adopted while walking on these flooring types (Willmott, 1986; Dickinson et al., 2001). Willmott (1986) found that elderly people walk faster on carpet than in vinyl flooring, and the Dickinson et al. (2001) had the opposite conclusion. Changes in gait speed and step length during ambulation over different floorings may influence the outcome of slips and falls, especially for the elderly. Understanding how older adults adapt to walking on different flooring types may provide useful information for the design of interventions to reduce falls in older people.

The surface roughness of the shoe and floor surfaces affects slipperiness significantly (Kim et al., 2013; Kim and Nagata, 2008, Chang et al., 2012; Lockhart et al., 2003), and dangerous slips are most likely to occur when the required coefficient of friction (RCOF) at the shoe–floor interface exceeds the available coefficient of friction of the floor (Kim et al., 2013; Kim and Nagata, 2008). The RCOF is one of the most critical gait parameters in predicting the risk of slipping (Chang et al., 2012). It is defined as the minimum coefficient of friction necessary at the shoe–floor interface to support walking, and its value relative to the available coefficient of friction is used to assess the probability of slipping (Chang et al., 2012; Redfern et al., 2001; Hanson et al., 1999). Consequently, slip severity increases as the RCOF increases above the available coefficient of friction of a floor surface (Kim et al., 2013; Kim and Nagata, 2008; Chang et al., 2012; Lockhart et al., 2003; Hanson et al., 1999).

At the interface between the foot and the ground, footwear is likely to influence balance control and the risk of experiencing slips and trips while walking. The shoe type and sole material affect the available friction between the foot and the support surface. Because many falls occur when older adults walk barefoot inside their home or in a familiar environment (Menz et al., 2006), understanding their behavior while walking barefoot on different flooring should provide new insights about the risk of falls in the elderly population.

In general, elderly adults walk slower than young adults, with a higher heel contact velocity and a shorter step length (Lockhart, 1997; Lockhart et al., 2003; Burnfield and Powers, 2003; Kim and Lockhart, 2006; Menz et al., 2006; Seo and Kim, 2013a,b). It has been suggested that these age-related gait adaptations influence the likelihood of slip-induced falls (Lockhart et al., 2003). Another factor that should be taken into account is gender differences. According to Lach (2005), gender is the most important covariant associated with the fear of falling. Women with balance and gait difficulty resulting in unsteadiness, multiple falls, and low self-rated health are at greatest risk (Lach, 2005).

Although fall risk factors among the elderly have been well studied (Lockhart, 1997; Lockhart et al., 2003; Burnfield and Powers, 2003; Kim and Lockhart, 2006; Menz et al., 2006; Seo and Kim, 2013a,b), it could be interesting to understand the strategies adopted by middle-aged and elderly adults when walking over different flooring. We are interested in comparing older adults (60–70 years old) (O'Loughlin et al., 1994), whose risk of falling is relatively high, with a group of adults close in age (40–50 years old) with a lower risk of falling (Rubenstein and Josephson, 2002).

Previous studies (Lockhart, 1997; Lockhart et al., 2003; Burnfield and Powers, 2003; Kim and Lockhart, 2006; Menz et al., 2006; Seo and Kim, 2013a,b) have assessed the gait parameters under slippery conditions and compared RCOF strategies in the elderly with control groups of young adults (20–30 years old). In this study we are considering the barefoot gait in the day-by-day flooring without slippery conditions and the aging process comparing middle aged individual with elderly individuals.

The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of flooring on the RCOF during barefoot gait according to age (middle-aged versus elderly adults) and gender. We expect in this study: (a) to find differences in the RCOF variables in barefoot gait on different dry flooring; (b) differences can be observed in the RCOF when elderly adults are compared with middle-aged adults; and (c) gender differences in the RCOF can be observed during barefoot gait.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

The Research Ethics Committee of the University of Campinas approved this study (UNICAMP protocol No. 319/2011), and the volunteers gave written informed consent to participate. Twenty healthy subjects volunteered in this study, and they were divided into two age groups: elderly adults (EA, n = 10) and middle-aged adults (MA, n = 10). Table 1
                         shows the anthropometric data for each group. The subjects recruited for this study were healthy (without known musculoskeletal, neurologic, cardiac, or pulmonary diagnoses), community dwelling, and ambulatory without an assistive device.

Three flooring types under four experimental conditions were used to evaluate the study volunteers:
                           
                              - Homogeneous vinyl (HOV): Homogeneous single-layer vinyl flooring (Pavifloor Prisma tile, 2 mm thickness, 2 × 8 m, ref. 909, charcoal, Tarkett Fademac);

- Heterogeneous vinyl (HTV): Compact flexible vinyl floor covering (Chinese Teak natural, 2.50 mm thickness, 2 × 8 m, Imagine Wood, Tarkett Fademac);

- Carpet: Needle-punch carpet (plain quality needle-punch carpet, 100% pet fiber, 2 mm thickness, 2 × 8 m, Flortex Eco Inylbra);

- Mixed: To simulate a person walking from one room to another room with different flooring, a mixed condition was included. As illustrated in Fig. 2d, in a walkway with 9 m and 2 force plates strategically embedded in the floor on the middle of it; the first 4.5 m of the pathway and the 1st force plate were covered by HTV, and the second 4.5 m of the pathway and the 2nd force plate were covered by HOV.

To characterize the flooring used in this study, the static coefficient of friction (μ
                        e) was calculated using a pulley test. Fig. 1
                        a illustrates the test and the resulting μ
                        e. The chosen flooring was positioned on a force platform (Kistler 9286BA), and over this flooring a halter (H1) was positioned weighing 18.42 kg. Halter H1 was pulled by another halter (H2) weighing 17.32 kg. H1 was connected to H2 by a steel cable that slid on a system of three rollers, one fixed on the floor (R1) and two on the laboratory roof (R2 and R3). From the plot of the coefficient of friction of the force plate as a function of time, μ
                        e was determined as the maximum friction prior to the start of movement. The μ
                        e values for all the flooring chosen for this study were approximately 0.5, which is within the standards of safety according to Templer (1992) and Miller (1983) (see Fig. 1b–e).

The RCOF is typically measure on dry surfaces with a force plate. The force plate consists of a board in which four sensors of piezoelectric are distributed to measure the three ground reaction forces components Fx, Fy and FY; the medial-lateral, the anterior-posterior and the vertical directions respectively. In this study two force plates (Kistler 9286BA) were used.

The participant was asked to walk barefoot, at his or her self-selected speed, along a 9 m pathway of the experimental flooring material, beneath which two force platforms were embedded in the data collection room floor on the middle of the pathway, as shown in Fig. 1.

The Dvideo kinematic analysis system (Figueroa et al., 2003; Barros et al., 2006) was used to obtain the tridimensional coordinate of the markers. The system consisted of 6 genlocked basler cameras (model A602fc) working at 60 Hz. To record the gait velocity one marker was positioned on each participant's calcaneous.

Three trials were performed for each experimental condition. Because of the difficulties associated with changing flooring conditions, all subjects accomplished the tasks in the same order: HOV, carpet, HTV and mixed.

Data acquisition was performed using BioWare software (Sweden, Kistler, Version 4.0.x). Kinetic raw data were filtered using a 2nd order low-pass digital Butterworth filter with a cut-off frequency of 10 Hz. An algorithm developed in Matlab was used to filter the raw data and to calculate the dependent variables.

The independent variables were the type of surface (HOV, HTV, carpet or mixed), age group (AG or EG) and gender (female or male). RCOF1, RCOF2 and Gait velocity, were the dependent variables of interest.

To calculate the RCOF (required coefficient of friction), the instantaneous COF was first calculated as the ratio of the resultant shear of medial–lateral and anterior–posterior ground reaction forces by the vertical ground reaction force during stance (Chang et al., 2012; Redfern et al., 2001—see Eq. (1) and Fig. 2
                        ). According to Chang et al. (2012), the RCOF is typically considered to be the local maximum of the instantaneous COF curve occurring at ∼20% of the duration of the stance phase of gait, during weight acceptance, identified as RCOF1 in Fig. 2. Also according to Chang et al. (2012), another local maximum occurs at ∼90% of the duration of the stance phase of gait, during push-off, identified as RCOF2 in Fig. 2. This peak is thought to be associated with a lower risk for a slip-induced fall. The greater the horizontal forces (or lower vertical), the greater RCOF is. As consequence greater RCOF values might denote higher risk of fall (Chang et al., 2012; Redfern et al., 2001).
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    COF
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         (
                                                         
                                                            F
                                                            Y
                                                         
                                                         )
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   2
                                                
                                                +
                                                
                                                   (
                                                
                                                F
                                                X
                                                
                                                   )
                                                
                                                ²
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          F
                                          Z
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

First, a two-sample t-test was performed to compare the anthropometric variables (height and weight) between age groups. Second, an ANOVA for repeated measures were applied to compare the walking velocity considering the flooring type, age and gender.

Third, a linear mixed-effects model (West et al., 2007) for repeated measures was performed to analyze the possible effects of flooring, age and gender on the dependent friction variables. The repeated covariance type chosen for the mixed linear model was scaled identity.

It is important to highlight that the participants performed 3 trials for each condition, and for these trials the data of two force plates were considered for the statistical analysis; once, there was no difference between right and left side for the variables analyzed. So, six trials for each flooring condition were considered in the statistical procedures. The model applied used three main factors. The first analysis factor was the flooring, which was treated as a repeated measures factor with four sublevels (HOV, carpet, HTV and mixed). The second factor analyzed was age, with two sublevels (EA and MA). The third factor was gender (male and female). The first effect was considered as a within-subjects factor, and the second and third effects were considered as between-subjects factors. The Bonferroni test of pairwise comparisons was computed for every level of combination of factors and interactions. SPSS software (SPSS for Windows, version 19.0) was used for the statistical analysis, with a level of significance of α < 0.05 for all tests.

The power of the analysis and the partial eta squared (
                           
                              
                                 η
                                 
                                    partial
                                 
                                 2
                              
                           
                        ) value was calculated to verify the practical relevance of the main effects and interactions. As proposed by Richardson (2011), in this study, partial η
                        2 values >0.01 were categorized as low, >0.06 as medium, and >0.14 as high.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The two-sample t-test revealed no significant differences between the EA and MA groups for body mass (p = 0.655) and height (p = 0.936). Possible effects of the participant's chosen speed on the results were tested, and no significant differences were found related to the flooring condition (p = 0.710), age group (p = 0.944) or gender (p = 0.417). The participants were aware of the force plate locations.

The mixed model analysis revealed significant differences for the three main factors (flooring, age and gender), with no interaction between them. When the flooring types were compared during the loading response phase, the participants demonstrated a greater RCOF1 on carpet than on the HOV or HTV flooring (p = 0.021; 
                        
                           
                              η
                              
                                 partial
                              
                              2
                           
                        
                      = 0.68; power = 0.924; Fig. 3
                     a). The 
                        
                           
                              η
                              
                                 partial
                              
                              2
                           
                        
                      value shows that the relevance of this effect was high.

In the push-off phase, the RCOF2 was statistically greater when the subjects walked on carpet than when they walked on the HOV flooring, with a medium level of effect size for this main factor (p = 0.006; 
                        
                           
                              η
                              
                                 partial
                              
                              2
                           
                        
                      = 0.11; power = 0.158; Fig. 3b).

The EA group had statistically smaller RCOF2 values than the MA group, with a high effect size for the factor (p = 0.0001; 
                        
                           
                              η
                              
                                 partial
                              
                              2
                           
                        
                      = 0.61; power = 0.892; Fig. 4a). Moreover, when gender effects were compared, the male subjects had a lower RCOF1 than the female subjects, with a low level of effect size (
                        
                           
                              η
                              
                                 partial
                              
                              2
                           
                        
                      = 0.04; power = 0.167; Fig. 4b).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This research project was undertaken to provide a better understanding of how flooring, age and gender influence foot-floor friction in the gait of healthy middle-aged and elderly male and female subjects. Barefoot gait was selected for analysis because according to Menz et al. (2006), a higher risk of falling indoors is associated with going barefoot. The required coefficient of friction at the loading response and push-off phases of gait were used as experimental variables because it is well known in the literature that these variables are related to the risk of a fall and also make it possible to mechanically characterize the foot–floor interaction.

The main result obtained in the present study was that the three main factors tested in the statistical model (flooring, age and gender) were significant and had practical relevance ranging from medium to high. No interaction was found among flooring, age and gender; therefore, no conclusion was possible regarding distinctive behaviors of the EA or MA groups, or of the male or female participants, with each flooring type.

The RCOF was higher during barefoot gait on carpet than on vinyl flooring (HTV and HOV) in the deceleration phase of gait (i.e., the loading response) as well as in the push-off phase (i.e., the terminal stance), confirming the first hypothesis of the present study and suggesting that carpet might presents higher risk of fall than the other three types of flooring analyzed in the present study. However, we can not forget that for a given available coefficient of friction the higher the RCOF the higher the risk of fall (Chang et al., 2012; Redfern et al., 2001). In this study we did not calculate the available COF, so, we can't assume just with the increase of the RCOF that this or that floor presents more risk of falls. Furthermore, we need to consider that the fall incidence is multifactorial and you can not make a cause-effect relationship just considering the RCOF.

It is well known that surface roughness plays an important role in floor slipperiness when subjects wear walking shoes (Kim et al., 2013; Kim and Nagata, 2008, Chang et al., 2012; Lockhart et al., 2003). Our results confirm this finding in barefoot walking.

The study found different RCOF behavior in the EA and MA subjects. The findings of the present study showed with similar gait speeds the elderly participants showed a higher RCOF during the toe-off phase. This could be due to plantar sensitivity. Plantar sensitivity is an important source of information for balance control because it codifies the changes in pressure under the feet, especially during gait. This information reaches the brain, which senses the body position and, if necessary, generates postural reflexes to maintain an upright position and dynamic balance during gait (Kavounoudias et al., 1998; Wang and Lin, 2008). Compared to the barefoot condition, walking shoes could potentially interfere with the detection of plantar surface stimulation (Fendley and Medoff, 1996). Such interference might be inconsequential for individuals with intact plantar sensitivity. However, EA often have reduced plantar sensitivity (Perry, 2006).

There were also gender differences in the RCOF. Female participants had higher RCOF values during heel contact. This was also observed by Li et al. (2001) and Chao et al. (1983), who found that women exhibited greater lateral and anterior–posterior ground reaction force than men. Burnfield and Powers (2003) found that the peak RCOF varied with gender; females generated higher peak RCOF values than males at a slow walking speed, whereas males generated higher peak RCOF values than females at a fast walking speed. The structural differences in the female hip and knee may result in differences in their movement patterns (Mizuno et al., 2001; Ferber et al., 2003). This suggests that some intrinsic characteristics, such as skeletal alignment, muscle strength and anthropometric parameters, may contribute to gender and age differences in gait performance. The results of the present study are in agreement with previous studies that have shown that the peak RCOF varies with gender (Burnfield and Powers, 2003).

Finally, limited statistical power because of the modest sample size in the present study (N = 20) may have played a role in limiting the significance of some of the statistical comparisons conducted. Another factor that needs to be observed with concern is that the walking velocity during all the trails was not controlled. However, no differences in gait velocity between conditions or groups were observed.

In conclusion, friction during barefoot gait was found to be effected by flooring type, gender and age. Carpet was the critical flooring in terms of the required coefficient of friction. When elderly adults were compared to middle-aged adults, they demonstrated greater required coefficient of friction during the toe-off phase, and gender differences were observed in the RCOF during the heel contact phase in barefoot gait.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We acknowledge financial support from Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) (process: BEX 11241/13-6) and Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - CNPq (473729/2008-3; 304975/2009-5; 140731/2011-3).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

