@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Rasmussen's legacy in the great outdoors: A new incident reporting and learning system for led outdoor activities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Rasmussen's risk management framework and Accimap method are popular in academic circles.


                        
                        
                           
                           However, widespread adoption in practice has not yet been achieved.


                        
                        
                           
                           We present a new incident reporting and learning system underpinned by the framework and Accimap.


                        
                        
                           
                           An analysis of the data from the first 3 months use of the system is presented.


                        
                        
                           
                           The analysis shows contributory factors and relationships across 5 out of the 6 levels of the framework.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Incident reporting systems

Rasmussen

Accimap

Accident analysis

Injury

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Jens Rasmussen's seminal risk management framework and accompanying Accimap method have become highly popular in safety science circles. Despite this, widespread adoption of the model and method in practice has not yet been achieved. This paper describes a project involving the development and implementation of an incident reporting and learning system underpinned by Rasmussen's risk management framework and Accimap method. The system was developed for the led outdoor activity sector in Australia to enable reporting and analysis of injuries and near miss incidents, with the aim of supporting the development of more effective countermeasures. An analysis of the data derived from the first 3 months use of the system by 43 organisations is presented. The outputs provide an in-depth Accimap-based analysis of all incidents reported by participating organisations over the 3 month period. In closing, the importance of developing usable domain specific tools to support translation of Ergonomics theory and methods in practice is discussed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

As evidenced by the topic of this special issue, there is no question that the seminal work of Jens Rasmussen is currently having a major influence on the discipline of ergonomics. This influence is extant both in research and practice, although the impact in practice is arguably less significant. In the research context, many are applying his theories, such as his risk management (Rasmussen, 1997) and skill-rule-knowledge-based behaviour frameworks (Rasmussen, 1979) to investigate system and human performance issues. Likewise, the last decade has seen many publications describing applications of his methods, such as Accimap (Svedung and Rasmussen, 2002) and Cognitive Work Analysis (Rasmussen et al., 1994), for systems design and evaluation purposes. These theoretical and methodological applications cover multiple domains and a range of issues (e.g. Karsh et al., 2014; McIlroy and Stanton, 2011; Rechard et al., 2015; Salmon et al., 2014; Stanton and Bessell, 2014; Walker et al., 2014).

The impact of Rasmussen's work in academic circles is therefore without question; however, there is little evidence that his models and methods are achieving the same impact on practice. This is not unique to Rasmussen's work, however, and reflects the widely discussed ‘research practice gap’ whereby advances in ergonomics theory and methodology are not readily translated by practitioners (Chung et al., 2014; Salmon et al., 2012; Underwood and Waterson, 2013). It is these authors opinion that a key driver of the research practice gap is the lack of guidance on how to translate ergonomics models and methods into practical, usable tools that organisations can implement as part of safety management systems. This is particularly so in the context of accident reporting, analysis and investigation, where contemporary models such as Rasmussen's risk management framework are often overshadowed by older models that have practical methodologies associated with them. For example, Reason's Swiss Cheese model (Reason, 1990) is widely adopted in many areas in part due to the associated Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS; Wiegmann and Shappel, 2003) methodology and its various derivatives (Chauvin et al., 2013; Olsen and Shorrock, 2010; Walker, O'Connor et al., 2011).

A critical component of organisations' accident prevention activities is the provision of an appropriate incident reporting and learning system. This article outlines a recently developed incident reporting and learning system that is intended for use in practice and is directly underpinned by Rasmussen's risk management framework and associated Accimap method. The aim is to demonstrate how organisations can translate and use models and methods from Rasmussen's legacy in practice and to showcase the power of implementing systems underpinned by Rasmussen's seminal work. To achieve this, an overview of the new incident reporting and learning system is presented, along with the findings from an analysis of the incidents reported during its first 3 months of use. In closing, further areas in which this legacy can make a significant contribution are proposed.

The research described in this article was undertaken in the area of led outdoor activities. Led outdoor activities represent one important educational form of active recreation, and have been formally defined as facilitated or instructed activities within outdoor education and recreation settings that have a learning goal associated with them (Salmon et al., 2010). Examples of led outdoor activities include school and scout camping, hiking, harness sports, marine aquatic sports and wheel sports.

Like all sociotechnical systems, the led outdoor activity sector experiences adverse events that can cause injury, and in the worst cases, multiple fatalities. Examples of recent major incidents in this sector include the Mangatepopo gorge incident in which six year 12 students and their teacher drowned during a gorge walking activity in the Tongariro National Park, New Zealand (see Brookes et al., 2009) and 12 year old Kyle Vassil's drowning in a waterhole whilst on school camp in Toolangi, Victoria. Analyses of fatal incidents in this area have identified multiple contributory factors related to various different actors, equipment, processes, and organisations (e.g. Brookes et al., 2009; Salmon et al., 2010). Further, research examining a series of more common everyday injury-causing incidents has revealed similar findings, showing that these too can involve multiple contributory factors from across the led outdoor activity system (e.g. Salmon et al., 2014). As a corollary, the need for a systems thinking-based approach to incident data collection and analysis has been emphasised (e.g. Salmon et al., 2010, 2012).

To prevent future injury causing incidents it is critical to learn from past near misses and adverse events (Lindberg et al., 2010; Reason, 1997; Jacobsson et al., 2011, 2012). Incident reporting systems are used to collect and store data regarding such incidents. They are now widespread in most organisations (Jacobsson et al., 2011, 2012; Nielsen et al., 2006) and are used in most safety critical domains, including aviation (e.g. Aviation Safety Reporting System, NASA), healthcare (e.g. Critical Incident Reporting System, Staender et al., 1997) and heavy industry (e.g. MARS, Lindberg et al., 2010). Moreover, the use of an incident reporting system is one of the demands specified in the international occupational health and safety management system OHSAS18001, one of the world's most widely utilised OHS and safety management system standards (Nielsen et al., 2006).

The point of reporting is to facilitate organisational learning and to help prevent recurrence of similar incidents by informing changes that redress the circumstances that went wrong (Dekker, 2007). Early incident reporting systems were criticised for failing to collect sufficient data to support prevention efforts (Jacobsson et al., 2010). More recently, criticism has focused on the fact that incident reporting systems have not been developed in line with the systems thinking approach to accident causation (e.g. Salmon et al., 2010; Reason, 1997; Dekker, 2011). In particular, the importance of using an appropriate accident causation model to underpin the incident reporting system has been discussed (Salmon et al., 2012). Accident causation models consist of a set of assumptions regarding how accidents happen and the causal factors that lead to them (Lundberg et al., 2009). In the case of incident reporting systems, they influence the type of data collected, the method used to analyse the data, and the remedial actions proposed (Underwood and Waterson, 2013).

‘Systems’ models of accident causation are now widely accepted as the most appropriate for understanding and preventing accidents and injury in most domains (Hollnagel, 2004). One of Rasmussen's seminal contributions in this context is his risk management framework (Rasmussen, 1997) and associated Accimap method (Svedung and Rasmussen, 2002), both of which are arguably becoming dominant in the accident causation and analysis literature. The risk management framework argues that accidents and safety are emergent properties arising from the interactions between components within a particular system (Rasmussen, 1997). Accidents are created by decisions and actions made by people at all levels of the system (e.g. politicians, CEOs, managers, safety officers and work planners), not just those working at the so-called ‘sharp-end’. Therefore, accidents are caused by multiple, interacting, factors beyond the immediate context of the accident. The accompanying Accimap method provides a methodological framework for investigating and representing accidents from this perspective; its explanatory power lies in the ability to describe contributory factors across all levels of the system in question along with the relationships between them. Recent applications by researchers have seen Accimap used to represent accident scenarios in areas ranging from led outdoor recreation (Salmon et al., 2012) and rail (Underwood and Waterson, 2014) to public health (Vicente and Christoffersen, 2006; Karsh et al., 2014) and space travel (Trotter et al, 2014). It is notable, however, that there are few organisations using Accimap formally to drive accident analysis and investigation activities.

The nature of Rasmussen's model and method has implications for incident reporting systems. Both suggest that, to be effective, incident reporting systems need to collect data on contributory factors from across the overall work system in addition to factors relating to the workers, environment, and equipment involved (Salmon et al., 2012). In addition, data regarding the interactions or relationships between factors both within and across different system levels needs to be gathered. Finally, there is a need to provide practitioners with an appropriate methodological framework with which to analyse and represent incidents from a systems perspective.

Unfortunately most of the incident reporting systems implemented in practice do not satisfy these requirements. Typically they do not provide the capability to gather data on contributory factors across the overall system or on the interactions between them, even in domains with mature safety management systems. For example, although the popular Aviation Safety Reporting System provides a text box for reporters to describe the event in question, there is no taxonomy of contributory factors, it asks the reporter to consider the ‘chain of events’, and the prompts provided focus on human performance issues (e.g. perception, judgement, decisions). Linear chain of event accident causation models (e.g Heinrich, 1931) are now widely considered to be inappropriate and human performance prompts may inadvertently keep the focus on those closest to the incident (e.g. pilots). In fact, most systems tend to focus on individuals close the event (e.g. workers at the sharp end) and even the most well developed systems do not look beyond the organisational level for contributory factors. This is in contradiction to Rasmussen's risk management framework, which argues that the decisions and actions made outside of work organisations also play a role in influencing behaviour (e.g. regulatory bodies, government). In the led outdoor activity context, a review of existing systems used in Australia revealed that existing incident analysis systems and databases focused on identifying contributory factors related to instructors, participants, and the environment (Salmon et al., 2010).

Acknowledging the need to better understand and prevent injury incidents, the led outdoor activity sector in Australia recently embarked on a major program of research aiming to develop and implement an incident reporting and learning system and national incident dataset underpinned by contemporary models of accident causation. Through this research, the authors have developed and implemented an incident reporting and learning system that is directly based on Rasmussen's risk management framework and uses Accimap to analyse the data reported. The resulting system, known as UPLOADS (Understanding and Preventing Led Outdoor Accidents Data System), provides led outdoor activity providers with a means of reporting and analysing adverse outcomes (e.g. injuries, illnesses, equipment, environmental damage and psychological impacts) and near miss incidents from a systems perspective.

UPLOADS includes: 1) a standardised reporting tool for collecting detailed information on incidents; 2) a classification scheme for coding the system-wide contributory factors involved in incidents, such as factors relating to government policy and funding, regulation, company management and supervision, as well as factors relating to the workers, equipment and environment; and 3) a tool for coding the relationships between the contributory factors involved in incidents. The resulting data is used to produce Accimap diagrams for single or multiple incidents, which are supported by tables with descriptions of the contributing factors and relationships identified. This allows users to investigate incidents from a systems perspective and identify trends emerging in different activities. UPLOADS also enables users to contribute de-identified data to a national dataset. This goal of this is assist professional associations and government agencies to make evidence-based decisions about issues that affect those involved in the provision of led outdoor activities.

Development of UPLOADS involved a range of research activities that were designed to develop a practical and valid tool that maintained the key elements of Rasmussen's thinking. These included literature reviews on accident causation and incident reporting systems, accident analysis methods comparison studies (Salmon et al., 2012), end user requirement studies (Goode et al., 2014a,b), mapping Rasmussen's framework to the led outdoor context (Salmon et al., 2010), analyses of existing accident data (Salmon et al., 2014), the development and inter-rater reliability testing of incident causal factor taxonomies (Goode et al., 2014a,b; Taylor et al., 2015), a six month trial, and end user usability studies (Grant et al., 2015). The focus was on developing a practical and usable tool that remained true to Rasmussen's risk management framework and Accimap method whilst also achieving acceptable levels of reliability and validity.

UPLOADS provides users with an incident reporting form that enables them to enter detailed data regarding participation and incidents and near miss incidents, including data related to the activity, leaders and participants, injury outcome and severity, the nature of the incident, and the system of contributory factors involved. The focus of this paper is on the incident reports surrounding injury incidents and the identification of the network of contributory factors that played a role in them. Once users enter an incident report, they then identify contributory factors and any relationships between them. UPLOADS supports this process by providing users with a classification scheme comprising contributory factor categories from across the led outdoor activity system.

The classification scheme was developed based on an Actor Map depicting the key led outdoor activity actors, organisations and artefacts at each of Rasmussen's six system levels (modified for the led outdoor activity context), an analysis of led outdoor accident data, and subject matter expert review. The Actor Map, showing the modified system levels and key actors and organisations operating within the led outdoor activity system, is presented in Fig. 1
                        . Developing the classification scheme involved identifying contributory factors associated with each of the actors, organisations and artefacts listed within the Actor Map. Extensive reliability testing was then undertaken during testing of the classification scheme (Goode et al., 2014a,b; Taylor et al., 2015). The current classification scheme is presented in Fig. 2
                        . Taylor et al. (2015) examined levels of inter-rater reliability when using the current version of the classification scheme and reported substantial agreement across codes at both levels of the classification scheme. Overall, there was a significant improvement in agreement over and above that found by Goode et al. when examining the original classification scheme.

After incident reports have been entered into the software, the users are prompted to classify the contributing factors, and relationships, identified in the report. Classifying the contributing factors involves picking the relevant factor from Fig. 2 and then entering a description of the factor in relation to its role in the incident in question. For each description, users select a Level 1 code from a drop down list that best described that factor, and if possible, a corresponding Level 2 factor. Classifying the relationships also involves entering a description of the relationships identified between contributory factors. For each description, users choose a pair of codes (identified when classifying the contributing factors), that best describe that relationship.

An example is presented in Figs. 3 and 4
                        
                        , whereby screenshots are presented from the software showing the classification of contributory factors and the relationships between them.

UPLOADS was recently implemented in Australia for the purposes of a 12 month national study of led outdoor activity adverse and near miss incidents. The study involves led outdoor activity organisations contributing participation and incident data to UPLOADS at 3 monthly intervals over the 12 month period. The remainder of the paper focusses on the data reported at the first 3 month interval.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

The study was approved by the University of the Sunshine Coast Human Ethics Committee. Organisations were invited to participate in the trial via outdoor education and recreation peak body and professional membership association newsletters. Interested organisations were asked to invite a senior staff member in a safety-related role to participate in the study. This person was responsible for entering all incident reports; analysing and managing the data; and providing training to other staff on reporting incidents.

43 organisations consented to participate in the national study. The participating organisations currently operate activity sites in all states and territories of Australia, with some operating sites in multiple states (Australia Capital Territory (ACT) = 1, Northern Territory (NT) = 2, New South Wales (NSW) = 12, Queensland (QLD) = 8, South Australia (SA) = 7, Tasmania (TAS) = 2, Victoria (VIC) = 14, Western Australia (WA) = 6). At the three month point, 23 of the 43 organisations had contributed participation and/or incident data. The data contributing organisations operate sites in all states and territories of Australia (ACT = 1, NT = 1, NSW = 6, QLD = 5, SA = 4, TAS = 2, VIC = 8, WA = 3) and included five schools, six registered training organisations, nine not-for-profit organisations, and ten commercial enterprises (with some organisations fitting into multiple organisation types).

UPLOADS includes: paper-based incident report forms; a Software Tool for collecting, coding and analysing data; an incident severity scale; and video and paper-based training. The software was developed in FileMaker Pro 12 and java.

The Incident Database captured the information shown in Table 1
                        . It was structured to record both near misses and incidents associated with adverse outcomes. A ″near miss” was defined as a serious error or mishap that has the potential to cause an adverse event but fails to do so because of chance or because it is intercepted. An “adverse outcome” was defined as any injury, illness or event with adverse psychological outcomes. The fields for injury type and location were adapted from the International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10, World Health Organisation, 1994).

On contacting the research team, organisations and participants were asked to provide written consent to participate in the study. Following this, participants were sent a link to a demographics questionnaire (via Survey Monkey). Once this was completed, participants were sent an email with instructions for study participation. This included how to download all the study materials from DropBox; the type of incidents to report; and dates for submitting data to the research team. A contact number for the research team was provided if participants had further questions or problems requiring assistance.

After incident reports had been entered into the software, UPLOADS prompted participants to classify the contributing factors, and relationships, involved. Participants were instructed not to speculate beyond the information provided in the incident report. There was no limit on the number of contributing factors or relationships that could be entered.

For the analysis presented in this paper, the incident data reported by participating organisations was recoded by two analysts experienced in coding led outdoor activity incident data. Initially, the first analyst identified contributory factors and relationships between them from the incident report. Each factor and relationship had to be explicitly identified in the text and the analyst was not permitted to draw any inferences from the reports. For example, from the report “Two of the participants were not wearing lifejackets because they were not instructed to by the activity leader”, the factors ‘not wearing lifejackets’ and ‘were not instructed to by the activity leader’ would be extracted. The analyst then recorded any relationships between the contributory factors described in the text. For example, from the report above a relationship between ‘not wearing lifejackets’ and ‘were not instructed to by the activity leader’ would be recorded.

Next, both analysts reviewed the contributory factors and relationships identified. Both then classified each of the contributory factors, along with relationships between them, using the UPLOADS classification scheme presented in Fig. 2. Finally, the contributory factors and relationships were represented across the six Accimap levels. For example, ‘participant unsafe acts’ was placed at the ‘Decisions and actions of leaders, participants and other actors at the scene of the incident’ level.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A total of 226 incidents were reported over the three month period. This dataset comprised 212 adverse events (93.8%) and 14 near misses (6.2%). Of the adverse events reported, 151 led to an injury of some sort (66.81%), 76 led to an illness (33.63%), and 20 led to an instance of psychological harm (8.85%).


                        Table 2
                         shows the frequency and percent of incident outcomes by activity type. The activities that had reported actual and near miss incidents associated with them were grouped into 12 activity categories (see Table 2). To protect confidentiality, activities that had less than 3 injury incidents were grouped into the ‘other’ category. The group of activities most represented was camping activities (35.8% of all incidents), followed by bushwalking activities (20.8% of all incidents) harness activities and aquatic activities (5.8% of all incidents respectively). For those activities that had both injury and near miss incidents reported, the activity type associated with the highest proportion of injuries was camping (96.3% within camping incidents), closely followed by bushwalking (95.7% within bushwalking incidents) and aquatic activities (84.6% within aquatic incidents). The activity type associated with the highest proportion of near misses was harness activities (46.2% within near miss incidents).


                        Table 3
                         shows the frequency and percentage of injury types by mean actual and potential severity ratings. A total of 11 injury types were coded in the original data file. The injury types most represented in the data were superficial (48% of all injuries), followed by dislocation, sprain and strains (23% of all injuries) and burns and corrosions (8% of all injuries). Across all injuries, actual and potential severity ratings were low (M = 1.44; SD = .78, M = 1.62; SD = 1.22 respectively). Based on the UPLOADS injury severity scale this indicates that the actual severity of the injuries reported was minor, with impacts limited to a requirement for localised or ongoing care with short to medium term effects. Within the data set the injuries rated as the most severe were injuries to nerves or spinal cord.

A summary of the contributing factors identified across the led outdoor activity system levels is presented in Fig. 5
                        . On average, 2.49 causal factors were identified per incident. As shown in Fig. 5, contributory factors were found at five out of the six led outdoor activity system levels specified. The factors most frequently involved in the incidents were participant mental and physical condition (29.5%), equipment, clothing and personal protective equipment (28.6% of all incidents), hazardous terrain (22%), and participant experience and competence (18.5%).

The relationships identified between the contributory factors, along with the frequency with which each relationship was identified across all incidents, are presented in Fig. 6
                        . Relationships between contributory factors were found across the following levels:
                           
                              •
                              Local area government, schools and parents, activity centre management planning and budgeting 
                                    
                                  Supervisory and management decisions and actions;

Local area government, schools and parents, activity centre management planning and budgeting 
                                    
                                  Decisions and actions of leaders, participants and other actors at the scene of the incident;

Local area government, schools and parents, activity centre management planning and budgeting 
                                    
                                  Equipment, environment and meteorological conditions;

Supervisory and management decisions and actions 
                                    
                                  Decisions and actions of leaders, participants and other actors at the scene of the incident;

Supervisory and management decisions and actions 
                                    
                                  Equipment, environment and meteorological conditions;

Decisions and actions of leaders, participants and other actors at the scene of the incident 
                                    
                                  Equipment, environment and meteorological conditions.

Relationships between contributory factors were also found within the decisions and actions of leaders, participants and other actors level and the equipment, environment and meteorological conditions level.

The most frequent relationships found across the levels included those found between the activity participants and equipment, clothing and personal protective equipment (15), between participants and infrastructure and terrain (6), trees and vegetation (6), and weather conditions (6), between supervisors/field managers activity or program design and weather conditions (3), and those between higher level management organisational culture and equipment, clothing and personal protective equipment (3).

At the equipment, environment and meteorological conditions level the most frequent relationships between factors included those found between equipment, clothing and personal protective equipment and weather conditions (6) and between infrastructure and terrain and weather conditions (5). At the decisions and actions of leaders, participants and other actors at the scene level, the most frequent relationships included those between activity leader and participant factors (8) and between activity leader factors and activity group factors.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The aim of this article was to outline a new incident reporting system that was developed for the Australian led outdoor sector based on Rasmussen's risk management framework and Accimap method. The following discussion focuses on the findings from the analysis presented, the potential power of Rasmussen's legacy in this area, and ways in which Rasmussen's legacy can be expanded across the safety critical domains generally.

The aim of the analysis presented was to identify the contributory factors involved in a series of led outdoor activity injury and near miss incidents that were reported during the first three months use of UPLOADS. The analysis provides some notable findings regarding incident causation in this sector. The analysis shows that the incidents in question were driven by contributory factors from five out of the six system levels (with no factors reported at the government department decisions and actions level). This finding provides further evidence that led outdoor activity injury represents a systems issue (Salmon et al., 2014) and adds weight to the notion that led outdoor activity incident reporting systems should attempt to collect data on contributory factors across all levels of the system. Rather than be simply the outcome of participant or instructor actions only, the network of events preceding led outdoor activity incidents can involve the decisions and actions of many actors from across the overall system. Importantly, these actors can reside outside of the activity providing organisations involved, for example in the present dataset the parents or carers of activity participants. Finally, Rasmussen's framework argues that accidents are typically caused by multiple contributing factors, not just a single catastrophic decision or action. In the present study, the mean number of contributing factors across the incidents was 2.49, suggesting that led outdoor activity adverse events are indeed caused by multiple factors rather than one decision or action in isolation. Whilst lower than the 4.1 contributory factors identified by Salmon et al. (2014) in an analysis of data from New Zealand, it is these authors opinion that further use and acceptance of the system and Rasmussen's framework will yield data comprising a higher rate of contributory factors.

For the present dataset the most frequently occurring contributory factors included factors related to equipment, clothing and personal protective equipment, participant mental and physical condition, hazardous terrain, and participant experience and competence. This is consistent with previous studies in the area that have pinpointed activity leaders, participants, equipment, and environment as the most prominent contributory factors (e.g. Salmon et al., 2014). The most frequent relationships between contributory factors across system levels included those between the activity participants and equipment, clothing and personal protective equipment, between participants and infrastructure and terrain, trees and vegetation, and weather conditions, between supervisors/field managers activity or program design and weather conditions, and those between higher level management organisational culture and equipment, clothing and personal protective equipment. Relationships within levels in included those found between equipment, clothing and personal protective equipment and weather conditions, between infrastructure and terrain and weather conditions, and those between activity leader and participant factors and between activity leader factors and activity group factors.

Although multiple factors and relationships were identified, it is acknowledged that there were only a small number of factors identified at the higher levels when compared to the lower levels. Three explanations are offered to account for this. First, it may be that higher level factors do not commonly contribute to incident causation; however, Rasmussen's work suggests that this is improbable, as does other research examining injury incidents in the led outdoor activity context (e.g. Salmon et al., 2012, 2014). Second, since the majority of incidents were relatively minor (e.g. scrapes, blisters) it may be that reporters feel that there is no need for further explanation when reporting them and so provide less detailed reports. Third, an important factor is that the systems thinking approach is not yet entrenched in the led outdoor activity sector, which in turn means that those reporting the incidents via UPLOADS may not consider potential contributory factors at the higher levels of the system (Salmon et al., 2014). Generally the systems thinking approach has been well received in the led outdoor activity sector; however, in areas there is still an emphasis on People, Equipment and the Environment (PEE; Dallat et al., 2015) when considering injury causation. Accordingly, since the UPLOADS trial began there has been a significant amount of work undertaken to communicate the systems thinking philosophy across the sector and to educate end-users on reporting incidents and identifying contributory factors. There are encouraging signs that this is bearing fruit with a high level of engagement and positive feedback (see http://uploadsproject.org/2015/03/13/workshop-adopting-a-systems-based-approach-to-accident-analysis-and-prevention/); however, much of this effort was undertaken towards the end of the three month period and so would not have impacted the data reported in this study. Notably, in a separate study evaluating the usability of the UPLOADS tool, although Grant et al. (2015) reported acceptable usability ratings from end users they also found that participants reported difficulty in entering data that required a deeper understanding of the systems approach (i.e. identifying higher level contributory factors and relationships between contributory factors). To facilitate translation of Rasmussen's work in this area, and indeed in other areas, it is recommended that further activities designed to further communicate the systems thinking philosophy be undertaken. These include workshops, lectures, and short pieces in non-academic publications (e.g. Salmon and Goode, 2015). In particular, clarifying the role of systemic issues in minor events is recommended.

The analysis presented highlights the far reaching impact that Rasmussen' legacy can potentially have in the led outdoor activity sector, and indeed safety science generally. As it is based on Rasmussen's expansive systems thinking framework, UPLOADS facilitates a richer understanding of injury and near miss incidents by enabling users to consider contributory factors outside of the instructors, participants and activity environment. Within the present dataset, this enabled identification of a wide range of contributory factors related to regulatory bodies, organisational management and culture, supervisors, parents, policies and procedures, and activity program design to name only a few. In addition, and perhaps the most powerful aspect of Rasmussen's legacy, UPLOADS enables users to report the relationships between contributory factors. This is a key tenet of contemporary accident causation models and is critical for the development of appropriate countermeasures that will prevent future incidents.

His legacy therefore provides rich information regarding how the led outdoor activity system can be modified to prevent future injuries and fatalities. Many have argued that treatment of wider systems failures, identified through systems-based analyses, is more appropriate than the treatment of local factors at the sharp end of system operation, since the factors influencing behaviour at the sharp end are removed following analysis efforts (e.g. Reason, 1990; Dekker, 2011; Rasmussen, 1997). The systems used prior to UPLOADS typically produced analyses describing the role that instructors, participants, and the environment played in injury incidents, which in turn limited countermeasures in that they were focused on instructors and participants (e.g. retraining, reprisals). UPLOADS goes further, providing guidance on which system wide factors influence behaviour during activity programs. For example, based on a relationship between the two, the present study suggests that consideration of the range of possible weather conditions is required when designing activity programs in order to create activities that can cope in the event of adverse weather.

The lower level factors identified are also useful for systems reform efforts. For example, the present analysis indicates that activity participants' physical and mental condition was a prominent contributing factor across the incidents analysed. This suggests that activity leaders, supervisors, and program designers should focus on improving aspects of the system related to monitoring and detecting changes in participants' physical and mental condition. This might be achieved through modifying activity leader training programs, policies and procedures, and activity programs. In addition, consent and information forms should be revised to support better assessment of participant's level of preparedness for activities. A wider issue raised by these findings is the question of whether led outdoor activities are appropriate for today's youth – it may be that legacy activities need to be tailored to better fit the levels of experience in the outdoors and the physical capabilities of today's youth.

Before discussing how Rasmussen's legacy could potentially be enhanced, it is worth noting some study limitations. First, the analysis presented is based on the research team's analysis of the data reported, not on an analysis provided by end users from the organisations involved. Although the end-goal of the research program is to have the sector themselves analysing their own incident data, this is not currently the case due to various issues (e.g. the systems thinking philosophy not yet being fully accepted across the sector, expectations of organisations funding the research, issues around data confidentiality across organisations). In addition, previous studies examining incident reporting data have found that the incident narrative provides a richer account of the incident and contributory factors, and that it contains more contributory factors than those specifically entered by users via a causal factor taxonomy (e.g. Salmon et al., 2014). It was therefore important in this case for the research team to code both the incident narratives and the factors identified by reporters via the classification scheme.

There is no doubt that Jens Rasmussen's legacy is now also relevant within the led outdoor activity context; in fact, his legacy is underpinning a paradigm shift in the way that the sector considers injury causation, analysis, and prevention. Further long term use of UPLOADS by organisations in this sector will strengthen the legacy and the sector will achieve improvements in safety and practice as a result. There is work to do however, with key tasks being to disseminate Rasmussen's philosophy on accidents and to educate end-users on how to investigate and report incidents from this viewpoint. Importantly, the authors are conducting a series of targeted activities designed to improve the sectors understanding of incidents and the quality of data reported through UPLOADS. This includes workshops on systems thinking, accident causation, and incident reporting and investigation, with a key focus on using appropriate led outdoor activity examples and getting attendees to engage in practical activities (e.g. re-investigate an incident that they have recently been involved in).

There are also further research directions that can strengthen this legacy. In the led outdoor context the impact of UPLOADS can be further strengthened through the conduct of research focused on the use of Accimap outputs in countermeasure design. The lack of guidance on how to translate the outputs of incident reporting systems into practical and effective safety initiatives is well known (Cooke and Rohleder, 2006; Lindberg et al., 2010; Lundberg et al., 2010). The biggest threat to Rasmussen's legacy is that organisations may better understand what injuries are occurring, but without guidance may still focus on fixing broken components such as activity leaders or equipment. The flaws associated with this approach are well known (Dekker, 2011). However, without guidance it is difficult for organisations to conceptualise appropriate system reforms based on incident reporting data (Lundberg et al., 2010). To fully realise the safety potential of incident reporting systems based on Rasmussen's thinking, organisations need explicit guidance on how to use their outputs.

Outside of the led outdoor activity context, Rasmussen's legacy can be widened through development of domain specific incident reporting and accident analysis systems underpinned by his risk management framework and Accimap. Part of the appeal of both is that they are generic in nature and can be applied in any domain; there is therefore no reason why systems similar to UPLOADS should not be developed in other areas such as aviation, process control, and surface transportation. It is these authors opinion that such systems would provide a significant improvement to those currently in operation.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The project from which this research derives is supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC, LP110100037) in partnership with Australian Camps Association, Outdoor Educators' Association of South Australia, United Church Camping, Outdoors Victoria, Outdoor Council of Australia, Recreation South Australia, Outdoor Recreation Industry Council, Outdoors WA, YMCA Victoria, The Outdoor Education Group, Girl Guides Australia, Queensland Outdoor Recreation Federation, Christian Venues Association, Parks Victoria, Victoria Department of Planning and Community Development, Outdoor Education Australia and the Department of National Parks, Recreation, Sport and Racing Australia. Paul Salmon's contribution to this research porgram is funded through his current Australian Research Council Future Fellowship (FT140100681). Caroline Finch was supported by a NHMRC Principal Research Fellowship (ID: 565900).Finally, the authors' would also like to acknowledge the extremely useful comments on the paper that were provided by two reviewers during the peer review process.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

