@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Ergonomics and sustainable development in the past two decades (1992–2011): Research trends and how ergonomics can contribute to sustainable development

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We review 10,000+ papers in the fields of ergonomics and sustainable development.


                        
                        
                           
                           The frequently researched areas in ergonomics have been identified.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ergonomics can contribute its knowledge in 4 categories of sustainable development.


                        
                        
                           
                           How to contribute ergonomics expertise to sustainable development are discussed.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Ergonomics

Sustainable development

Literature survey

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The need for sustainable development has been widely recognized and sustainable development has become a hot topic of various disciplines even though the role of ergonomics in it is seldom reported or considered. This study conducts a systematic survey of research publications in the fields of ergonomics and sustainable development over the past two decades (1992–2011), in order to identify their research trends and convergent areas where ergonomics can play an important role in sustainable development. The results show that ‘methods and techniques’, ‘human characteristics’, ‘work design and organization’, ‘health and safety’ and ‘workplace and equipment design’ are the top five frequently researched areas in ergonomics. Ergonomics has an opportunity to contribute its knowledge especially to ‘industrial and product design’, ‘architecture’, ‘health and safety’ and ‘HCI’ (especially for energy reduction issues) categories of sustainable development. Typical methodologies and general guidance on how to contribute the expertise of ergonomist to sustainable development are also discussed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Defined as “meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (WCED, 1987), sustainable development has been becoming the center of attention and concerns for researchers as well as practitioners in various fields such as design, engineering and business over the past few decades (Barbier, 1987; Lele, 1991; Palmer et al., 1997; Wise, 2001; McLennan, 2004; IISD, 2013). Sustainable development is usually considered to have environmental, economic and social dimensions which should be balanced and jointly optimized (Blevis, 2007; Hanson, 2013; Zink, 2014). Ergonomics (or its synonym human factors) is “the scientific discipline concerned with the understanding of the interactions among humans and other elements of a system, and the profession that applies theory, principles, data and methods to design in order to optimize human wellbeing and overall system performance” (IEA, 2010) and it considers both a social goal (human wellbeing) and an economic goal (overall system performance) (Dul and Neumann, 2009), these two goals are corresponding to aforementioned two dimensions of sustainability.

Statements above indicate both ergonomics and sustainable development are human centered and concerned with the joint optimization of the elements of complex socio-technical systems (Legg and Brown, 2010; Zink, 2014), implying that ergonomics could play an important role in assisting the transition to sustainable development (Moray, 1995; Dekker et al., 2013; Martin et al., 2013; Zink and Fischer, 2013; Bolis et al., 2014). Even though a few case studies on how ergonomics can help in achieving transition to sustainability have been reported (Wise, 2001; Rodriguez, 2004; Legg and Brown, 2010; Miller et al., 2012; Ryan and Wilson, 2013), a recent literature review conducted by Martin et al. (2013) reported that only seven articles on ergonomics, design and sustainability were in ergonomics journals and thus there is a lack of clear published contributions from ergonomics to sustainable development, showing still very weak sign of ergonomists tacking sustainability issues.

Since the demands in dealing with the issues related to sustainable development are increasing (IISD, 2013) and the goals of ergonomics and sustainable development are somewhat congruent, integrating ergonomics into the field of sustainable development might offer promising solutions to solve sustainability related problems (Moray, 1995; Ryan and Wilson, 2013; Zink and Fischer, 2013) and open a window of opportunity for the discipline of ergonomics to devote attention to global problems (Haslam and Waterson, 2013; Martin et al., 2013). A number of efforts have been initiated in recent years to call for ergonomics to become more involved with sustainability. Steimle and Zink (2006) initially applied the term sustainable development to ergonomics (or human factors), and special IEA technical group on “Human Factors and Sustainable Development” (chaired by Professor Klaus J. Zink and Professor Colin G. Drury) has been established afterward in 2008. A special issue titled ‘Ergonomics and Sustainability’ was also recently published in Ergonomics in 2013. However, since the perspective on sustainable development is relatively new for ergonomists, very few publications are available on where and how ergonomics can contribute well to the sustainable development (Thatcher, 2009; Haslam and Waterson, 2013). Following, the main goal of this study is to identify the research trends and the convergent areas of ergonomics and sustainable development through a systematic survey of the relevant research publications over the past two decades (1992–2011). The findings from this study are expected to provide some preliminary answers to the basic question: where and how can ergonomics contribute to sustainable development?

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

All 24 ‘ergonomics journals’ in the Ergonomics List 2004 developed by Dul and Karwowski (2004) were initially considered to search peer-reviewed English language publications in the field of ergonomics. Among 24 journals, 5 (Ergonomia-Italy, Ergonomia-Poland, Ergonomics-Australia, Ergonomics-New Zealand, Ergonomics-South Africa) are regional/national journals, 3 (Le Travail Humain, Tijdschrift voor Ergonomie, Zentralblatt für Arveitsmedizin Arbeitsschutz und Ergonomie) are non-English language journals, 2 (Ergonomics International, Workplace Ergonomics) are not included and accessible in the major online databases of Web of Science, Scopus and Ergonomics Abstract, 2 (Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Bulletin, Ergonomist) serve as the forum for Human Factors and Ergonomics Society members to exchange society news and events, 1 (International Journal of Cognitive Ergonomics) has ceased publication since 2002. These 13 journals were further excluded and thus 11 journals listed in Table 1
                         were selected to study the research trend in ergonomics. From 1992 to 2011, in total 9717 papers were published, 1551 were excluded based on the following filtering rules, thus, 8166 papers were further reviewed and analyzed.
                           
                              (1)
                              Review, comments, erratum and advertisement papers;

Papers being judged without substantial contents in ergonomics.

Since the meaning of the term ‘sustainable’ has shifted and evolved over the years (Haslam and Waterson, 2013) and sustainable development covers a wide range of topics across many disciplines in natural sciences, professional and applied sciences, and social sciences (Rodriguez, 2004), it is difficult to use a list of a few journals to represent the entire research field of sustainable development. Thus, a general keyword search was conducted on online databases through a commonly used reference management software package-EndNote X5(Thomson Reuters). In this study, three very general keywords ‘sustainable development’ or ‘sustainable design’ or ‘eco design’ were used to retrieve peer-reviewed English language publications from 1992 to 2011 from three online databases-Web of Science (WoS), EBSCO and PubMed. The Boolean operators “or” among those general keywords were used to ensure the inclusion of publications as broad as possible at the beginning and then to filter out articles judged to be outside of scope of sustainable development. The databases were chosen for their coverage of literature relating to sustainable development and their accessibilities through EndNote and our university libraries. Overall 5648 papers were retrieved in the initial searches, 3015 were excluded if they are duplicated or can't pass through the similar filtering rules applied to ergonomics, and thus 2633 papers were left for further review.

The retrieved and filtered research publications in ergonomics and sustainable development were classified into 11 and 9 categories (Table 2
                        ) respectively based on an established classification flowchart (Fig. 1
                        ). The 11 ergonomics categories were adopted from classification scheme for ergonomics proposed by the Ergonomics Abstracts (2004) and Karwowski (2005). All 9 sustainable development categories except human–computer interface (HCI) had been widely mentioned in published books and review papers (Lele, 1991; Holmberg and Sandbrook, 1992; Adams, 2006; Atkinson et al., 2007). The only category created by the authors was HCI.


                        Fig. 1 shows the established classifying process for research publications in ergonomics and sustainable development. Each paper was reviewed and then classified into corresponding category by the authors in the order of title-keywords-abstract-full text. For most papers, the combined information from title, keywords and abstract was sufficient to classify them into the corresponding categories. Otherwise, the content analysis of the full text will be further conducted. Considering one single paper sometimes could cover more than one primary category, it is allowed to give maximum two categories for a paper. Additionally, to minimize the possible bias in the classification and ensure the obtained results are reliable, all papers were reviewed and classified by two authors independently at the first stage. If there are discrepancies between first two authors' classifications for some papers, the third or fourth author is involved to resolve the discrepancies at the second stage.

After the publications were classified, the trend analysis was performed: (1) to identify what are the key domains and research trends of ergonomics and sustainable development; and (2) to discover the possible convergent areas between ergonomics and sustainable development. By doing so, we expect to know where and how ergonomics can possibly contribute to sustainable development.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Time trends in the percentages of papers published each year in total publications of ergonomics and sustainable development during the past two decades are shown in Fig. 2
                     . Even though the trends exhibit remarkable inter-annual fluctuations, the general trends to increase are well pronounced, especially steadily growing for ergonomics since 2002 and for sustainable development since 2004. Further analysis on percentages of ergonomics and sustainable development publications in total scientific publishing output in Web of Science (WoS) reveals that ergonomics has had a relatively constant publication rate (∼1%) in WoS in the period of 1992–2007 and after that, the publication rate gradually declines to 0.6% in year 2011, while sustainable development has seen an increase in publication rate (from less than 0.1% in year 1992 to 0.4% in year 2011), indicating sustainability issues are currently attracting more and more attention from the scientific community. All related publications are further classified into aforementioned categories (Table 2).


                        Fig. 3
                         shows the spectrum of research areas in ergonomics based on the classification scheme. It was found that there are four leading areas (percentage >10%) in the ergonomics field during the past 2 decades: ‘methods and techniques’ (19.2%), ‘human characteristics’ (16.6%), ‘work design and organization’ (14.8%), and ‘health and safety’ (10.1%). Results in Fig. 4
                         further demonstrate that although those 4 areas have been consistently ranked top 4 in the field of ergonomics in each 5-year period, ‘methods and techniques’ and ‘human characteristics’ are now less dominating than they were in the past. ‘methods and techniques’ and ‘human characteristics’ contributed to a share of 21.0% and 17.2% respectively of the total number of publications in the first 5-year period (1992–1996), but the relative shares decreased to 17.7% and 16.0% over the last 5-year period (2007–2011). On the other hand, the shares of ‘work design and organization’ (from 13.7% to 15.7%) and ‘health and safety’ (from 9.6% to 10.8%) are steadily increasing. All other categories except ‘workplace and equipment design’ (from 7.5% to 9.0%) hold a similar share of the total number of publications since their relative changes are less than 1%.


                        Figs. 5 and 6
                        
                         show the overall (from 1992 to 2011) and periodic (each 5-year period) contributions of 9 categories to the field of sustainable development respectively. Fig. 5 illustrates that overall contributions from each category of sustainable development are somewhat uniform when compared with the contributions in ergonomics. There are 6 out of a total of 9 categories that contributed more than a share of 10% to the total number of publications: ‘environment and social’ (16.1%), ‘industrial and product design’ (13.2%), ‘education’ (12.6%), ‘health and safety’ (12.2%), ‘renewable energy and technology’ (12.1%) and ‘architecture’ (11.4%), thus they are relatively leading domains of sustainable development in the past 2 decades.

Some noticeable changing trends of the declines and developments on shares of sustainable development categories during the past 2 decades can be observed from Fig. 6. As time goes by, there are dramatic declines in the shares of both ‘environment/social’ and ‘agriculture’, the domains which periodic contributions were ranked first and second during the first 5-year period (1992–1996). More specially, during the period of 1992–1996 ‘environment/social’ issues of sustainable development covers 26.4%, and ‘agriculture’ alone made up 20.3% of the entire sustainable development field. However, ‘agriculture’ has dropped by 62.6% and only accounts for 7.6% of the total share in the last 5-year period (2007–2011), ranking the second-to-last place (8th) among 9 categories. Additionally, ‘environment/social’ has dropped by 43.9% and accounts for 14.8% of the total share in the last 5-year period. The rapid declines in the shares of ‘agriculture’ and ‘environment/social’ domains are counterbalanced by the steady developments in ‘industrial and product design’ (from 3.4% to 14.8%), ‘architecture’ (from 4.7% to 11.4%), ‘renewable energy and technology’ (from 7.4% to 12.3%) and partially ‘economy’ (from 4.7% to 7.9%). The shares of other three categories including ‘education’, ‘HCI’, ‘health and safety’ remain unchanged. In the last 5-year period, ‘environment/social’ (14.8%), ‘industrial and product design’ (14.8%), ‘health and safety’ (12.6%), ‘renewable energy and technology’ (12.3%), ‘education (12.3%) and ‘architecture’ (11.4%), are the top 6 areas in sustainable development.

Since categories used in ergonomics field are not the same as those in sustainable development, and a category in ergonomics field is often intertwined with more than one category in sustainable development field, and vice versa, it is difficult to define the exact one-to-one matching between ergonomics and sustainable development. Thus, the commonality and overlapping areas between these two fields are inspected to find the convergent areas or the directions of ergonomics having high potential to make contributions to sustainable development. According to the trend analysis, ‘methods and techniques’, ‘human characteristics’, ‘work design and organization’, ‘health and safety’, and ‘workplace and equipment design’ were the most dominating research areas in ergonomics. In the case of sustainable development, ‘environment/social’, ‘industrial and product design’, ‘education’, ‘health and safety’, ‘renewable technology and energy’ and ‘architecture’ were the most frequently researched areas.

Since ‘human characteristics’ and ‘methods and techniques’ cover broad issues related to physiological and anatomical aspects, psychology, individual differences, general methods and techniques, and measures on human performance etc (Salvendy, 1997; Karwowski, 2005) towards products and work systems, ‘industrial and product design’ in sustainable development can be significantly overlapped with them. In the field of design for sustainability, ergonomic design (User-Centered Design) is becoming an important design strategy for design culture innovation, providing designers with the necessary knowledge regarding human characteristics (especially capabilities and limitations, behaviors, needs and desires) during use and interaction with products and systems (Tosi, 2012). Several methodological approaches in ergonomics such as direct observation, survey, trial tests, experimental measuring of physical and mental workloads can be further applied in assessing the appropriateness and effectiveness of the user-product/system interaction. Additionally, ‘health and safety’ should be important for both ergonomics and sustainable development since it is the common classifying category in both fields.

‘Workplace and equipment design’ and ‘environmental ergonomics’ in ergonomics field can be connected to sustainability features of ‘architecture’ that promote the wellbeing of the occupants and protect the environment through energy conservation and green buildings (Hendrick, 2000; Wise, 2001; Remijn, 2006; Miller et al., 2012; Hanson, 2013; Hedge and Dorsey, 2013; Thatcher, 2013). Similarly, ‘health and safety’ along with ‘work design and organization’ can also be the promising areas of ergonomics to attain business sustainability in that it can contribute to the development of corporate social responsibility on considering occupational health and welfare of workers in sustainable work systems (Genaidy et al., 2009, 2010; Bolis et al., 2014; Zink, 2014). In general, work design is from relevant micro-ergonomics approach and organizational design is from macro-ergonomics principles (Hendrick, 2000; Zink, 2008; Guimarães et al., 2012). Some practice examples demonstrate that ‘work design and organization’ has great potential to be developed for social sustainability in conjunction with economic sustainability (GAO, 1997; Baxter and Harrison, 2000; Docherty et al., 2009; Guimarães et al., 2012).

‘Social and economic impact of the system’ in ergonomics starts to grow and it is closely connected to sustainable development. Especially nowadays, ergonomics discipline aims to improve the contribution to the global society. To achieve this goal, collaborative approach among federated ergonomics societies, NGO, enterprises, and governmental authorities is required (Caple, 2010). Approaches dealing with global problems, such as improving labor standards of industrially developing countries (Locke and Romis, 2006), changing operational decision toward environmentally friendly by implementing new design of feedback (Flemming et al., 2008), reducing behavioral and cultural barrier toward sustainable development can be good references for sustainable development strategy.


                        Fig. 7
                         summarizes the possible interconnections between sorted categories in the fields of ergonomics and sustainable development. It indicated that the ergonomics expertise and knowledge (especially from the top five frequently researched areas) could be incorporated into ‘industrial and product design’, ‘architecture’, ‘health and safety’, and ‘HCI’ for more contribution to sustainable development.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS@&#

Even though sustainability has stimulated considerable changes in design, engineering and business professions over the past decades, ergonomics has remained relatively absent from this paradigmatic revolution (Wise, 2001). In this study, instead of providing a complete list of contributions on sustainable development which have been made from ergonomics, we focus on identifying the potential directions for better incorporating ergonomics to the sustainable development in the future through literature survey, paper classification and the trend analysis.

The results from the trend analysis have shown where the potential areas in ergonomics can contribute to sustainable development (Fig. 7), another part of the question on how to contribute still remains unanswered. There have been several attempts by scholars and practitioners in the ergonomics field to come up with an appropriate methodology or framework that can possibly contribute to sustainable development (Marsot, 2005; Bucchianico et al., 2012; Marano et al., 2012; Nadadur and Parkinson, 2013; Neumann and Village, 2012; Ryan and Wilson, 2013; Carayon et al., 2014; Davis et al., 2014; Norros, 2014; Zink, 2014).

To integrate ergonomics at the industrial and product design stage for sustainability, Marsot (2005) has suggested using quality function deployment (QFD), a method to transform user demands (including ergonomic demands) and sustainability requirements (such as the use of materials friendly to environment and with long life cycles) into engineering design characteristics for a product or system as a general tool. The effectiveness of the QFD for linking ergonomics and product design has been demonstrated by many studies (Tsuda, 1995; Terninko, 1997; Wu, 1997; Haapalainen et al., 2000). Tosi (2012) recently applied User-Centered Design (UCD) approach into the design of everyday use products for environmental sustainability in terms of energy saving and resource conservation. Two examples were introduced in Tosi's study to demonstrate the applicability of UCD approach. The first example involves innovative design solutions for household kitchens regarding the preparation and consumption of food, especially in relation to energy saving and waste reduction; while the second example is related to the design of an easily transportable, folding and ultra-lightweight bicycle (intermodal bike) for sustainable mobility and intermodality. Furthermore, Nadadur and Parkinson (2013) highlighted the role of anthropometry from ergonomics in sustainable development and proposed three ways in which its consideration is relevant to sustainability: reducing raw material consumption, increasing usage lifetimes and ethical human resource considerations. They reported a global case study on workstation seat design, with detail considerations of human anthropometry variability. Aside from the integration of ergonomics with industrial and product design for sustainability, Wise (2001) showed that principles of environmental ergonomics for building occupant benefits can be applied into sustainable building design. The potential of having a magic integration of ergonomics and sustainable design for buildings have been demonstrated through architecture related projects with ergonomic inputs (Cardoso et al., 2006; Remijn, 2006; Hignett and Lu, 2009; Miller et al., 2012).

Aside from being applied into ‘industrial and product design’ and ‘architecture’ for sustainability, ergonomics can also be applied into ‘HCI’ for sustainability (Abrahamse et al., 2005; Darby, 2006; Flemming et al., 2008), especially for environmental issues such as energy reduction. Abrahamse et al. (2005) and Darby (2006) showed that feedback about energy usage, a consequence intervention, is successfully encouraging conservation behavior and reducing energy consumption in the developed world. Flemming et al. (2008) reviewed the literature on how reductions in energy consumption can be achieved through behavioral interventions and they demonstrated a need for ergonomics in the sustainability domain. Since ergonomist have the theory and technical expertise to approach the feedback design problem systematically, ergonomics has an opportunity to contribute to better human-machine systems for sustainable development on energy reduction (Harvey et al., 2013; Peffer et al., 2013). Recently, Lockton et al. (2010) developed an innovation tool-Design with Intent (DWI) method to influence the user behavior so that the environmental impact of the products can be reduced efficiently.

‘Health and safety’ along with ‘work design and organization’ can contribute to social sustainability by the sustainability of human resources, the most important asset in enterprises and our society. Sustainability of human resources is based on enduring workability and employability, which have been dominant elements in ergonomics ever since (Zink, 2008; IEA, 2010). In this sense, ergonomics can contribute to designing sustainable work systems which not only have to be able to function in their environment and to achieve economic or operational objectives, but also have to preserve or enlarge human and social capital (Maguire, 2001; Neumann and Village, 2012; Zink, 2014). In fact, the sustainability of human and social capital is one of the foundations of economic sustainability and it is needed to secure environmental sustainability (Docherty et al., 2009). A conceptual framework for integrating ergonomics into designing sustainable work systems effectively to eliminate the health hazards at source was recently proposed by Neumann and Village (2012). Broad stakeholder participation (Vink et al., 2008), link between performance and health goals (Dul and Neumann, 2009), and process focused change tools are three essential elements of the proposed framework. The general strategies of ergonomic design for sustainability were discussed by Marano et al. (2012) and Ryan and Wilson (2013). It should be noted that in order for ergonomics to successfully contribute to sustainable development, an interdisciplinary design-driven and systems approach should play very important roles (Bucchianico et al., 2012; Carayon et al., 2014; Norros, 2014; Wilson, 2014; Zink, 2014).

This study has some limitations. Firstly, even though more than 8100 articles from ergonomics and over 2600 articles from sustainable development were selected for classification, we can't exhaust all related publications due to the interdisciplinary nature of the ergonomics and sustainable development. For example, the keywords used to describe work in sustainable development may vary across disciplines, and the popularity of using different keywords to describe similar work may change over time, thus three keywords used in this study may bias the search and the findings may not be fully representative for the research publications in the field of sustainable development. Secondly, the classification of an article depends on not only each rater's professional knowledge, but also his/her personal judgments of substantial contribution to each category, thus, subjectivity is unavoidable in this classifying process. More rigorous criterion on article classification should be further studied. Furthermore, most of identified areas for ergonomics contribution to sustainable development should be considered as areas of somewhat mature contribution only, they are not necessarily the most promising areas of research since the most promising areas could be those that are not yet popular. Finally, regarding how to contribute ergonomics expertise and knowledge to sustainable development, this study only suggested typical methodologies and general guidance based on the surveyed literature, the systematic implementation steps remain unknown and should be further studied. Nevertheless, the findings from this study could offer some hints on where and how ergonomics can better contribute to the field of sustainable development.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was funded by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF 2011-0022185). The authors would like to thank the reviewers and the editor for their constructive comments and suggestions, which helped to improve the quality of this paper.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

