@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Partly visible periods in posture observation from video: Prevalence and effect on summary estimates of postures in the job

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We compared observation of fully and partly visible working postures from video.


                        
                        
                           
                           Postures were rated to differ between fully and partly visible video frames.


                        
                        
                           
                           Postural angles tended to be lower for fully visible frames than partly visible.


                        
                        
                           
                           Findings were consistent for both trunk and arm postures.


                        
                        
                           
                           Including partly visible postures resulted in different daily exposure summaries.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Observation

Posture

Exposure assessment

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This paper investigated the extent to which observers rated clearly visible postures on video differently from partly visible postures, and whether visibility affected full-shift posture summaries. Trunk and upper arm postures were observed from 10,413 video frames representing 80 shifts of baggage handling; observers reported postures as fully or only partly visible. Postures were summarized for each shift into several standard metrics using all available data, only fully visible frames, or only partly visible frames. 78% of trunk and 70% of upper arm postural observations were inferred. When based on all data, mean and 90th percentile trunk postures were 1.8° and 5.6° lower, respectively, than when based only on fully visible situations. For the arm; differences in mean and 90th percentile were 0.7° and 8.2°. Daily posture summaries were significantly influenced by whether partly visible postures are included or not.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Observation has been called “probably the most often used approach to evaluate physical workload”, and there are many different observation protocols available for use in realistic working conditions, on real workers performing real work tasks within the real industrial context (Takala et al., 2010). For example, observations may be made based in real time using a paper-based (Village et al., 2009) or computer aided system, on running video (Liv et al., 2012), on video still images, or using a multi-camera system. Posture values may be recorded into broad categories (McAtamney and Nigel Corlett, 1993; Callaghan et al., 2004), or narrow ones that can be treated as continuous variables (Bao et al., 2007; Trask et al., 2013). However, one challenge that field-based observation protocols have in common is that the view of the observed worker is not always clear, as the workplace setting does not always make for ideal observation conditions, i.e. an unobstructed, sagittal view of the relevant body part (See 
                     Fig. 1). In addition to skew introduced by oblique viewing angles or far distance, the body segments in question may be obstructed by equipment, other workers, or the worker's own body segments (Sutherland et al., 2007). Situations when postures are only partly or not at all visible may arise for instance when workers are in machinery-operation cabs; under conditions of heavy rain, fog, or dust; when the observer has inadequate safety training or security clearance to enter a worksite; and when workers are occupying a small space that would not accommodate the observer (Trask et al., 2007).

Past studies have quantified the potential errors in observation introduced by: oblique camera angles (Sutherland et al., 2007, 2008; Qu et al., 2012); expert vs. novice observers (Weir et al., 2007; Andrews et al., 2008); the size of body parts and range of motion (Bao et al., 2009); and category resolution and ability of observers to identify detailed categories (Weir et al., 2007; Andrews et al., 2008; Lowe, 2004). These aspects are important for understanding how to arrive at the best possible validity and efficiency when assessing postures by observation. However, questions remain regarding the degree of inference and estimation involved in typical work posture observation under realistic working conditions. Although some estimation and inference are required by the nature of any workplace observation, studies rarely report the degree to which postures are assumed or approximated when they are only partly visible; for example, situations where evidence from other body parts or inference based on the task are still at hand to guide the observer. Even validation studies that describe the observation protocol and training practices in depth rarely describe the procedure for posture estimation in such cases (Village et al., 2009; Paquet et al., 2005). If estimation of partly visible postures is required for significant parts of the total observation period, and if postures differ between fully and partly visible periods, including the approximations (or not) may substantially influence the overall summary results on postures in the job.

Thus, there is a need to determine the extent to which periods with partly visible postures influence daily exposure summary statistics. If overall results are influenced by whether partly visible periods are included or not, the ergonomist faces the trade-off between increasing the amount and completeness of data by including such periods, and taking the risk of posture estimates in partly visible periods being less correct than those in fully visible periods. Using video data collected from aircraft baggage handlers, this paper addresses two questions: 1) how often are observers required to approximate postures during dynamic work due to the worker being only partly visible?; and 2) to what extent do estimates of overall summary variables of postures in the job differ depending on whether such approximations are included or not? We hypothesize that partly visible postures are commonplace in video-based observation, which in turn influence summary exposure estimates.

@&#METHODS@&#

Prior publications describe in detail the methods for data collection (Trask et al., 2012) and data processing (Trask et al., 2013). Briefly, twenty-seven randomly-selected full- or part-time baggage handlers from a single employer at a large Swedish airport were recruited to the study. Workers who consented were video-recorded with a single camera for at least 4 h during their regular work activities. In this context, where workers move throughout the worksite, dual-cameras were not feasible for shift-long exposure assessment. Also, as this was a field-based study, we were not able to control lighting conditions, camera angle, and whether parts of the body were occluded. Video-recordings were collected both indoors and outdoors during the winter months of January and February, during a variety of weather conditions including: snow, sun, wind, and clouds. Day, afternoon, and night shift were included, resulting in recordings with indoor light, daylight, dusk, and darkness. Thus, these measurements represent conditions in real-world observations of productive work. Three measurement days were successfully collected from all but 1 worker who could not complete a third due to injury, resulting in data being available from 80 different shifts. All participants gave informed consent and all methods were approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Uppsala, Sweden.

Participating workers' regular work tasks were video recorded using a single camera by following them throughout the airport during for the first or second half of their work shifts. These recordings were subsequently analyzed by four (4) trained observers using a customized software program, ViSPA (Video Sampling Posture Analysis), similar to that described by Bao et al. (2007, 2009). Observers were university students; all received a 35-h structured training program following training suggestions laid out by Bao et al. (2009). This included training in the posture definitions and recording protocols, practice watching trunk and shoulder postures, instruction and practice using the ViSPA software, group discussions on complex scenarios, and feedback on performance. Observers had access to senior researchers throughout the analysis process and were encouraged to ask questions and clarification whenever needed (Trask et al., 2013). Worksite still frames were selected at 55-s intervals, yielding up to 252 unique frames per half-shift. Each workshift was divided into four parts, with each observer assessing one randomly-assigned part (Trask et al., 2013). Observers coded posture with 1-degree resolution relative to gravity for the trunk (−180° extension to +180° flexion) and upper arm (0° to +180°) at a self-selected pace. Observers also coded trunk twisting and lateral flexion as binary variables; angles judged to be greater than 20° were recorded as ‘twisted’ or ‘laterally bent.’ Additionally, the amount of time between displaying a still frame and the observer submitting the posture rating was recorded automatically by the registration software.

For each frame, the degree of visibility was evaluated by the observers for each body part: left arm, right arm, and trunk; in one of the categories: clearly visible, partly visible (inferred postures as shown in Fig. 1), or completely undistinguishable. Thus, this data set provides an opportunity to analyze the difference between daily exposure summaries based on observations where the body parts were fully visible and no inferences were made, vs. summaries based on all available ratings, irrespective of posture visibility.

Daily exposure summaries were generated for both trunk flexion/extension and right upper arm inclination, including: mean angle, 90th percentile angle, and percent of work time spent in angles greater than 45° and greater than 60°. In addition, the proportion of observations with trunk twisted or laterally flexed was summarized. Daily summaries were obtained from three data sources: 1) fully visible frames only; 2) partly visible frames only; and 3) fully and partly visible frames combined, i.e. a full standard-practice data set. All 80 half-shifts provided data for all three sources. All exposure summaries were treated as continuous variables, since the common practice of collapsing continuous variables into categories results in a loss of exposure information and power, and potentially introduces bias (Taylor and Yu, 2002; Royston et al., 2006; Loomis, 2012; Schellingerhout et al., 2009).

Exposure summary statistics were tested for normality using Normal Q–Q plots (Devore and Berk, 2012). When necessary, log or squared root transformations were made to arrive at normality. Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) (Liang and Zeger, 1986; Hardin and Hilbe, 2003) were used to analyze the data by creating data layout such that the results of all 240 summary exposure estimates (80 half-shifts, 3 data sources) for each particular exposure summary metric constructed one variable (i.e. one for mean angle, one for 90th percentile, etc.). The following general regression model was then used on each of the exposure metrics to test differences in summary exposure estimates between data sources:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    h
                                    
                                       
                                          (
                                          
                                             posture
                                             |
                                             var
                                             1
                                             ,
                                             var
                                             2
                                              
                                          
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                       β
                                       0
                                    
                                    +
                                    
                                       β
                                       1
                                    
                                    var
                                    1
                                    +
                                    
                                       β
                                       2
                                    
                                    var
                                    2
                                    +
                                    ɛ
                                    ,
                                 
                              
                           
                        where h is a suitable link function in GEE selected to minimize Quasi-Akaike Information Criterion (QIC) (Hardin and Hilbe, 2003). The dummy variable var2 takes on the value 1 for partly visible data and zero otherwise; var1 takes on the value 1 for combined standard practice, zero otherwise. Both var1 and var2 are 0 for fully visible postures, which are therefore used as a reference condition. In interpreting the model parameters, a significant β
                        1 indicates that exposure summaries based on partly visible postures are significantly different from those based on fully visible postures; a significant β
                        2 indicates that exposure summaries combining fully and partly visible postures are significantly different from those based on fully visible postures. All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS version 9.2 (SAS institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA).

In order to calculate the confidence intervals for regression parameters, we used Wald-based methods (Hardin and Hilbe, 2003) and to calculate the 90th percentile we used Woodruff's method (Francisco and Fuller, 1991; Sarndal et al., 1992; Dorfman and Valliant, 1993). An alpha level of 0.05 was used for all inferential tests.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Altogether, 13,368 unique video still frames were considered in this analysis. Of these, 2998 (22.4%) were determined to have invisible trunk, and 5079 frames (38.0%) were rated invisible for right upper arm; 2955 (22.1%) frames were considered invisible for both trunk and right upper arm, i.e. completely missing data. The proportions of still frames in which body parts were fully or partly visible, once those that were not at-all-visible were extracted, are presented in Table 1
                        . Body parts were fully visible only in a fraction of the observable video frames: 22.3% (95% CI = 21.6–23.0%) for the trunk and 30.1% (95% CI = 29.3–30.9%) for the right upper arm. Correspondingly, partial visibility made up the bulk of postural samples: 77.7% (95% CI = 77.1–78.4%) for the trunk and 69.9% (95% CI = 69.1–70.7%) for the right upper arm (Table 1).

The average amount of time spent on all aspects of observing one frame (including rating all variables) was 24.5 and 24.4 s (SD 4.2 s) for frames with fully or partly visible trunk (n = 10,370) and right upper arm (n = 8289), respectively. Observation time was significantly longer (25.2 s) for frames where the trunk was partly visible (n = 8058) than for frames with fully visible trunk (23.5 s; n = 2312), whereas frames for which the right upper arm was fully or partly visible were rated equally fast (on average 25.2 s vs. 24.5 s; 2495 fully visible and 5794 partly visible frames). The time spent on ‘missing’ frames for which no postures could be rated at all was 2.2 s on average (SD 6.5 s); these frames were not included in the calculations of the averages above.

For several posture metrics, daily summaries (Table 1) developed from fully visible frames were significantly different (cf. Table 2
                        ) from those obtained using both partly visible and combined fully and partly visible frames. Overall, fully visible frames tended to deliver lower estimates than either partly visible or combined visibility (standard practice). When considering trunk posture, 90th percentile flexion/extension was significantly lower for fully visible frames than both partly visible and standard practice, whereas the percent time with the trunk twisted and the trunk laterally bent was significantly higher when only fully visible frames were considered. For all arm elevation variables, estimates were lower for daily summaries based on fully observed frames than either partly visible frames or standard practice, even if the differences in percent time with the arm elevated more than 60° were significant only at p = 0.08 (Table 2).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Nearly 80% of trunk postures and 70% of upper arm postures were approximated based on partly visible video images. The fact that the bulk of observations in standard practice observation (i.e. combining fully and partly visible frames) required inference or estimation is surprising, and daily exposure summary statistics were influenced by whether these frames were included or not.

Thus, different observation strategies (data sources) resulted in small-to-modest, yet significant, differences in several daily summary metrics. For example, mean and 90th percentile trunk postures were 1.8° and 5.6° lower, respectively, when based on fully visible frames only than if both fully and partly visible frames were included. Results for the arm were similar; mean and 90th percentile differences were 2.0° and 8.2°, respectively. Although differences of less than 10° might be considered trivial in some contexts, such as in crude screenings for the occurrence of hazardous postures, they represent a fairly substantial proportion of the exposure in question; mean trunk exposure could vary by 46% (1.8/3.9) and 90th percentile arm exposure by 22% (8.2/38.0) depending on the observation strategy adopted. In research as well as ergonomics practice, a difference of this magnitude could affect the reliability of exposure assessments if different observation strategies were adopted for different worksites, or before and after an intervention. It is conceivable that an intervention affecting workstation layout could also impact the visibility of postures at that workstation; if visibility-related differences are due to observer bias, this could result in a different assessment of posture regardless of whether posture had actually changed. Upper arm posture differences of 25% among different occupational groups have been shown to have an impact on rates of shoulder disorders within these groups (Svendsen et al., 2004); it seems probable that differences of ∼20% would introduce a risk of arriving at misleading results if the same observation strategy is not used between groups, in before-and-after conditions, or when comparing studies. In the case that posture is being assessed for later biomechanical analysis, even small changes in posture can have large impact on calculated joint forces. Conversely, the effect of including (or not) the partly visible periods in the overall exposure summary are within the range of a just noticeable posture difference between two stills observed by the same observer (Weir et al., 2007), and may thus be deemed to be of a size that does not warrant any particular concern in daily practice. Practitioners should therefore consider their need for accuracy when deciding on an observation strategy; and then be sure to adopt the same strategy for all data collections in order to reduce methodological bias.

In this study, posture exposure was analyzed as a continuous variable, as opposed to the common approach of estimating postures in categories, in order to provide the highest-possible resolution. However, this may be counter-intuitive to some ergonomists. Intra and inter-observer agreement has been evaluated quite extensively for observation-based posture assessment (for reviews, see Denis et al., 2000; Takala et al., 2010), and observed postures have been compared to directly measured exposure in several validation studies. With few exceptions (Lowe, 2004), agreement between observed and directly measured posture, as measured by Kappa or ICCs, decreases as more, narrower, categories are used, and the best agreement is shown for dichotomous posture categories (Bao et al., 2009; Kilbom, 1994). Also, the amount of time needed for the observer to select a category goes up with more categories (Weir et al., 2011). However, fewer categories will lead to better percentage agreement just by chance, and the apparent improvement in exposure classification comes at the price of a decreased resolution in posture data, as determined by the width of categories. Recording angles as “continuous” integers can be considered as a special case of categorizing where there are 360 1-degree categories. Clearly the probability of agreement by chance goes down (i.e. the opportunity for misclassification compared to “true” data from measurements with the same resolution goes up) with many categories. However, treating exposure as a continuous variable has statistical advantages, including improved power to detect true differences between conditions and decreased bias. The fact that each individual still frame's posture assessment is uncertain due to the shortcomings of the human observer, adds to the overall posture exposure variability associated with observation as a method (Rezagholi et al., 2012). The imprecision of each individual assessment, however, has less impact as the number of assessments increases (Mathiassen et al., 2013), and the average of “many” observations will converge to a stable value irrespective of the extent of uncertainty in each single observation. Thus, occupational researchers have been advised to use continuous data where possible, and to avoid categorization (Royston et al., 2006; Loomis, 2012). A further advantage of using a continuous scale for posture observation is that it may potentially lead to more exact identification of possible exposure thresholds of significance to health effects (Taylor and Yu, 2002; Royston et al., 2006; Altman and Royston, 2006).

The differences between fully visible and combined strategies were a result of partly visible postures being rated differently than fully visible (Table 1). Fully visible mean and 90th percentile trunk postures were 1.8 and 5.6° lower than partly visible postures, respectively, and for the arm mean and 90th percentile differences were 2.0° and 8.2°, respectively. There are a few competing theories for these results. Firstly, this difference could be a statistical artefact, since the sample of fully visible frames, including only 25–30% of observations, might not capture the full range of exposures in the job. Previous work found that restricting a sample of muscle activity (Trask et al., 2008) or upper arm posture (Mathiassen et al., 2012) to short time periods can lead to biased estimates of exposure percentiles, with the 90th percentile being underestimated. However, the present study showed consistent exposure differences between fully and partly visible frames for 90th percentile posture even though both covered at least 1 h of work, which was sufficient in another study to nearly eliminate bias altogether (Mathiassen et al., 2012). Furthermore, fully and partly visible frames differed for several other posture variables than the 90th percentile, in particular for the upper arm (Table 2), and small samples should not, on theoretical grounds, lead to bias in these cases (Mathiassen et al., 2012). This explanation for the difference between fully and partly visible frames therefore seems unlikely.

As a second theory, this finding may result from a true exposure difference between fully and partially visible observations. It may be that during partly visible periods, workers actually perform different types of movements and have authentically different postures. For example, during the baggage handling tasks analyzed in this study, partly visible still frames may have occurred mostly in machinery or planes, where work would tend to be associated with more extreme bending postures.

A third explanation could be that observers are biased to different extents when observing fully and partly visible postures. For example, observers might consistently under- or over-estimate exposures that they cannot really see. Several studies have shown that posture estimates based on observation differ from those based on inclinometry (Rezagholi et al., 2012; Juul-Kristensen et al., 2001; de Looze et al., 1994; Spielholz et al., 2001). Most suggest this is due to observation bias (i.e. that the directly-measured inclinometer results are a true ‘gold standard’). However, a recent study by Jackson et al. (2015) suggested that inclinometry of the upper arm may be biased, and that observations may, in this case, give a more valid estimate of angles, according to the interpretation used in ergonomics practice.

Whether the posture differences between fully and partly visible frames are due to true differences in exposure during these periods, or whether they are caused by differential observer bias cannot be answered with the present data. Therefore, we cannot, on basis of the present study, conclude whether more valid summary exposure estimates would be obtained by including visible frames only (because partly visible frames are associated with larger observer bias), or by combining fully and partly visible frames (because partly visible frames represent periods of work with genuinely different exposures). Resolving this issue would require simultaneous, synchronized posture assessment using inclinometry and observation. This would be a valuable line of inquiry for future study.

As this was a field-based study, we were unable to control lighting conditions or camera angle beyond the limits allowed by the prevailing conditions at the worksite. Dual-camera set-up was also not feasible. While we collected data showing how common the issue of posture occlusion is when collecting video recordings using one camera during productive work in a genuine occupational environment, our data do not permit examination of the effect of other – and maybe more beneficial – recording conditions. However, our study demonstrated that partly visible postures occur to a large extent in real-world videos, and we encourage future experimental studies of the influence of different relevant factors, such as lighting and camera angle, on the occurrence of body occlusion; this may eventually lead to better guidelines for how to optimize posture visibility in naturally occurring field settings.

An additional issue related to observation performance is whether observer variability (i.e. variance between and within observers (Rezagholi et al., 2012)) differs between fully and partly visible periods. Duplicate observations by multiple observers were not available in the present study. However, prior studies of upper arm posture show between-observer variance (including contributions from within-observer variability when repeating posture observations) were up to about 50% of the total measured variance, depending on exposure variable and observation procedure (Rezagholi et al., 2012). Since rating partly visible postures requires more subjective assessment and interpretation than fully visible postures, it seems likely that between-observer variability is larger with partly visible frames. For example, observers with extensive experience and knowledge of the work tasks may approximate postures more correctly. Observers may also differ in willingness to make approximations. In the current study, the four observers had substantially different percentages of fully observed frames (21%, 31%, 34%, and 13%), and they also completed observations at different paces (26 s, 17 s, 32 s, 2 0 s). This shows not only some variation in what observers consider an unobstructed view, but also reflects the degree of consideration they expend on each frame. Although duplicate observations were not included in the current results, this data collection did involve a small proportion of postures (848 frames) that were viewed by all four observers. Investigation of this subset of data showed that even when the exact same video still frames were viewed, observer assessment of ‘full visibility’ varied substantially: 22%, 53%, 16%, 10%. The number of frames classified as invisible also varied between the four observers: 11, 17, 30, 12. Obviously, training could have an effect on how partly visible frames are treated, but all observers in the current study received the same training (Trask et al., 2013). Despite the large source of variability in observation data introduced by inconsistencies within and between observers, to our knowledge, no existing observation protocol directly addresses observer training for partly visible scenarios.

Larger between-observer variability would require a larger sample of postures in order to obtain an acceptable precision of the eventual exposure estimate, and a shift of the cost-efficiency trade-off between documenting work on video and retrieving posture data by observing those videos (Mathiassen et al., 2013). As with many aspects of study design and exposure assessment, there appears to be a trade-off in the choice of observation strategy. On one hand, researchers could elect (or be instructed) to code only frames showing fully visible postures, which has the advantage of being quicker than coding all visible frames (in that fewer postures will be fully visible) and (at least heuristically) eliminates the potential uncertainty associated with approximating partly visible postures. On the other hand, observing all available data (fully and partly visible postures combined) provides a larger sample that can provide insight into aspects of the job that don't permit full visibility, and thus avoid the pitfalls of missing relevant exposure variability, both due to the statistical effect of “small” samples on certain posture variables (Trask et al., 2008; Mathiassen et al., 2012), and because less visible periods may, indeed, be associated with different exposures than fully visible periods. Also, a larger sample leads to a better precision (less uncertainty) of the eventual summary mean exposure estimate. The present study clearly showed that fully-visible-only vs. combined fully and partly visible (i.e. standard observation practice) can produce different summary exposure metrics. Including both fully and partly visible frames in posture assessments can obtain a larger sample and hence a more precise exposure estimate, representing the entire job; however, this comes at the price of possibly introducing some bias in the eventual summary results, even if this caveat cannot be confirmed by the present data, as discussed above.

To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the impact of obstructed view on the result of observational posture assessments from videos collected in the field. The results will help inform future study design and urges caution in interpreting the existing literature, since differences in observation strategy could limit comparability of posture results obtained by observation. However, there were some limitations that warrant further consideration. Our results were specific to the worksite and tasks investigated in this study. It is likely that a different set of work conditions and tasks would have different reasons for obscuring posture, in terms of obstacles or movement throughout the worksite, and the proportion of less visible video frames would therefore depend considerably on the occupational setting. In settings where a far majority of video frames would show fully visible postures, the issue of whether to include partly visible frames or not is obviously of less importance than in the present case, where only about 30% of all frames were fully visible. Further, camera set-up may affect posture assessment, which was not considered in this study. It is ideal to have a perpendicular view of the range of motion, since cameras placed in oblique angles relative to the plane of movement reduce inter-observer agreement (Sutherland et al., 2007; Bao et al., 2009), and presumably lower accuracy. A dual-camera system would permit more opportunities for a favourable angle and also for an unobstructed view, but these systems are not very portable during dynamic work. Future work could investigate the effect of different work scenarios, observer training, and camera set-up on the proportion of fully visible postures and the resulting impact on daily posture summaries.

Postures were partly visible in almost 75% of video frames from aircraft baggage handling, forcing observers to approximate working postures. Trunk and upper arm postures generally differed between fully and partly visible frames; effects were more pronounced for extreme values like the 90th percentile than for measures of central tendency like the mean. As a result, job exposure summaries were considerably influenced by the inclusion (or exclusion) of partly visible frames. Whether the exposure difference between fully and partly visible frames was due to observation bias at different degrees of visibility, or to exposure during less visible periods being truly different from that during fully visible work, remains unclear. Although the current results are specific to an industry, worksite, and set of tasks, they suggest that all observation studies need to consider the degree of visibility and its effect on study results. Further research should aim to further understand this effect, and identify optimal strategies for posture observation. Thus, while the specific effect of including partly visible frames in other settings is uncertain, we advise practitioners to use the same observation strategy (i.e., to consistently include or exclude partly visible frames) when comparing groups or conditions.

None to declare.

CT developed the research questions, oversaw data collection and processing, and drafted the manuscript. SEM conceived of the original study, contributed to the development of research questions for the present paper, and contributed substantially to the manuscript. MR contributed to the analysis plan, performed all statistical analyses, and contributed substantially to the manuscript. All authors have read and approved of the final manuscript.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was undertaken, in part, thanks to funding from the Canada Research Chairs program. The authors would like to thank AFA Insurance (grant # 100071) and the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare (Forte; Dnr 2009-1761) for their financial support, as well as study partners SAS Ground Services and the Vocational Training & Working Environment Council in the transportation trades (TYA). We gratefully acknowledge: the data collection efforts of Jens Wahlström, Jennie Jackson, and Carl Lind; the data processing efforts of Margaretha Marklund, Kerstin Nilsson, Lars Holm, Karin Holmkvist, Johan Hultman, and Niklas Lindfors; as well as the software development efforts of Per Gandal. We would particularly like to thank all of the baggage handlers who participated in this study. The authors gratefully acknowledge Aaron Kociolek for his critical review of the manuscript.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

