@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A comparison of clutching movements of freely adjusted and imposed pedal configurations for identifying discomfort assessment criteria

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Clutching motions of freely adjusted and imposed pedal configurations were compared.


                        
                        
                           
                           Pedal position was adjusted to ensure a good starting pedal position.


                        
                        
                           
                           Pedal position adjustment seemed not motivated by reducing joint torque.


                        
                        
                           
                           Discomfort ratings were found significantly correlated with knee and ankle torques at the end of depression.


                        
                        
                           
                           Relevant biomechanical parameters were identified for defining discomfort indicators.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Discomfort

Biomechanics

Clutch pedal

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This paper focuses on the effects of the free pedal position adjustment on clutching movements of the left lower limb as well as on the perceived discomfort. Six automotive clutch pedal configurations were tested by 20 subjects (5 young females, 5 young males, 5 older females, 5 older males) using a multi-adjustable experimental mock-up. Results showed that the pedal position was adjusted to ensure a good starting pedal position allowing a less flexed ankle and avoiding unnecessary leg displacement from the foot rest to the position at start depression. Pedal position adjustment seemed not motivated by reducing joint torque though discomfort ratings were found significantly correlated with knee and ankle torques at the end of depression. The present work also illustrates that the less-constrained motion concept is helpful for a better understanding of people preference and useful for identifying motion-related biomechanical parameters to be considered for defining assessment criteria.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Pedals are one of the most important controls used in vehicles. Only a few studies of the comfort of pedal operation have been reported in existing literature (see Haslegrave, 1995; Wang and Bullock, 2004). In our past studies (Wang et al., 2000, 2004), four design parameters of the clutch pedal (seat height, pedal travel length, pedal travel inclination, pedal resistance) were investigated to understand their effects on lower limb movements and pedal discomfort. The results from the biomechanical evaluation of comfort/discomfort are consistent with those from the subjective evaluation. Both agree with the principle of minimum work, observed in biomechanical analysis of leg movements. This is characterized by the preference of not raising the leg during the approach phase, and the preference of low joint work at the knee and hip during the depression phase. Although some design recommendations for clutch pedal design were provided by this study, ergonomic criterion for pedal design which can be easily used by design engineers are still missing especially when one wants to optimise its position. Moreover, the configurations tested in our previous study (Wang et al., 2000, 2004) were not necessarily realistic when compared to existing vehicles. Indeed, the four controlled variables had 5 equidistant levels. A central composite experimental design was used to reduce the number of test configurations. Therefore, some combinations may not have been realistic. In addition, subjects were asked to freely place the clutch pedal without any restrictions related to the seat’s range of horizontal and vertical adjustments. The pedal positions tested in this study may not exist in real vehicles. Thanks to long experience in automotive engineering, currently existing pedals are generally well designed. Generally speaking from the design engineers' point of view, it is more critical to choose the best solution among already well designed ones than to distinguish a well-designed product from bad ones.

Another motivation for this work was the development of digital human models (DHMs) for ergonomic design of products. DHMs became one of the key components of the CAD systems used in industry for product design and manufacturing (see Duffy, 2009 for an overview). In order to reduce design cycle and cost, it has become necessary to assess the ergonomics of a product in the very early stages of its development. Thanks to recent progress in motion simulation, simulating a complex tasked orientated motion now becomes possible. But another challenging issue is how to assess motion related discomfort. We can mention some existing ergonomic assessment methods such as OWAS (Karhu et al., 1977), RULA (McAtamney and Corlett, 1993), REBA (Hignett and McAtamney, 2000) or OCRA (Occhipinti, 1998). Some of them are currently implemented in a DHM software package. However, these methods were developed by ergonomic experts for ergonomic assessment of working postures in industry and they can hardly be used by a design engineer to assess a product.

In recent years, more and more researchers have become aware of the need for distinguishing comfort and discomfort (De Looze et al., 2003; Helander and Zhang, 1997; Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004; Moes, 2005). In particular, Helander and Zhang (1997) supported the claim that discomfort is related to biomechanical factors such as joint angles, joint torques and muscle forces, whereas comfort can be credited to a sense of well-being and aesthetics. Therefore biomechanical parameters may provide relevant insights for understanding discomfort and developing motion related discomfort assessment modelling.

Because any task oriented motion is more or less-constrained by the environment, a better comfort may be obtained when people can make their own appropriate adjustments. These less-constrained motions, also referred to as “neutral” motions by Dufour and Wang (2005), can then be used as reference data for comparing a proposed solution and for identifying objective discomfort criterion based on biomechanical data. The purpose of this study is therefore to compare less-constrained clutching motions with normally constrained ones in order to understand clutch pedal position adjustment and to explore whether it is possible to define objective discomfort assessment criteria for the clutch pedal operation that can be easily implemented in a DHM.

Twenty volunteer subjects took part in the experiment. They were divided into four anthropometric groups according to age and gender: 5 young females, 5 young males, 5 older females, 5 older males. Due to small sample size, only the 50th percentile of each age-gender group in terms of stature was considered in order to keep a more homogeneous sample. All participants were regular drivers with a 2-year minimum driving experience and were in a good physical condition without joint trauma or diseases. The experimental protocol was approved by the ethical committee of IFSTTAR (French Institute of Science and Technology for Transport, Development and Networks). Informed consent was given before participating in the experiment.

Forty one anthropometric dimensions were measured for all participants. Functional tests were performed on each subject in order to characterize joint ranges of motion and maximum isometric joint torques. The tests were selected according to their relevancy to clutch pedal operation. Therefore, maximum isometric joint torques and ranges of motion were collected only for the left lower limb. The active ranges of motion (ROM) mainly in the sagittal plane were measured for the left hip, knee and ankle joints. Maximum isometric joint torques were performed for these three joints only in flexion/extension using a specifically designed ergometer. They were measured randomly at different joint positions according to the recommendations by Gallagher et al. (1998) (see also Chaffin et al., 2006). The following joint positions were imposed with help of a goniometer and defined from a reference standing posture (Fig. 1
                        a): flexion of 0° for the ankle, flexion of 45° for the knee and flexion of 60° for the hip. Table 1
                         summarizes the main characteristics of each group.

A multi-adjustable experimental mock-up, similar to that used in our past study (Wang et al., 2000), was used to simulate different pedal configurations. It was composed of a seat, footrest, steering wheel, accelerator pedal and clutch pedal. The adjustments in height of the seat and steering wheel were motorized as well as the clutch pedal adjustment both in depth and in height with respect to the accelerator pedal. The other adjustments such as pedal travel length, pedal travel inclination and the clutch pedal lateral position were done manually by an experimenter. The range of lateral adjustments of the pedal was 60 mm with an increment of 10 mm. The pedal resistance was configured manually by the experimenter using the same spring for all tested configurations. The pedal resistance at the end of depression was not explicitly controlled as in our earlier study (Wang et al., 2000). It was dependent on the pre-loading applied to the spring when adjusting the pedal surface orientation with respect to the horizontal plane (clutch pedal initial angle, Fig. 2
                        ). The acceleration pedal was attached to the support of the clutch pedal. For a given clutch pedal configuration, the acceleration pedal moved together with the clutch pedal when adjusting its position horizontally and vertically. The steering wheel location was let to each participant's preference.

Six pedal configurations (Table 2
                        ) were chosen among eleven, provided by the three car manufacturers participating in the research project, in order to cover the large range of pedal design parameters from currently existing vehicles. The configurations C1 to C4 and C6 were selected as border configurations of the investigation space, whereas C5 was selected as central configuration. For each imposed pedal configuration, a less-constrained condition, for which the subjects could adjust the pedal position, was also tested. In order to estimate the repeatability of the movement and discomfort rating, the central configuration C5 was tested three times. The trial order was randomized.

The body movements were captured at 100 Hz with 10 MX40 cameras of the VICON optoelectronic system (Oxford, UK) using 40 surface markers attached to the whole body. Pedal force was measured at 1000 Hz using a three-axe force sensor DAC-2000-P specifically designed by TME (Toulon, France) for automotive clutch and braking pedals (ranged from 200 to 1500 N). Six reflective markers were attached on the pedal for measuring its displacement.

A specific mock-up coordinate system, centered at the reference H-point of the seat, was used to define the pedal configurations (Fig. 2). Its origin corresponded to the barycentre of the seat H-point travel path. The seat reference H-point was measured prior to the experiment with the help of the SAE H-point machine (SAE J826) using a FARO arm digitizer (www.faro.com). As a same seat was used for all test configurations, the mock-up coordinate system center at the seat H-point was therefore the same.

Discomfort feelings when clutching the pedal were collected for all trials by means of a questionnaire, which was composed of two parts. First, multiple-choice questions were designed to assess possible interference with the seat, the appropriateness of the four pedal design parameters (pedal position at beginning and end depression, travel length, travel angle) and the perception of the clutch pedal force. The global discomfort was then rated using a modified CP-50 category partition scale (Chevalot and Wang, 2004, see also Shen and Parsons, 1997 for a comparative study on rating scales). The scale was put in front of the subject and was visible all the time. They were instructed to first select a category among seven responses (imperceptible, very low, low, medium, high, very high, extremely high), then to refine their judgement by choosing a number from 1 to 10 within the selected category. The real scale from 0 to 50 and more (original CP-50) was hidden from the subject in order to give priority to the category choice and not to a numerical value. Due to the limited length of this paper, only results regarding the start and end pedal positions and global discomfort ratings will be presented.

The experiment began with the measurement of the main subject anthropometric dimensions. Anatomical landmarks were palpated on the pelvis and left lower limb according to the procedure described by van Sint Jan (2007). Then, reflective markers were put on these same points after manual palpation.

Prior to the clutch pedal experiment, the data for characterizing the subject's individual physical capacity of the left lower limb were collected. For the hip flexion extension ROM, participants were asked to slowly flex the left hip until to the maximum, then to slowly extend the hip to the maximum from a standing position. They were standing upright on the right leg. In order to help maintain balance during the movement, they were asked to grasp a horizontal bar placed in front of them. For the knee and ankle flexion–extension ROMs, participants were seated on a stool to move slowly the knee and ankle to their limits. For each joint ROM, subjects were asked to repeat the motion three times. For each joint torque, they were asked to exert a maximum voluntary joint torque and to maintain it during 5 s. Each joint's maximum torque was measured twice with a rest of at least 40 s between two repetitions.

Subjects were then asked to sit down in the seat of the experimental mock-up and to familiarize themselves with the available adjustments and the discomfort questionnaire. For this, three configurations were tested at first for training purposes. They consisted of two extreme configurations, which were a priori very uncomfortable and one average configuration considered to be less uncomfortable. The two extreme configurations were: one combining a high seat height, a small travel inclination angle and a long travel length; and the other combining a low seat height, a high travel inclination angle and a long travel length. For each imposed pedal configuration, participants were asked first to adjust the horizontal seat position with respect to the accelerator pedal before adjusting the steering wheel. After testing an imposed pedal configuration, an experimenter changed the pedal position by placing it out of reach of the left foot. Then subjects were asked to choose their preferred pedal position while keeping all other parameters unchanged. The adjustments in longitudinal (x-axis) and vertical (z-axis) directions were carried out by subjects themselves using a remote controller. For lateral direction (y-axis), the adjustment was performed with the help of an experimenter. This adjustment process continued until the preferred clutch pedal position was found. During the pedal position adjustment process, the subjects could perform as many pedal depressions as necessary.

For all trials, before recording the clutching movement, subjects were asked to fill in the discomfort questionnaire. Usually, several tests were required in order to answer the questionnaire. Then, a complete pedal clutching movement was recorded. Participants were instructed to start motion with a standard driving posture (the left foot on the foot rest, the right foot on the acceleration pedal and the hands on the steering wheel), to push the clutch pedal with the left foot without changing the positions of the right foot and hands, then to maintain the clutch pedal fully pressed for about 3 s, finally releasing the pedal and replacing the left foot on the foot rest.

The whole duration of the experiment lasted about four and a half hours. A pause of at least 10 min was imposed in the middle of the experiment during which drinks and biscuits were provided. The subjects were allowed to take a break whenever requested during the experimentation.

The whole body motions were reconstructed by an inverse kinematic method which calculates the joint angles from captured trajectories of skin markers by minimizing the distance between the captured and model-based markers positions (see Ausejo and Wang, 2009 for the principle of motion reconstruction). In this paper, we focus only on the left lower limb. The lower limb kinematic model has seven degrees of freedom (Fig. 1).

Joint forces and torques were then computed using a 3D inverse dynamics method based on homogeneous matrices (Doriot and Chèze, 2004). Inertial properties of the body segments were calculated from subjects' anthropometric dimensions using the regression equations of Dumas et al. (2007). The joint forces and torques were computed iteratively at each frame by isolating the body segments from the most distal to the most proximal. Then, joint moments were projected onto the kinematic axes of their respective joint.

The two main key instants were identified from a clutching movement: the beginning of pedal depression, i.e. when the left foot starts depressing the clutch pedal, and the end of pedal depression, i.e. when pedal end travel is reached. The beginning of pedal depression was defined as the first frame when the force recorded by the pedal force sensor was above 5% of the maximal force recorded in the trial. The end of pedal depression was defined as the first frame when the left foot velocity, calculated from numerical derivation and filtering (low-pass 4th order Butterworth with a cut-off frequency at 10 Hz) of the recorded trajectories of a marker located on the top of the foot near the toes, was below 5% of the maximum velocity recorded after the beginning of pedal depression in the trial. These specific instants or key-frames were determined for each recorded motion. Postures were analyzed at these two key-frames. For the foot force applied to the pedal and the joint torques of the left lower limb, the analysis was performed only at the end of depression. The main parameters analysed in the paper are defined in Fig. 3
                           .

An ANOVA for multiple factors was mainly used to analyse the effects of group of participants, test configuration and type of configuration on biomechanical parameters (joint angles and torques) as well as discomfort rating. As participants tested both imposed (IM) and less-constrained (LC) conditions for all test configurations, a paired sample t-test was performed to test null hypothesis (no significant different between IM and LC). The differences between IM and LC were calculated for each test configuration performed by a same participant. For the pedal position adjustments, only effects of group of participants and test configuration were analysed. For the categorical responses to the multiple choice questions from the questionnaire were compared between imposed and less-constrained conditions. Their independence was tested by a Chi squared test. Statistical significance level was fixed at p = 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The variations in the clutch pedal position between imposed and less-constrained configurations were estimated using the reflective markers fixed on the clutch pedal. Table 3
                         gives the means and standard deviations of the pedal adjustments in x, y and z by participant group and test configuration. The displacements in x, y and z directions from imposed pedal positions to preferred ones were −8.8, −21 and −16.8 mm on average respectively. A strong effect of pedal configuration was observed. Indeed, initially high clutch pedals were lowered for C1, C2 and, C3. For those close to the seat (C5, C6), the pedal was placed farther away from the seat. A more leftward pedal position was also preferred for all configurations. A significant effect of the subject group was observed in x and z directions only.

The preferred positions were also analysed with respect to subject's stature by simple regression. Apart from lateral position (p = 0.265), both longitudinal (ΔX) and vertical (ΔZ) adjustments were significantly dependent on stature and taller persons preferred a farther and higher position:
                           
                              ΔX = 112–0.0715*Stature (in mm), R
                                 2 = 5.5%, p = 0.0029

ΔZ = −222 + 0.0124*Stature (in mm), R
                                 2 = 6%, p = 0.0018.

Six questions were asked to assess the initial and end positions of the pedal in terms of its height, longitudinal distance and lateral position. For each question, subjects were asked to choose one of three proposed answers: too high/good/too low for pedal height, too far/good/too near for pedal longitudinal distance, too left/good/too right for pedal lateral position. Table 4
                            shows the frequency of each of these three answers. Strong effects of the type of configuration (imposed/preferred) were found a using a Chi-square test (Table 4). At the start depression, imposed pedal configurations were found too high for 55% of the responses, too near for 40% and too rightward for 64%, whereas more than 90% of trials with a response of “good” were obtained for less-constrained configurations for all three directions. However, the free pedal adjustment did not seem to improve the comfort perception of the end depression position as much as for the pedal's start position. Instead, at the end depression, the free pedal adjustment increased the perception of “too low” and “too far” respectively from 16% to 22% and from 32% to 42%. Therefore the subjects tended to improve the beginning of the clutch pedal operation at the expense of the end.

For each subject, the central configuration C5 was tested three times for both imposed and less-constrained conditions, in order to evaluate the repeatability of discomfort ratings. The maximum gap in discomfort rating between three repeated trials and their mean was calculated. 13 out of 20 subjects had a mean maximum gap higher than 5, implying that the rating of an identical target may change the category from trial to trial. In particular, three subjects had an average value higher than 10, probably suggesting difficulty in using the rating scale. In this experiment, the mean maximum gap value was 6.8.

An ANOVA was performed for analysing the effects of the three variables (Group of subjects, Configuration and Type of configuration) on the CP50 discomfort ratings. A paired sample t-test was also performed on the differences between less-constrained (LC) and imposed (IM) configurations. Results are summarized in Table 5
                            and show that discomfort rating strongly depended on these three factors. Lowest discomfort score of 13.6 was obtained for C3 and highest score for C6. There was a significant effect of subject group on discomfort scores, the average differences between the four groups varied from 2.3 to 6.1, smaller than the mean maximum gap value, i.e. 6.8. As expected, the less-constrained configurations were better rated than the imposed ones (Table 5).

The flexion–extension angles and torques of the hip, knee and ankle joints were examined at the beginning and the end of the clutching movement (Table 6
                           ). Significant differences in flexion–extension angles at hip, knee and ankle were found between imposed and less-constrained configurations by paired sample t-tests. These differences were in agreement with the adjustments for preferred clutch pedal positions. The highest variation in the ankle joint flexion–extension angle was found at the beginning of depression. Globally, the change of pedal position led to a decrease in the flexion of the hip, knee and ankle joints at the beginning, and an increase of the extension of these joints at the end of the pedal depression, especially for the ankle. Significant effects of the group of subjects and test configuration were also found on the joint angles (Table 6).

The force applied on the pedal and the joint torques were analysed only at the end of pedal depression (see Fig. 3 for definition of analysed parameters). The foot force applied on the pedal was decomposed in three components with respect to the pedal travel path: tangential, normal and lateral forces. As the contact forces between the thigh and the seat were not estimated, the hip joint torque was not considered.

An ANOVA was performed on knee and ankle joint torques, three pedal force components and pedal force direction in XZ plane with respect to the hip-foot pedal contact point. The means and standard deviations of these 6 variables are summarized in Table 7
                           . A strong effect of test configuration and group of subjects was found for the six variables. Significant effect of configuration type (freely/imposed) was only found on the lateral force component by ANOVA. By paired sample t-tests, a significant difference in ankle joint torque was also found. As less-constrained and imposed configurations only differed in pedal position, the tangential force required for fully depressing the pedal should be remained unchanged. The lateral force components were mainly directed leftwards from the driver's point-of-view. A small increase in the lateral force towards the left direction was observed for all pedals when comparing the less-constrained configurations with imposed ones. Concerning the effect of subject group, a higher tangential force was observed for older subjects than for younger ones. Lower normal force was observed for older volunteers than younger ones, in agreement with the pedal force direction with respect to hip-pedal contact point in the xz plane (parallel to the body sagittal plane). The deviations of pedal force direction from the hip-pedal contact line were on average 0.8, −2.7, −6.1 and −11.4 degrees respectively for older females, older males, younger females and younger males. Pedal force was therefore directed more closely to the hip for older subjects than for younger ones, leading to a lower knee torque for younger volunteers.

@&#DISCUSSIONS@&#

In this study, clutch pedal position as well as joint angles, pedal force and joint torques of the left lower limb were compared between six imposed configurations and corresponding less constrained ones with freely adjusted pedal position. Due to small variation in discomfort rating among trials and relatively low reproducibility in discomfort rating, it is therefore difficult to find any objective variables to explain the variance of discomfort ratings. In what follows, we'll mainly focus the discussions on the differences in objective parameters between imposed and less-constrained configurations for a better understanding of clutch pedal position adjustment.

The analysis of the clutch pedal adjustments showed that the subjects moved the pedal further away from the seat and also lowered it for the less-constrained configurations. This led to a decrease in the flexion of the hip, knee and ankle joints at the beginning and an increase of the extension of these joints at the end of the pedal depression as the travel length was kept unchanged. The difference in the joint flexion extension angle between freely adjusted and imposed configurations was the highest for the ankle. Compared to the joint ROM values collected, the ankle angle was very close to its dorsiflexion limit at the beginning of pedal depression (Table 1) for the imposed configurations. The subjects may have adjusted the pedal position so as to reduce the ankle dorsiflexion angle away from its limit when depressing the pedal in agreement with the cost functions suggested by Cruse et al (1990) and also by Kee (2002). This may at least partly explain the decrease in discomfort rating for preferred pedal configurations.

It was also observed that a clutch pedal positioned more to the driver's left was preferred by participants when comparing imposed and freely adjusted configurations. The lateral clutch position varied from −60 mm for C1 to −120 mm for C3. The range of the lateral adjustment was −41 mm for C1 to 0.9 mm for C3 on average. An average lateral position of about −110 mm was preferred, slightly smaller than the half of the distance between two pelvis illac crests (135 mm on average from the participants of this study). One explanation could be that people prefer to minimise the distance from foot rest position to the pedal at the beginning of the depression, according to the hypothesis of minimum work suggested by Wang et al. (2004).

In the present experiment, only the pedal position changed between imposed and preferred pedal configurations. Other pedal characteristics such as its resistance, travel length and travel inclination were kept unchanged. Relative position between clutch and acceleration pedals was also kept unchanged as they both moved together when adjusting the clutch pedal position. Pedal force direction was close to the hip-pedal line with an average deviation angle of −5.6 degrees (Table 7). This deviation was significantly dependent on pedal configuration and also on subject group. Older subjects preferred a pedal force more directed to the hip than younger ones. But no significant difference in pedal force direction in XZ plane and knee joint torque was found between imposed and preferred configurations, suggesting that pedal position adjustment was not motivated by reducing joint torque under the experimental conditions of the present study. From our previous study (Wang et al., 2004), it was shown that discomfort rating was strongly dependent on pedal resistance and that discomfort was also significantly correlated to joint torques at the end of pedal depression, especially to the knee joint torque. Interestingly, a weak but significantly correlation between CP50 raw scores and knee and ankle joint torque at the end of depression. Fig. 4
                      shows the discomfort ratings in terms of knee torques for all test configurations.

In summary, pedal position adjustment is an iterative trial-error process in which a subject generally carries out a large number of trials before finding a preferred pedal position. The results of the present study are in agreement with our earlier suggestion (Wang et al., 2000) that pedal position may result from the principle of minimum work and minimum discomfort. The pedal was positioned neither too high, thus avoiding unnecessary work raising the leg, nor too low, which helped to avoid an uncomfortably large ankle extension at the end of pedal travel. It was also adjusted to be neither too near, thus reducing ankle dorsiflexion, nor too far, avoiding too large a joint extension at the end of travel. Interestingly, the results of the present study seem to show that the comfort at the beginning of depression was more privileged than the comfort at the end of travel. Results also show that pedal position adjustment was not motivated by a more efficient foot force exertion for reducing joint efforts.

As explained in Introduction, one of the motivations of the present work was to explore the possibility of defining design criteria based on objective parameters for helping design engineers using a digital human model (DHM). Results of the present study show that assessing a control design like clutch pedal is challenging using a DHM. Firstly, defining objective assessment criteria is difficult. Though six pedal configurations were selected covering a large range of existing clutch pedal designs, their range of variation is not large enough for a large variation in discomfort perception. It is therefore difficult to establish direct relationship between discomfort and any objective measures only using the data of the present study. However, the results of the present study suggest that pedal assessment criteria should consider joint angles in particular the ankle at the start of depression and joint torques at the end of pedal depression. Based on the findings of the present work and also our earlier findings (Wang et al., 2004), seven discomfort indicators based on joint angles at the start and end of depression and two from knee and ankle torques at the end of depression were proposed by Pannetier (2012). But their use should be combined with other considerations than biomechanical factors. Secondly, engineers often have to assess different alternative designs with small differences between them. When comparing the movements between imposed and less-constrained pedal configurations, consistent joint angles with respect to pedal position change were obtained. But their differences were very small. For example, the average differences in hip, knee and ankle flexion–extension angles between imposed and less-constrained configurations were respectively about 1.4, 1.1 and 4.1 degrees at the start of depression, and 2.8, 2 and 3.9 degrees at the end (Table 6). Considering the kinematic redundancy of the body with respect to the task, a person can adopt more than one posture for a same pedal position. As only the tangential component of foot force is imposed by pedal resistance, two other components are not totally fixed, thus allowing a person to adopt different foot force control strategies. Thus, different joint torques can be obtained for a same body posture depending on foot force direction. For example, older participants seemed to adopt a foot force control reducing hip torque, whereas younger persons preferred more reducing knee joint torque. Therefore, kinematic and dynamic motion simulations should be experimentally validated before using any assessment criterion based on motion-related parameters. In summary, digital human model is a useful tool for analysing task-related motions and understanding possible causes of discomfort. But, its use as a prediction tool for optimising a product design requires experimentally validated simulation algorithms.

There are several limitations of the present study that we would like to point out. Firstly, though six pedal configurations were selected covering a large range of existing clutch pedal designs, only their location were studied in the present study. Other factors like pedal resistance and their interactions with pedal location were not investigated. Secondly clutch pedal design may be critical in case of the long repetition of clutching movements, in a traffic jam or during an urban journey. Under the current experimental conditions, subjects were asked to assess a pedal configuration without any real task associated. Only the discomfort related to the clutching movement was investigated, not the task associated with the movement. More realistic experimental conditions should be encouraged in future. Finally, it should be noted that the experiment tests lasted about 4.5 h. There might be an effect of fatigue on movement and discomfort perception. Thanks to the randomisation of trial order, fatigue effect should be avoided.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

By comparing six existing pedal configurations and corresponding freely adjusted ones, results showed that pedal position was adjusted in all three directions to ensure a good starting pedal position, which allowed a less flexed ankle. Pedal position adjustment seemed not motivated by reducing joint torque though discomfort ratings were found significantly correlated with knee and ankle torques at the end of depression. In addition to the results for further improvement of clutch pedal location, the present work also illustrates that the less-constrained motion concept is helpful for a better understanding of people preference and useful for identifying motion-related biomechanical parameters to be considered for defining assessment criteria.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under grant agreement n°218525.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

