@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effect of coating over the handle of a drill machine on vibration transmissibility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Vibration levels at the surface of handle of drill machine were achieved using coating instead of gloves.


                        
                        
                           
                           Commonly available coatings of low cost.


                        
                        
                           
                           Measuring the rms vibrations at surface of handle and wrist.


                        
                        
                           
                           Vibration transmissibility was calculated for low cost coating materials.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Coating

Vibration transmissibility

Work related musculoskeletal disorders

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study was to see the effect of different coatings on the handle of hand-held drilling machines. Out of five different handles chosen for this study, including one handle uncoated. Root mean square (rms) values of the vibration levels (acceleration) were recorded at the surface of handle and wrist of the operators. Results showed that maximum vibrations were reduced by coating of handle coated with rubber sheet and Rexene (H4) followed by handle coated with cotton sandwiched between jeans cloth (H5). Equivalent vibrations transmitted through coating of handles coated with sponge and velvet (H2) and jute and cotton (H3) were of almost same magnitude and these two coated handles were able to reduce least vibration transmitted. Transmissibility of vibrations along dominant (Z) direction was analyzed using ANOVA. Results showed that coating on handles significantly affected vibration transmitted in Z direction. Vibration transmissibility ratios were found to be 0.354, 0.571, 0.408, 0.4326, and 0.3555 for handles H1, H2, H3, H4 and H5 respectively.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Wide use of hand-held vibrating tools is one of the most important reasons for transmitting vibrations from these tools to the hands, arms and shoulders of the operators. It causes discomfort to the operator and results in early fatigue. When such fatigue prevails over a period of months and years, they may cause physical, physiological and musculoskeletal disorders (Waersted and Westgaard, 1991; Buckle, 1997; Hagberg, 2002). The ill effects of the prolonged exposure to hand–arm vibration on the operators have been known for a long time and the occupational health disorders are referred to as ‘vibration-induced white finger (VWF)’ or ‘hand–arm vibration syndrome (HAVS)’ (Taylor and Pelmear, 1975; Hellstrom and Lange Andersen, 1972; Griffin, 1996). For almost a century, workers operating vibration tools on the job have complained symptoms resembling Raynaud's disease. These complaints were related to episodic numbness and tingling of the fingers, episodic blanching of the fingers, the so-called “Vibration-induced White Finger” (VWF) or HAVS (Palmer et al., 2000; Hubbard et al., 2004; Bylund et al., 2002; Weir and Lander, 2005). Many studies have revealed that the workers were not aware of the level of vibration transmitted to hand (Margarita et al., 2008; Hao et al., 2011) whereas in some studies self-reported exposure time estimates were found to be more than actual direct observation estimates (McCallig et al., 2010).

The percentage of workers exposed to hand tool vibration is quite high all over the world. Even in advanced countries like Germany, France, Spain and Finland the percentage varies from 4.6 to 10.9 (Eashw, 2008). The prevalence of exposure was found dominated in construction (63% workers), manufacturing and mining (44%) and agriculture and fishing (38%). In construction industry use of vibratory hand tools is of great concern (DiDomenicoa and Nussbaumb, 2008). Hand–Arm Vibration Syndrome (HAVS) remains a significant occupational health problem as disease symptoms continue to occur even when vibration exposure levels believed to incur low risks. Burström et al. (2004) studied metal workers where tools produced low vibratory exposures with frequency-weighted accelerations between 2.1 and 2.5 m/s2 but the prevalence of vascular (39%) and neurological symptoms (47%) still existed, with the vascular incidence rate noticed as 24.2 cases per 1000 exposure years.

To have concern about these issues, it is important to know about hand systems response with respect to exposure to vibration. According to biomechanics, the human hand is a very sophisticated and flexible structure. The Biodynamic response distributed on the fingers is very different from that distributed on the palm of the hand (Dong et al., 2005). Therefore, the energy transmission and absorption at these two parts of the hand could also generally be very different (Dong et al., 2004). Because the transmitted vibration is likely to be more closely associated with the vibration-induced health effects, it is important to characterize and understand the transmitted vibration. Whereas the vibration transmissibility in the hand–arm system excited from a single-axis vibration exciter has been studied in controlled laboratory conditions by many researchers (e.g., Reynolds and Angevine, 1977; Pyykkö et al., 1976; Gurram et al., 1994; Sörensson and Lundström, 1992, Marcotte et al., 2005; Dong et al., 2006a,b), the characteristics of vibration transmissibility, especially those under real working conditions, have not been sufficiently investigated. However little information on the vibration transmitted to the hand–arm system during the operations of drilling machines is available in literature.

Although the relationship between such disorders and physical characteristics of vibration (frequency, magnitude and direction) is not yet known completely, it is generally agreed that onset of these disorders can be reduced through a reduction in magnitude of vibration transmitted to the hand. It is often recommended that the handle surface should be smooth and slightly compressible (Konz 1990; Mital and Kilbom, 1992b). The arguments for this recommendation are that it is easier on the hand, it distributes the surface pressure more evenly in the hand and also that it is vibration attenuating, compared with an incompressible material. Apart from this vibrations transmitted to hand arm caused by power tools also vary for different postures of hand (Joshi et al., 2012). When studying handle design it is of great importance to have reliable and relevant information regarding all aspects of the handle. Handle is main part of the power tools through which vibrations are transmitted in human body. Hence to reduce risk factors associated with hand arm vibration, it is necessary to improve the handle design so that vibration transmitted could be reduced. Reducing the magnitude of the vibration transmitted from a tool to the hand has been viewed as a potential effective approach to prevent hand–arm vibration syndrome (Griffin, 1990; Pelmear and Wasserman, 1998; Cherng et al., 2009; Morioka and Griffin, 2009; Mallick, 2010). There are two simple ways of reducing vibrations transmitted from power tools to the hands. One is to use gloves and second one is to use coating on the handles through which vibrations are transmitted to hands.

The use of gloves has been demonstrated to have both positive and negative influences on hand exertion. Wearing gloves reduces hand movement and dexterity, and hence increases the performance time needed to complete the task (Plummer et al., 1985; Bellingar and Slocum, 1993; Bensel, 1993; Muralidhar and Bishu, 1994). Some studies reported that wearing gloves reduces the grip force as compared with the barehanded condition (Sudhakar et al., 1988; Wang, 1991; Hallbeck and McMullin, 1993; Shih et al., 1995). Furthermore, the vibration energy transmitted to and absorbed by the hand–arm system results in relative compression and extension of tissues (Reynolds, 1977). The results of gloves influencing the hand-transmitted vibration reported in published reports are varied. When operating a pneumatic chipping hammer, Goel and Rim (1987) indicated that the use of leather, Porton padded and Sorbothane padded gloves, all reduce hand-transmitted vibration as compared with the barehanded condition. On the other hand, the report of Gurram et al. (1994) revealed that the gloves do not yield an effective attenuation of hand-transmitted vibration caused by hand-held powered tools. Most of commercially available antivibration gloves did not attenuate vibrations below 100 Hz (Sampson and Van Niekerk, 2003) and only reduce high frequency vibrations (Smutz et al., 2002). In case of gloves vibration perception at different location on the hand arm system could vary (Dong et al., 2010a,b) indicating effectiveness of antivibration gloves to be location oriented.

Another important approach is coating using damping materials on tool handle that can be used for preventing or reducing the amount of vibration transmitted to hand from the power tools. Some of the problems associated with gloves may be eliminated by using coating on the handle. But the materials which are used to reduce vibrations are of very high cost. In countries like India contractors are not ready to use expensive tools. Therefore task is really challenging in developing and underdeveloped countries to find cheaper ways to reduce problems due to hand-transmitted vibrations. Hence it is important to develop coatings which are relatively cheap so that these can be used in developing and underdeveloped countries to overcome the workers problems as in these countries even the laws are not so strict regarding compensation and other facilities for workers. In the present study different coatings were used on the handle and their effect on the vibration transmitted at the hand and wrist was investigated.

@&#METHOD@&#

Vibrations are transmitted from power tools to the hands of operators. The transfer of vibrations from machine to operators can be reduced either by wearing gloves or by providing coating on the surface of handle. Coating of handle is preferable over wearing gloves as these are integrated with machine itself and overcome many problems associated with gloves. Isolation of vibration was done in this experiment by coating the handle with some of very common materials easily available at a very less cost. Hence this experiment was to investigate the effect of different coating materials on the amount of vibration transmitted to the hand of operators.

Five male participants (Right handed college students) volunteered to participate in this experiment. All were healthy with no history of neuromuscular or vascular disorders. The subjects showed their interest to voluntarily participate in the study. Their consent was taken prior to start of the experiment. The mean age, mean height and mean mass of the subjects were found to be 23.5 years, 167.69 cm, and 64.8 kg respectively.

Five wooden handles were prepared in the carpentry shop of the college. The reason for choosing wood as material for making handle was its ease of manufacturing, good strength and capability of damping vibrations transmitted through it. Moreover it was possible to attach and remove the handles as per the requirement of experiments performed. One handle was kept bare whereas other four were coated with different materials commonly available as shown in Table 1
                        . Major properties considered for selecting material were vibration damping, comfortable in holding, long life, cheap and easy availability.

These materials were coated in such a manner that the final diameter after coating was 45 mm for all the coated handles as shown in Fig. 1
                        . Uncoated handle was also of same diameter. The handles were having a coating layer of 3 mm. From a pilot experiment done on different type of coating materials; it was found that all selected materials used for coating in the present study were supposed to reduce the level of vibrations transmitted to hands. H2 handle which was coated with sponge and velvet was softer in holding too.

The hand arm vibration measurement procedure was followed as described in ISO5349 (2001). The vibration levels were recorded using the LABVIEW code written in Version 8.6 to record in each of the directions (X, Y, and Z). The sampling rate was 1024 per second. That was made possible due to the interfacing of the triaxial transducer (Model: SEN04/F-CBL, Make: PCB Piezotronics Ltd.) through NI USB-9234 card to HP laptop (Core 2 duo Processor based). The ISO standard describes four ways to fix accelerometers to tool handle. These are screwing, gluing, using hose clip connectors and using hand tool adapters. Hand tool adapter was used in present study to measure vibration at tool handle. The weight of the accelerometer significantly affects the magnitude of vibration at the hand–arm system (Gurram et al., 1994). NIOSH (1989) has recommended the weight of the accelerometer to be less than 5 g and the total weight of the accelerometer and adapter to be less than 20 g to reduce measurement errors and to increase accuracy. A lightweight miniature accelerometer was used in the present study for measurement of vibration transmissibility. For measuring vibration at wrist the accelerometer was attached to the wrist by a light weighted strip wrapped over wrist and accelerometer as shown in Fig. 2
                        .

The details of the connections and recording for a participant are shown in Fig. 2. The coordinate axes for vibration recordings were inline with the guidelines of ISO5349-1086.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

The task of drilling in a cast iron block was chosen to study the vibration passed to the operators from the hand-held drilling machine. As the vibrations are transmitted from drilling machine through handle, five handles were considered. Four handles of which were having different types of coating and one handle was without any type of coating. The feed force (push force) was kept constant at 60 ± 5 N during the experiment as variation of feed force would have altered the amount of vibration transmitted to handle of operator because transmissibility is significantly dependent on grip force (Gurram et al., 1994). Different handles were considered as independent parameter and measurement of vibration at two positions were considered as dependent parameter. Fixing of handle on drilling machine as well as participants performing drilling operation was randomized to avoid ordering effect. For each participant 10 recording of vibrations (5 different handles × two positions) were made for duration of 30 s in each case.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The subject sat on the stool as shown in Fig. 2. The stool was having an arrangement to lower or raise it through screw. Hence height of the stool could be lowered or raised as per the requirement of the experimenter so that posture for the arm of the participants did not change with participants. The upper arm was kept vertical without abduction, forearm horizontal with elbow flexed at 90° throughout the session. The participants were asked to drill the hole in an iron block fixed in the experimental rig with constant feed force of 60 N (±5 N). The rig was prepared in the college workshop and it had a provision of fixing the work piece in it along with a mechanism to measure the feed force applied on the work piece through a spring balance. As it was not possible to maintain exactly 60 N feed force by every participant a variation of 5 N in either side was considered acceptable to take into account human errors and other variations. As soon as the feed force varied the given range there was a provision to inform the participant, moreover he could also see the level of feed force applied through the pointer marked on helical spring. Prior to start of the experiment the participant was asked to have a trial of drilling with required feed force so that he became accustomed to the task. One of the five fabricated handles was screwed to the drill machine and the participants were asked to drill in random order for 40 s in each case. Measurement of vibration started after 5 s of the beginning of drilling task. Vibrations were measured for 30 s in each case. Vibrations were measured at surface of handle and at the wrist of the participant for each type of handle using a triaxial accelerometer. For measuring vibrations at the surface of handle, an adapter was used over which accelerometer was fastened. This adapter was held in between surface of handle and middle finger where vibrations were measured. Vibrations at wrist were measured by keeping the accelerometer at wrist and fastening it over wrist through a strap wrapped over it as shown in Fig. 2 (as per ISO5349-2).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The vibrations at the surface of the handles and the wrist of operators were recorded for different conditions along X, Y and Z directions. The vibrations were recorded at a sample rate of 1024 per second. Frames were decided by selecting 256 sample readings and clubbing them in one frame and thus 120 frames were made in data recorded for 30 s. Sample graph between one sided power spectral density and frequency, frequency of occurrence and vibration amplitude, Root mean square (rms) value and number of frames, amplitude and time are shown in Figs. 3–6
                     
                     
                     
                     .

The data were recorded at a rate of 1024 samples per second. From these data equivalent vibrations were calculated. The recorded data were analyzed further.

Values of equivalent rms vibrations for different handles along with the transmissibility of coating materials are summarized in Table 2
                        . Vibration transmissibility was found to be least in H4 handle, coating of which was made of rubber sheets with Rexene covering.

It was found that all the coating materials were able to reduce vibrations. A box plot of vibrations recorded at the surface of different handles is shown in Fig. 7
                        .

It was observed from recorded vibrations that the magnitude of vibration on the surface of handle was maximum when bare handle was used. As the coating was provided on the handle the vibration level reduced considerably due to isolation of vibrations. It is evident from Fig. 7 that maximum vibrations are reduced by coating of handle H4 (coated with rubber sheet and Rexene) followed by handle H5. Equivalent vibrations transmitted through coating of handles H2 and H3 were of almost same magnitude and these two coated handles were able to reduce least vibration transmitted.

Vibrations are transmitted to arm from hand. Some of the vibrations are absorbed by hand which was evident from the rms value of vibrations recorded at wrist. In each case vibrations reaching at wrist were significantly less than the vibrations measured at the surface of the handle. A box plot of rms value of vibrations recorded at the wrist of participants is shown in Fig. 8
                        .

From the box plot of vibrations measured at the wrist for different type of handles it was found that least rms vibrations were recorded at the wrist when handles H4 and H5 were used. In case of bare handle maximum vibrations were observed. Vibrations recorded at wrist were found to be less with handle H3 as compared to handle H2.

A comparative value of vibrations recorded at surface of handle and the wrist of operators was shown in Fig. 9
                        . The magnitude of vibrations recorded at the surface of bare handle (uncoated handle) was maximum and at surface of handle H4 its value was found minimum. It was evident from the graph (Fig. 9) that vibrations were maximum at the wrist when bare handle was used. Vibrations absorbed by hand in case of bare handle were found to be maximum which would obviously cause more discomfort to operators of this type of handle. Vibration transmissibility of hand was calculated by finding the ratio of rms equivalent vibrations at the wrist of participants and surface of the handle. The values of vibration transmissibility of hand were found to be 0.354, 0.571, 0.408, 0.4326, and 0.3555 for handles H1, H2, H3, H4 and H5 respectively. Although the transmissibility of vibrations for each case should be same because same participants were involved in each case but the difference was observed which might be due to different coupling forces used by participants while using different handles. More over wrist might not be straight all the time of experimentation. These results indicate that about 60–65% vibrations are absorbed by human hand. If the amount of vibration is more at the surface of handle more vibrations are absorbed by human beings using vibrating tools.

As Z direction was dominant hence it was selected for detailed study as per ISO5349-1 for hand-transmitted vibrations. Data obtained for vibration transmitted and power density at the surface of handle in Z direction for various type of handles are presented in Table 3
                        .

It was observed that the vibration transmitted at the surface of handle was maximum in H1 handle whereas the vibrations transmitted at the surface of H5 handle were minimum, in Z direction. Results of ANOVA for vibration transmitted in Z direction for different handles are presented in Table 4
                        . These results showed that the vibration transmitted in Z direction are significantly different for different type of handle coatings as p < 0.001.

A graph for vibrations transmitted in Z direction with 95% confidence interval was plotted for different coatings of handle (Fig. 10
                        ). These rms value of vibrations recorded at the surface of handle for different coatings were found to be significantly different (p < 0.001). When bare handle was used maximum vibrations were recorded at the surface but the level of vibrations reduced significantly by applying various types of coatings at the surface of handle. All the coatings reduced vibrations considerably. On the basis of vibration transmitted at the surface of coated handles it could be concluded that coating of H5 handle isolated maximum vibrations followed by H4, H3 and H2 handles.

The vibrations recorded at wrist along Z direction are summarized in Table 5
                        . The results indicated that maximum vibrations were recorded in case of H1 (bare handle) whereas minimum vibrations were found in H5 handle. ANOVA results shown in Table 6
                         indicated that handle coatings significantly affected the vibrations at wrist along Z direction. Vibrations were reduced considerably as compared to vibration at surface of handle, indicating absorption of vibration by hand of operators in this direction. Fig. 11
                         shows the bar graph of vibrations in Z direction with 95% confidence interval for different handles.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Vibrations were reduced by coating provided over the handles as noted in the present results. The value of vibration transmitted was least in case of handle H4 (coated with rubber sheet and Rexene) indicating better performance on the basis of vibration transmitted. Rubber was also found suitable in reducing vibrations in power tillers out of various interventions of different materials used in the study (Chaturvedi et al., 2012). Handles H2 and H3 showed almost similar magnitude of vibration transmitted indicating that both type of coating produced almost similar results, when rms value of vibration transmitted was considered. Handle H2 was coated with sponge and velvet whereas handle H3 was coated with jute and cotton. H4 handle which absorbed maximum vibration was having a covering of rubber sheets and Rexene. Some of the researchers have recommended that the handle surface should be smooth and slightly compressible (Konz, 1990; Mital and Kilbom, 1992b). The arguments for this recommendation are that it is easier on the hand, it distributes the surface pressure more evenly in the hand and also that it is vibration attenuating, compared with an incompressible material. The more even pressure distribution was documented (Fellows and Freivalds, 1991). However, compressible/resilient materials on the handle have not been shown to significantly reduce vibrations (Radwin and Haney, 1996).

In the present study vibration transmitted along Z direction was analyzed separately in detail due to the reason that Z direction was dominant direction. Due to this reason some of researchers have studied vibration transmitted in this dominant direction (Marcotte et al., 2005; Aldien et al., 2006; Dong et al., 2006a,b). The magnitude of rms vibration was found maximum in Z direction followed by X direction. In case of Y direction the value of rms vibration was found least. The results of the study also veliditated that the vibration transmitted through the coating were significantly affected in this direction, whereas vibrations transmitted along Y direction were not significantly different for different coated handles. It might be due to the reason that grip force was provided in a direction which was perpendicular to the direction of vibration measured. The feed force applied was also not in Y direction, hence there was no significant effect in vibration transmitted in this direction. Although measurement of vibration was done using ISO5349-2 standard but recordings may be highly depending on many other factors including the operators' technique, the condition of work equipment, the material being processed and the measurement methods. However the parameters affecting the magnitude of vibrations were controlled in present study but participants were college students who did not have expertise in using hand drill machines. Moreover students of same age group are likely to provide different results as compared to true working population. Also with time the drill bit used lost its sharpness which might have influenced the level of vibrations. Theoretically isolation behaviour of coatings should also be influenced by the biodynamic properties of hand arm system apart from the coating material used. Human anthropometrics influences the biodynamic properties of hand arm system (Burstrom, 1997) and it would be easy to use hand and arm sizes as measure to assess individual effect. However, it is not necessary that biodynamic properties of hand only depends on anthropometric measure because tissues and bones in the system, coupling condition of hand tool, location as well as orientation are important.

The equivalent vibrations transmitted to hand were least in handle H4 followed by handle H5, but the value of vibrations recorded at the wrist was found least in case of handle H5 followed by handle H4.This might be due to individual factors of the participants. As individual factors are very important in vibration transmitted through hand, the nature of results of vibration transmitted through hand were found to be different at wrist along Z direction, as compared to vibration transmitted through coating and measured at the surface of handle. It was observed that magnitude of vibration reduced by coating in handle H5 was maximum in Z direction. The magnitude of vibrations was so less that vibrations were not further reduced at wrist. It indicated that least vibrations were absorbed by hand of operator in this direction. Probably it is due to the reason that if fewer vibrations are reaching at surface of hand vibrations absorbed by hand also decreased. Other factors like hand size, contact forces and stiffness are also important. A person with large hand size will likely have a thicker layer of soft palm tissues than would a person with small hand. Vibrations are influenced by stiffness of palm contact. The value of stiffness of a large hand under similar effective palm force may be lower than that exhibited by a smaller hand. Different participants are likely to have mechanical properties in their soft tissues and joints. The biodynamic response distribution on fingers is very different from that of the palm of the hand (Dong et al., 2005). Therefore the amount of energy transmitted and absorbed at these parts of the hand could also be different (Dong et al., 2004).

Handles used in the present study were all wooden having coating of different materials over them. Although in most of the drill machines the handle used are made up of either metal or polymers. Coating applied over wooden handle may probably show difference in behaviour if applied over metallic or plastic handles. Application of wood in handles may itself reduce vibration level at surface of handle due to damping properties of wood. However the nature of level of vibrations reduced by coating, over different kind of materials should not alter as the properties of coating will not change, whatsoever material is used in handles. In the present study variability of vibration transmissibility was also not found to be individual specific. Contradictory to this several studies (Paddan and Griffin, 1997; O'Boyle, 2001; Hewitt, 2002) had reported that there were large variations in the glove vibration transmissibility data obtained from different subjects suggesting that the effectiveness of gloves was also individual specific. The inter-subject variability of glove transmissibility may cause some difficulties when evaluating the performance of gloves using the ISO standardized test method. A glove may be classified as a true “antivibration glove” when tested with some subjects, but not with other subjects (Paddan and Griffin, 2001). However results of present experiment showed that each type of coatings was capable of reducing vibration for all participants, although level of vibration absorbed varied with participants. There might be a difference in individuals absorbing ability but that differences found in the present results were not very different for individuals participated in this experiment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Coating on handles of a hand-held vibrating tool is an effective way of reducing vibrations. Out of the four different coatings studied, handle coated with rubber sheets and Rexene absorbed maximum vibrations and transmitted least vibrations at hand. This coating was able to reduce rms value of vibrations by 59%. Vibrations transmitted in dominant direction (Z direction) were significantly different for various coatings used but these were not significantly different in Y direction. Vibrations absorbed by hand were maximum in case of bare handle (handle without coating). Vibrations transmitted from surface of handle to wrist of operators were found to be 35% in two cases; 40, 43 and 57% in other three cases indicating that almost 60% vibrations were absorbed by fingers and palm of the operators. In present study the vibrations transmitted at wrist were considered without considering the individual effect of fingers and palm. This effect could be considered in further studies.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was supported by the grant of All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE, New Delhi) Reference No. F/No 8023/BOR/RID/RPS-23/2008-09.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

