@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The combined effect of physical, psychosocial/organisational and/or environmental risk factors on the presence of work-related musculoskeletal symptoms and its consequences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Combined exposure to poor physical and poor psychosocial factors increased the odds of MSS.


                        
                        
                           
                           This combination also increased the odds of reduced activities and absenteeism due to MSS.


                        
                        
                           
                           Favourable psychosocial conditions reduced the odds of MSS due to poor physical conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           To reduce MSS and its consequences, employers need to adopt a multifaceted approach.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Back pain

Interaction

Work stress

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study assessed the combined effect of physical and psychosocial/organisational and/or environmental factors on the presence of musculoskeletal symptoms (MSS) and its consequences (reduced activities and absenteeism due to MSS) in a random sample of 3003 workers in New Zealand. By telephone interview, participants reported their current workplace exposures and MSS (neck/shoulder, arm/elbow, wrist and low back) and its consequences. Data were analysed using multivariable logistic regression. Combined exposure to physical and psychosocial/organisational and/or environmental factors increased the odds of MSS in the neck/shoulder (OR 3.14, 95% CI 1.79–5.52), arms/elbow regions (OR 4.14, 95% CI 2.21–7.76) and low back (OR 1.74, 95% CI 1.28–2.37) and its consequences, i.e. reduced activities due to neck/shoulder symptoms (OR 5.45, 95% CI 2.28–13.00), absenteeism due to neck/shoulder symptoms (OR 5.19, 95% CI 2.24–12.01) and absenteeism due to low back symptoms (OR 4.37, 95% CI 2.92–6.53). In contrast, favourable psychosocial/organisational work conditions reduced the odds of wrist symptoms due to poor physical work conditions (OR 2.19, 95% CI 1.44–3.34). We conclude that to reduce MSS and its consequences, employers need to adopt a multifaceted approach: concentrate on improving physical conditions as well as the psychosocial/organisational and environmental aspects of the working environment.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Musculoskeletal symptoms (MSS) are common among general and working populations. They are most prevalent in the low back, followed by the neck or shoulder (Holmström and Engholm, 2003; Lei et al., 2005; Palliser et al., 2005; Scuffham et al., 2010; Widanarko et al., 2011; Wijnhoven et al., 2006), or upper extremities (Choobineh et al., 2007; Leroux et al., 2005).

Physical work factors have a major role in the development of MSS, such as awkward posture (Ariëns et al., 2000; Bernard, 1997; Heneweer et al., 2011; Lotters et al., 2003; NRC & IOM, 2001), repetitive movements (Bernard, 1997; Devereux et al., 2004), manual material handling (Bernard, 1997; Lotters et al., 2003; NRC & IOM, 2001) and vibration (Bernard, 1997; Lotters et al., 2003; NRC & IOM, 2001). However, during the last two decades, a number of studies and systematic reviews have shown that psychosocial risk factors also play a role in the development of MSS. These include high job strain (Ijzelenberg et al., 2004), high psychological demands (Ariëns et al., 2001; Hooftman et al., 2009; Ijzelenberg et al., 2004), low decision latitude (Bernard, 1997; Bongers et al., 1993), low social support (Ariëns et al., 2001; Bernard, 1997; Bongers et al., 1993; Hoogendoorn et al., 2000), job dissatisfaction (Bernard, 1997; Hoogendoorn et al., 2000; Linton, 2001; Lotters et al., 2003), effort-reward imbalance (Rugulies and Krause, 2008) and high work stress (Linton, 2000, 2001). As a result, some recent studies (Andersen et al., 2003; Engholm and Holmström, 2005; Hooftman et al., 2009; Jensen et al., 2012; Krause et al., 2010; Widanarko et al., 2012a) have included both physical and psychosocial factors as candidate exposure variables in multivariate models developed to estimate risk factors for MSS.

Theoretical models by Davis and Heaney (2000), Karsh (2006) and Widanarko et al. (2013) indicate that both physical and psychosocial factors may independently influence MSS and that both factors may interact. While this is a biologically plausible hypothesis, few studies have quantified the combined effect of these factors on MSS risk (Huang et al., 2003; Lapointe et al., 2009; Linton, 2005; Waters et al., 2007, 2011). To date, most studies have shown that the risk of MSS due to combination of physical and psychosocial factors is greater than the risk of MSS when a single factor is present (Devereux et al., 2004, 1999, 2002; Huang et al., 2003; Lapointe et al., 2009; Östergren et al., 2005; Vandergrift et al., 2012; Wahlstrom et al., 2004; Waters et al., 2007, 2011; Widanarko, 2013). For example, Huang et al. (2003) found that the combination of high biomechanical pressure and time pressure significantly increased the risk of low back symptoms (LBS) (odds ratio (OR) 2.61, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.39–4.91) and upper extremities symptoms (OR 2.90, 95% CI 1.49–5.66), whereas the risk of LBS or upper extremities symptoms due to exposed to single exposure (either biomechanical pressure or time pressure) was between 0.46 and 1.05. Similarly, Devereux et al. (2004), in a 15-month cohort study of the general working population in the UK showed that those exposed to both high physical and psychosocial risk factors had the highest risk of LBS (OR 2.83, 95% CI 1.30–6.18), neck symptoms (OR 2.19, 95% CI 1.33–3.61), elbow/forearms symptoms (OR 1.87, 95% CI 1.02–3.46), and wrist symptoms (WS) (OR 3.14, 95% CI 1.76–5.61) compared with those exposed to a single exposure.

Whilst MSS per se may seriously impact the health and productivity of employees and employers, its consequences (reduced activities and absenteeism) reflect the real/practical impact of the problem. The 12-month period prevalence of reduced activities due to MSS has been estimated to be anywhere between 4% and 42% (Chen et al., 2005; Scuffham et al., 2010; Widanarko et al., 2012b). It is around 1–36% for absenteeism due to MSS (Alexopoulos et al., 2008; Bovenzi and Betta, 1994; Bovenzi et al., 2002; Cunningham et al., 2006; Ghaffari et al., 2006; Ijzelenberg et al., 2004; Matsudaira et al., 2011; Scuffham et al., 2010; Widanarko et al., 2012b). To the best of the authors' knowledge, very few studies (Fernandes et al., 2009; Lapointe et al., 2009; Thorbjörnsson et al., 2000) have examined the combined effect of risk factors at work for MSS consequences. The few studies that have attempted to do so have specifically examined the combined effect on MSS consequences and found that the combination of poor posture and job strain significantly increased the risk of reduced activities due to LBS (OR 5.51, 95% CI 2.33–13.03) and reduced activities due to neck/shoulder symptoms (NSS) (OR 3.38, 95% CI 1.58–7.22) among females (Lapointe et al., 2009). Thorbjörnsson et al. (2000) examined the combined effect of physical and psychosocial risk factors on absenteeism due to LBS and reported that exposure to both increased the risk of absenteeism due to LBS. Although environmental factors may play a role in the occurrence of MSS and absenteeism due to MSS (Harkness et al., 2003; Piedrahita et al., 2004; Widanarko et al., 2012b), none of the studies cited above included environmental factors in their analyses.

With this background, the objective of this study was to quantify the combined effect of physical and psychosocial/organisational and/or environmental factors for MSS and its consequences (reduced activities and absenteeism due to MSS) for the body regions: neck/shoulder; arm/elbow; wrist; low back.

@&#METHODS@&#

This study was part of a recent large national survey of self-reported current occupational exposures, workplace practices and occupational ill-health which has been described in detail elsewhere (Eng et al., 2010). Ten thousand potential participants aged 20–64 years randomly selected from the New Zealand Electoral Roll were invited by mail to have a telephone interview (Eng et al., 2010). Of 10,000 mail-outs, 1209 were returned to sender, 2719 did not reply to the three invitation letters and could not be contacted by phone, 637 did not meet the study eligibility criteria (i.e. the addressee either no longer lived or never worked in New Zealand, or was deceased) and 2425 refused to take part. Seven questionnaires were missing and therefore excluded. Thus, 3003 people were interviewed as the study participants. Ethics approval for the study was obtained from the Massey University Human Ethics Committee (WGTN 13/133).

Information on demographic characteristics (including gender and age), lifetime work history, current self-reported physical, psychosocial/organisational, and environmental exposures, and various health conditions including MSS and its consequences was obtained during the telephone interviews (Eng et al., 2010).

A modified version of the Nordic Musculoskeletal Questionnaire (Kuorinka et al., 1987) was used to gather information on MSS in the neck, shoulders, arms, elbows, wrists/hands and low back regions. A yes/no response indicated if in the last 12 months the participant had trouble (musculoskeletal aches, pains, discomfort, or numbness) in those regions, if normal activities (e.g. housework, hobbies, gardening) were prevented due to that trouble (reduced activities) and if they had been absent from work due to that trouble (absenteeism).

Physical exposures were assessed by asking participants to estimate how much working time (never, quarter, half, three quarters or full time) during their work activities involved any of these situations: awkward or tiring positions, awkward grip or hand movements, lifting, carrying out repetitive tasks, working at very high speed, standing, sitting, or using tools that vibrate.

Psychosocial/organisational exposures in their current working place were assessed using a modified version of the job content questionnaire (Karasek et al., 1998) with a 5-point Likert scale (very satisfied, satisfied, neutral, dissatisfied and very dissatisfied). Cronbach's alphas were computed for each of the component items for each of the exposure assessments to quantify internal consistency or reliability. Participants were asked about: contact and cooperation with management (contact and co-operation between yourself and senior management, the help and support given to you by your colleagues, the help and support given to you by your supervisor, co-operation among you and your fellow workers, with Cronbach's alpha = 0.75); level and difficulty of work (the level of enjoyment of your work, the level of difficulty of work, the level of mental demands of work, with Cronbach's alpha = 0.65); hours of work (the total number of hours worked per week and the times of the day when you are asked to work, with Cronbach's alpha = 0.52) and; work organisation (the way work is organised, details of the way the work organisation is run, and work as a whole, with Cronbach's alpha = 0.61). An additional question on perceived job stress asked “In general, how do you find your job?” with a 5-point Likert scale for the response categories as follows: not at all stressful, mildly stressful, moderately stressful, very stressful and extremely stressful (Smith et al., 2000). Participants were also asked to estimate the fraction of total work time (never, quarter, half, three quarters or full time) that the job involved boring work or working to tight deadlines.

Environmental exposures were assessed by asking participants to estimate how much of their working time (never, quarter, half, three quarters or full time) was spent in a cold/damp environment, a hot/warm environment, working outside, or exposed to loud noise.

Analysis of the data based on the five response categories for physical, psychosocial/organisational and environmental exposure showed clear trends in MSS prevalence. Low numbers of cases in each of the strata meant that the confidence intervals around the MSS prevalence estimates were unreasonably large. Therefore the 5-point categories were collapsed into three. For physical factors it was (1s), (2s and 3s) and (4s and 5s). For psychosocial factors it was (1s and 2s), (3s) and (4s and 5s). This approach results in a large numbers of events within each strata but still provides the reader with the opportunity to appreciate the trend in the association between the level of exposure and the outcome. From a practical point of view, the use of 3-point scale categories makes it easier to apply resultant preventive strategies to those who are exposed to less or more than half of working time. This approach also makes it possible to compare directly between the present and other studies, since it is consistent with previous papers that have used the same dataset and/or methods (Scuffham et al., 2010; Widanarko et al., 2012a, b).

Multivariable logistic regression models were developed to quantify the association between each of the explanatory variables and the outcomes (neck/shoulder symptoms (NSS), arm/elbow symptoms (AES), wrist symptoms (WS), and reduced activities due to NSS, AES and WS and absenteeism due to NSS, AES and WS). The associations were estimated by calculating the ORs and their 95% CI (Hosmer and Lemeshow, 2000). The reported strengths of association were adjusted to account for the confounding effect of all explanatory variables (individual, physical, psychosocial/organisational and environmental factors) that were included in the model. Explanatory variables with upper and lower limit of 95% CI above (or below) 1 were interpreted as having a positive (or negative) significant association with the outcome. Analyses were carried out separately for nine outcome definitions (NSS, AES, WS, and reduced activities due to NSS, AES and WS and, absenteeism due to NSS, AES and WS). The findings of risk factors for low back symptoms (LBS) and its consequences (reduced activities and absenteeism) were obtained from our earlier papers (Widanarko et al., 2012a, b) that used the same dataset and a very similar analysis to that of the present paper. In our previous papers ‘age’ was treated as a categorical variable. In addition, unlike our previous papers, the ‘duration of work’ and ‘hours per week’ variables are now included in the present paper since MSS relates to the accumulation of exposure.

To assess the combined effect between physical factors and other risk factors (psychosocial/organisational and/or environmental), physical, psychosocial/organisational and environmental factors that were significantly associated with the outcomes and showed a positive (or negative) dose-response association (Hill, 1965) in the previous analyses were combined. Logistic regression analyses were then conducted to quantify the association between the combination of risk factors and the outcomes, adjusted for gender, age, duration of work and working hours per week. The Hosmer–Lemeshow test was used to assess the fit of the final logistic regression model (Hosmer and Lemeshow, 2000). To assess the discriminatory ability of the logistic regression models Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves were constructed for each model. The area under a ROC curve, which ranges from 0 to 1, provides a measure of the ability of the model to classify those with and without the outcome of interest, with higher values indicative of better discriminatory ability. All statistical analyses were conducted using Stata (StataCorp, 2012).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The overall response rate (the number interviewed as a proportion of the total eligible sample) was 37%. Although the response rate of 37% was typical for this type of survey (Tourangeau, 2004), a major nonresponse bias was not found in this study population (Mannetje et al., 2011). Participants were involved in various occupations: legislator and administrator, professionals, technicians and associate professionals, clerks, service and sales workers, agriculture and fishery workers, trade workers, plant and machine operators and assemblers; and elementary workers. Overall, the sample represents the working population in New Zealand as described in a previous study (Widanarko et al., 2011). Of a total of 3003 participants, 48% were male (n = 1431) and 52% were female (n = 1572). The median age was 45 years (interquartile range 36–54 years), median duration of work in the present job was 5 years (interquartile range 2–11 years) and median working hour per week was 40 h (interquartile range 30–47 h).

Among the 3003 participants, 58% (95% CI 56–60%), 24% (95% CI 22–25%) and 30% (95% CI 28–31%) reported NSS, AES and WS, respectively. Our previous paper reported the prevalence of LBS was 54% (95% CI 52–56%) (Widanarko et al., 2011). The prevalence of reduced activities due to NSS, AES and WS were 15% (95% CI 14–17%), 7% (95% CI 6–8%) and 7% (95% CI 6–8%), respectively. The prevalence of reduced activities due to LBS was reported to be 18% (95% CI 17–20%) (Widanarko et al., 2012b). The prevalence of absenteeism due to NSS was 7% (95% CI 6–8%), whereas the prevalence of absenteeism due to AES and WS was each 3% (95% CI 2–4%). It is reported to be 9% (95% CI 8–10%) for absenteeism due to LBS (Widanarko et al., 2012b).


                        Table 1
                         presents the risk factors for NSS, AES and WS adjusted for gender, age, duration of work, working hour per week, and all explanatory variables. Variables that were associated with outcomes and showed a positive dose-response association are as follows: for NSS -awkward or tiring position, awkward grip or hand movements and work stress; for AES – awkward grip or hand movements, using tools that vibrate and working in a hot or warm environment; for WS – awkward grip or hand movements and level and difficulty of work. Working in a sitting position was a protective factor for WS. In order to quantify the cumulative effect of physical exposure, therefore, those working in a sitting position, as opposed to working with no sitting at all, acted as the reference group in further analysis. Although working in a cold/damp environment appeared to be associated with NSS, it did not show a positive or negative dose-response association, so was not included in further analyses. Our previous study (Widanarko et al., 2012a), that examined risk factors for LBS, used the same dataset and a very similar analytical approach showed that an awkward or tiring position and work stress were significantly associated with LBS for the same study population.


                        Table 2 and 3
                        
                         respectively present the risk factors for reduced activities and absenteeism due to NSS, AES and WS adjusted for gender, age, duration of work, working hour per week, and all explanatory variables. Awkward or tiring position, awkward grip or hand movements, sitting and dissatisfied with hours of work were significant and had a positive dose-response association with reduced activities due to NSS (Table 2). Table 2 also shows that lifting was associated with reduced activities due to NSS, and working at high speed, using tools that vibrate, exposure to loud noise were associated with reduced activities due to WS. No convincing dose-response effect was evident. Only one factor was significantly associated with the outcome with a consistent, positive dose-response effect: tools that vibrate for reduced activities due to AES and awkward grip or hand movements for WS. Lifting was the only factor that was previously reported to have an association with reduced activities due to LBS (Widanarko et al., 2012b).


                        Table 3 presents that awkward or tiring position, work stress and working in a cold/damp environment were significant and had a positive dose-response association with absenteeism due to NSS. Table 3 also shows that only awkward or tiring positions was associated with absenteeism due to AES whereas none of the risk factors were significantly associated with absenteeism due to WS. In our previous study (Widanarko et al., 2012b), awkward or tiring positions and working in a cold/damp environment were associated with absenteeism due to LBS.

The combined effects of work-related risk factors for NSS, AES, WS and LBS are presented in Table 4
                        . In general, the NSS, AES and LBS models showed that the combination of two or more risk factors increased the risk of the outcomes. However, since the psychosocial factor ‘satisfied with the level and difficulty at work’ appears to act as a potential protective factor for WS, the combination of physical (awkward grip and hand movements and working with no sitting at all) and psychosocial factors reduced the odds of WS.


                        Table 5
                         shows the combined effects of work-related risk factors for MSS consequences, i.e. reduced activities due to NSS, absenteeism due to NSS and absenteeism due to LBS. Similar to the models presented in Table 4, the combination of two or more risk factors increased the risk of MSS consequences. Since only single factors were significantly associated with reduced activities due to AES, WS, LBS and absenteeism due to AES (and showed a positive dose-response association), and none of these risk factors were associated with absenteeism due to WS, the present study was unable to assess the combined effect of work-related risk factors for these outcomes.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The results of the multivariate analyses indicate that physical factors are associated with almost all of the outcomes assessed in this study. The analyses indicate that the physical factors involved in each outcome are specific for the various body regions. For example, NSS and LBS and absenteeism due to NSS and LBS were associated with exposure to an awkward or tiring position. This may be related to the non-neutral posture of the spine during working which may increase the force on the tissue of the low back and neck region. Awkward grip or hand movements increased the risk of symptoms in the neck/shoulder, arm/elbow and wrist regions. Considering that the shoulder, arm, elbow and wrist are components of one locomotor unit (upper limb), it makes sense that a non-neutral posture in the upper limb region due to work activities may be associated with symptoms in this region.

Sitting was a risk factor for reduced activities due to NSS but a protective factor for WS. These apparently paradoxical findings may be because those who worked with no sitting at all were more likely exposed to forceful exertion, which has previously been identified as a risk factor for WS (Bernard, 1997), and they had less opportunity to take a rest. These findings could be interpreted as indicating that a way to help reduce MSS and its consequences could be to encourage musculoskeletal ‘mobility’ at work through postural changes such as shifting between sitting and standing, e.g the use of sit/stand workstations and scheduling of rest breaks (i.e. hourly or more frequent), so as to reduce prolonged sitting.

Psychosocial/organisational factors were also associated with the occurrence of MSS. The present study found that work stress was associated with NSS and LBS. There are two plausible ways in which psychosocial factors could influence MSS and its consequences. First, stress can induce muscle tension as part of the body's general defence mechanism, i.e. a nonspecific response of the body to any threat (Selye, 1978). This can act through neuromuscular mechanisms, i.e. the ‘Brussels model’ (Johansson et al., 2003) and ‘Neuromotor Noise Theory’ (Van Galen et al., 2002), and/or overuse of the low-threshold motor units (Hagg, 1991; Sjogaard et al., 2000) due to activation of the sympathetic-adrenal medullary system. It also may reduce blood flow to the muscles (Selye, 1978) which may limit the ability of the body to repair and heal microtrauma in the musculoskeletal system (Carayon et al., 1999). Second, psychosocial/organisational factors can also influence an individual's psychological mood and work behaviour (Carayon et al., 1999). This has implications for the detection of symptoms: individuals who experience stress in their job are more likely to report NSS and LBS. These observations are consistent with other findings in the present study, particularly that dissatisfaction with hours of work was associated with reduced activities due to NSS and work stress was associated with absenteeism due to NSS.

The present study also provides supportive evidence for the hypothesis of Armstrong et al. (1993) that a combination of two known physical risk factors may further increase the risk of MSS and its consequences. For example, for AES, the OR for exposure to ‘awkward or tiring position’ was 1.64 (95% CI 1.30–2.08) and the OR for ‘using vibrating tools’ was 1.98 (95% CI 1.13–2.48). Combining these two risk factors gave a much higher OR of 2.67 (95% CI 1.51–4.72) (Table 4). Similarly, for reduced activities due to NSS, although exposure to a single physical factor was not associated with the outcome, those who were exposed to multiple physical factors had a two-fold increased odds of reduced activities due to NSS (Table 5).

The findings of the present study indicate that physical and psychosocial/organisational factors are related since combined exposure to both of these factors increased the risk of the outcomes of interest. Specifically, combined exposure to both poor physical and poor psychosocial/organisational factors increased the risk of outcomes of interest. This finding is in line with previous studies (Devereux et al., 2004, 1999, 2002; Huang et al., 2003; Lapointe et al., 2009; Östergren et al., 2005; Vandergrift et al., 2012; Wahlstrom et al., 2004). As explained earlier, stress is a nonspecific ‘defence’ response of the body that can help to protect it from threats (Selye, 1978). Part of the defence response is to adopt a protective posture involving a hunched (or curved-back) posture which is associated with increased muscle tension of the musculature of the back. People in a hunched or curved-back curved posture, reflective of a threatened posture, reported higher level of perceived stress or negative mood compared to those who were put in a relaxed position or sitting with an erect back (Briñol et al., 2009; Riskind and Gotay, 1982; Schouwstra and Hoogstraten, 1995). As reported previously, a hunched or curved-back posture was associated with symptoms in the low back or neck/shoulder regions (Andersen et al., 2003; Ariëns et al., 2000; Bernard, 1997; Lotters et al., 2003). ‘Awkward posture’ has also been reported to be associated with perceived job stress (Devereux et al., 2004). It appears that mental stress, as a psychosocial factor, may affect body posture, and vice versa. A laboratory-based study by Marras et al. (2000) in which participants did a lifting task under unstressed and stressed conditions found that psychosocial stress significantly increased the spine loading during lifting activities through alteration in muscle coactivity and trunk kinematics. However, because the present study was cross-sectional, it cannot provide any confirmatory evidence in favour of a cause–effect relationship between these two variables.

There were some different outcomes when individuals were exposed to the combination of poor physical and good psychosocial factors. The OR for WS for those who were exposed to awkward grip or hand movements with no sitting at all was 2.79 (95% CI 1.62–4.79). After combining with a psychosocial factor (satisfied with the level and difficulty of work, OR 0.78 (95% CI 0.60–1.01)) the OR was reduced to 2.19 (95% CI 1.44–3.34). A possible explanation might be that favourable psychosocial work condition may buffer the negative effect of poor physical factor on the risk of MSS. The findings of a longitudinal study among Dutch workers by Joling et al. (2008) support this explanation. Joling et al. (2008) found that among those with high physical workload, those that experienced a poor psychosocial working environment (a low quality of communication) had a higher risk of MSS compared to those who experienced a good psychosocial environment (a high quality of communication). Similar trends were also shown among those with a low physical workload (Joling et al., 2008). Two studies by Torp et al. (1999, 2001) showed that there were positive and significant relationships between psychosocial factors and how mechanics coped with their MSS. The mechanics were more likely to use many coping strategies (e.g. changes in working technique, taking more or longer breaks, or discussing the problem with a colleague and/or health and safety officer) to reduce their MSS if the social support and manager's involvement in health and safety was high.

The effect of environmental factors as an additional exposure to physical (and psychosocial/organisational) factors increased the risk of AES and absenteeism due to LBS and NSS. For example, exposure to physical and environmental factors (working in a cold or damp environment) increased the risk of absenteeism due to LBS and NSS to 4.37 (95% CI 2.92–6.53) and 4.49 (95% CI 2.65–7.61), respectively. Sundelin and Hagberg (1992) reported that exposure to cold environments may trigger people to adopt a hunched posture as a protective behavioural response to cold, which may then activate the muscles in the shoulder and back region and lead to muscle strain and the development of muscle fatigue in these body regions. Cold exposure may also lower the workers' inclinations, attitudes or mood towards working. Similarly, exposure to physical and environmental factors (working in a hot or warm environment) increased the risk of AES to 4.14 (95% CI 2.21–7.76). Working in a hot or warm environment may increase physiological strain, i.e. cause increases in body temperature. This condition may elevate the perceptions of work effort (Schlader et al., 2010) and fatigue (McMorris et al., 2006), which are associated with a voluntarily reduced work intensity and an earlier onset of muscular fatigue or discomfort (Cheuvront et al., 2010). These physical, psychosocial/organisational and environmental exposures at workplaces should be addressed to reduce MSS and most importantly its consequences (reduced activities and absenteeism). For workers who experienced that their activities have been reduced due to MSS, even when they are present at work, they may experience productivity loss. Absenteeism due to MSS may also cause significant productivity loss.

There are two limitations to the present study. First, the cross-sectional design makes it difficult to draw any firm conclusion in relation to causal relations. Longitudinal studies are needed to address this issue in the future. Second, although Balogh et al. (2004) have shown that the self-reported questionnaire method can classify exposed and non-exposed groups, the method has been criticised for not providing accuracy about real exposures. Hence, to ensure the validity and reliability of the questionnaire, future studies need to assess its validity and reliability in small sub-sample groups.

The high correlation (multicollinearity) between explanatory variables may occur when including many variables in a model. This issue was addressed by examining the variance inflation factor (VIF). A previous study that used the same data set as the present study (Widanarko et al., 2012a) reported that the VIFs for all explanatory variables were between 1.2 and 2.9, indicating that the possibility of high multicollinearity was unlikely. For the outcomes (dependent variables), we did not examine this issue. However, we were aware that participants may have found it difficult to differentiate the symptoms between some close body parts. Hence, we combined participant's responses as a single outcome as follow: neck and/or shoulder – neck/shoulder outcome and; arm and/or elbow – arm/elbow outcome. This approach may have reduced the possibility of multicollinearity for the outcomes.

In conclusion, the present study has found that some physical (awkward and tiring position, awkward grip or hand movements, sitting and using vibrating tools), psychosocial/organisational (work stress, level and difficulty of work and hours of work) and environmental (cold/damp and hot/warm environment) factors were independently associated with MSS and its consequences. When these single independent factors were combined, the risk of outcomes of interest changed. Combined exposure to poor physical and poor psychosocial/organisational and/or poor environmental factors increased the risk of MSS (neck/shoulder, arm/elbow and low back) and its consequences. In contrast, favourable psychosocial/organisational work condition reduced the odds of wrist symptoms due to poor physical work conditions. The findings indicate that in order to reduce MSS and its consequences, employers need to adopt a multifaceted approach: concentrate on improving physical conditions (reducing working with awkward and tiring position, awkward grip or hand movements, prolonged sitting and using vibrating tools) as well as the psychosocial/organisational (managing work stress, reducing level and difficulty of work and improving hours of work) and environmental (avoiding working in a cold/damp or hot/warm environment) aspects of the working environment.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We acknowledge funding support from the Joint Research Portfolio of the Health Research Council, Accident Compensation Corporation, and Department of Labour (HRC 04/072) of New Zealand. We would like to thank Tracey Whaanga, Zoe Harding, Cecil Priest, Penelope Whitson, Michaela Skelly, Phoebe Taptiklis, Emma Drummond, Anna McCarty, Natasha Holland, Kelly Gray, Adam Hoskins, Alister Thomson, Jessica Fargher, Cilla Blackwell, Emma Turner, Selena Richards, Kim Crothall, Alice Harding, Joelene Wilkie, Joanne Dow, and Tania McKenzie who conducted the interviews, and Rebecca Jones, Alice Harding, Zoe Harding, Alister Thomson, Chani Tromop van Dalen, Jessica Fargher, Cecil Priest, and Miria Hudson who completed the data entry. We also would like to acknowledge Massey University Research Fund (MURF COB-12-008) for funding support for data analysis and manuscript preparation.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

