@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Is workplace satisfaction associated with self-reported quad bike loss of control events among farm workers in New Zealand?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Two independent samples of farmers surveyed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Count data regression techniques used.


                        
                        
                           
                           Aspects of workplace satisfaction related to quad bike loss-of-control events.


                        
                        
                           
                           Psychological demand, employment status and sex linked with quad bike LCEs.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Agriculture

Quad bike

Loss of control events

Workplace satisfaction

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study investigated whether rural workers who have higher workplace satisfaction are less likely to report quad bike loss of control events (LCEs). Two independent samples of farmers completed a survey regarding LCEs and workplace satisfaction. In the first sample (n = 130) analysis revealed no relationship (p = 0.74) between workplace satisfaction and LCEs but lower rates of LCEs were reported by employees (IRR 0.52, 95%CI 0.31–0.86) compared to self-employed participants. In the second sample (n = 112), workplace satisfaction was weakly related to LCEs (IRR 1.04, 95%CI 1.00, to 1.09) with participants who found their job more psychologically demanding more likely to have had an LCE (IRR 1.14, 95%CI 1.05–1.23). Exploring the role of psychological demands on safety behaviour with respect to quad bike use, may help to address this important safety issue.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Quad bikes are used extensively on New Zealand (NZ) farms for stock work, transport, and towing farm implements (Milosavljevic et al., 2010; Moore, 2007) with an estimated 70 000 to 80 000 in current operation (Carman et al., 2010; Moore, 2007). Use of these vehicles, however, carries some risk of injury. Among NZ rural workers, quad bike incidents cause more than 850 injuries per year and claim an average of five lives (Department-of-Labour, 2010). The cost to the individual, their family, society and the economy as a whole is considerable. In 2009 NZ's nationalised no fault accident insurance scheme, the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC), outlaid more than NZ$7 million on medical, rehabilitation and workers compensation claims related to quad bike incidents (ACC, 2009).

Despite workplace educational interventions from national agencies (Farmsafe, ACC and Department of Labour) the number of reported quad bike injuries and fatalities on NZ farms has not reduced. Recent research identified a considerable number of farm quad bike incidents in NZ are unreported (Milosavljevic et al., 2011) and the true working lifetime prevalence ratesare in excess of 60% (Carman et al., 2010; Milosavljevic et al., 2010). Risk factors associated with quad bike fatality and injury in NZ include vehicle design (Milosavljevic et al., 2010; Moore, 2007), environmental conditions (Basham et al., 2006; Milosavljevic et al., 2010) and personal factors (Milosavljevic et al., 2011; Shulruf and Balemi, 2010). Risk factors fall into two categories; non-modifiable factors such as farm terrain, weather conditions, the rider's height and weight, and modifiable factors such as speed and route. Quad bikes are inherently unstable with a narrow wheel base and a high centre of gravity. There are on-going debates between farmers and manufacturers as to the ideal vehicle design with no progress to date. Safe use of quad bikes on farms, therefore, continues to rely to a large extent on rider behaviour. Neal and Griffin (2004) conceptualised workplace safety performance behaviours as being determined by safety knowledge and the motivation to adopt such behaviours, both of which were derived, in part, by an individual's attributes (attitude, personality etc). Farmer's workplace safety attitudes and behaviours are often posited as a cause of quad bike incidents (Basham et al., 2006; Cryer et al., 2009; Lovelock et al., 2008; Palmer et al., 2009) Organisations responsible for NZ farm health and safety have also hypothesised that personality and social traits in this population make it difficult to change safety behaviours (Lovelock et al., 2008; Research NZ, 2007). Research suggests workplace satisfaction can be an antecedent to safety motivation and knowledge (Probst and Brubaker, 2001). If satisfaction is high, workers are more motivated to comply with safety measures, lowering accident and injury outcomes (Probst and Brubaker, 2001).

Workplace satisfaction is the “overall affective orientation on the part of individuals work roles which they are presently occupying” (Kalleberg, 1977 p. 126). It is a complex construct that appears to be the composite of psychosocial aspects, specific job characteristics and an individual's personal factors that form a general like or dislike of the job (Cranny et al., 1992; Kalleberg, 1977; Locke, 1969; Warr, 2007). Global job satisfaction is related to occupational accidents and injury (Dembe et al., 2004; Harkness et al., 2004; Krause et al., 1998; Zontek et al., 2009). More specifically, a negative mood, high perceived physical demand, high perceived psychological demand and low co-worker support are associated with occupational accidents (Day et al., 2009; De Jonge et al., 2000; Harkness et al., 2004; Holmberg et al., 2004; Kaplan et al., 2009; Kirkcaldy et al., 1997; Krause et al., 1998; Lovelock et al., 2008; Rodgers and Adler, 2001; Swaen et al., 2004; Trimpop et al., 2000). It is psychometrically optimal to assess workplace satisfaction using multi-item questionnaires, which can be treated as a single factor or broken down to measure specific components of the job such as perceived physical or psychological demand, decision latitude, social support and task variety. There is limited existing knowledge of the role of workplace satisfaction in quad bike LCEs and broad models of occupational safety require further testing.

The primary aim of this study was to use existing data, from two independent samples, to explore the relationship between workplace satisfaction and prevalence of prior quad bike loss of control events (LCEs). It was predicted that farm workers with lower workplace satisfaction would report more LCEs than those with higher workplace satisfaction scores. The secondary aim was to determine the model of best fit, in each study population, to describe this relationship adjusting for confounding variables.

@&#METHODS@&#

Sample A involved a secondary analysis of self-reported survey data collected in a cross-sectional study. Data were gathered during farm visits and face to face surveys in 2009 (Milosavljevic et al., 2010). The study explored how personal, physical and workplace characteristics influenced vibration and mechanical shock exposure, as well as LCE and injury prevalence (Milosavljevic et al., 2010). Sample B involved analysis of self-reported survey data collected face to face in 2011/2012 for a cross-sectional study exploring psychosocial risk factors for quad bike incidents on farms.

A convenience sample of 130 farmers and farm employees (Sample A) that regularly used quad bikes in their day-to-day work was recruited from the South Otago region of the South Island of NZ. The region is typified by rolling farmland with a variety of mixed stock and dairy farms. Sample B consisted of 112 farmers and farm employees initially selected at random from the Otago Farm Location Map 2005 and supplemented using a snowballing technique. All participants were recruited with approval from the University of Otago Human Ethics Committee. Written informed consent was obtained from each individual.

Although the samples showed similarities in the ratio of male to female participants and in occupational status there was significant disparity between them with respect to age, years of quad bike experience and the type of farming. The differences in methodology may have been responsible and it was for this reason that the samples were analysed separately. Sample A was a convenience sample of farmers living within a one hour radius of the main service town in South Otago. One farm was visited per day. Sample B recruited participants within the wider Otago region from a publically available farm location directory, which provided a more robust sampling frame. Any farmers known personally by the researchers were excluded. For practical reasons participants were also asked to volunteer neighbours who could also be approached for participation. Several farms could be visited in any one day. Driving times varied between 30 min and 3.5 h from the main city.

The primary outcome variable was the number of quad bike LCEs per participant in a working lifetime. LCEs were defined as a driving experience where the worker lost control of the quad bike and had to either voluntarily or involuntarily dismount (e.g. ejected from or tipped off the vehicle). Injury or quad bike damage may or may not have occurred.

Workplace satisfaction was measured using a 15-item stand-alone instrument embedded within the Whole Body Vibration Health Surveillance Questionnaire (WBVHSQ) (Pope et al., 2002) used by Milosavljevic et al. (2010) in Sample A. Sample B used this instrument to allow for comparison. Each item is a work-related statement such as “I am happy with my job” and “My job is mentally demanding”, Responses are recorded using a 5-point Likert scale where 1 indicated strong disagreement with the statement and 5 indicated strong agreement. A Cronbach's alpha of 0.78 (Sample A) and 0.72 (Sample B) demonstrated reasonable internal consistency suggesting that the total or mean score could be used as a composite indicator of workplace satisfaction (Bland and Altman, 1997). Examination of the individual items, however, suggested that these addressed more than one construct related to workplace satisfaction and, since the psychometric properties of the scale are not reported, an exploratory principal components analysis (PCA) with varimax rotation was undertaken to investigate for the presence of variable clustering of items around meaningful constructs in each sample (Table 1
                        ).

For Sample A, results showed three independent factors with eigenvalues >1 explaining 59% of the variance in item response. The first factor contained seven items relating to how happy one was about their job and was termed ‘job satisfaction’. This factor had an eigenvalue of 6.35 and accounted for 30% of the variance with excellent internal consistency (α = 0.90). The second factor had four items relating to how well one communicated with other farmers and was termed ‘colleague support’. This factor had an eigenvalue of 2.11 and accounted for 18% of the variance with acceptable internal consistency (α = 0.74). The third factor contained four items which were related to psychological components of one's job. This factor was termed ‘job demands’, had an eigenvalue of 1.16 and accounted for 17% of the variance with acceptable internal consistency (α = 0.75).

The same three independent factors with eigenvalues >1 were also found on PCA with varimax rotation in Sample B and explained 53% of the variance. Items within the job satisfaction and colleague support factors differed slightly from Sample A. The job satisfaction factor contained five items, had an eigenvalue of 3.83 and accounted for 26% of the variance with excellent internal consistency (α = 0.81). The colleague support factor contained three items, had an eigenvalue of 2.41 and accounted for 16% of the variance with acceptable internal consistency (α = 0.74). The third factor, job demands containing four items, had an eigenvalue of 1.74 and accounted for 11% of the variance with acceptable internal consistency (α = 0.62). The remaining three items (5, 12 and 14) were disregarded as they loaded equally on two factors.

The variables of job satisfaction, colleague support and job demands, for each sample, were then used in each analysis and compared to results using the workplace satisfaction composite score of all 15-items. Six other variables were used for multivariate analysis and included: employment status (self-employed versus employed), sex, age, farming and quad bike experience in years, and type of farm (dairy, sheep, beef, mixed stock, other).

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

All analyses were undertaken with the use of R (V 2.13.1) statistical software (R Development Core Team, 2011). Years of work experience, age and workplace satisfaction (total score and scores on the three components found in the PCA) were recorded as continuous data. Dichotomous data were sex (male/female), farm type (dairy/beef, sheep, mixed or other), and employment status (self-employed/employed). Descriptive and graphical analysis was undertaken initially to examine the data with independent sample t-tests and 1-sample proportion tests with continuity correction used to test for differences between the samples.

For each of the samples, A and B, the relationship between previous LCEs and current workplace satisfaction (as a total score and then as three individual factors; job satisfaction, colleague support and job demands), was explored using count data regression models (Poisson and negative binomial). In order to optimally identify the influence of each explanatory variable, the bivariate acceptance threshold into the multivariate model was contingent on p ≤ 0.20 (Altman, 1996, p. 349) adjusting for age, farm type, employment status and years of work experience. The potential confounding variables were included in the multivariate analysis as independent variables and as interaction terms with workplace satisfaction or its components. The model of best fit for predicting a relationship between workplace satisfaction and LCEs was chosen based on ANOVA and goodness of fit comparisons.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Participant demographics and study variables are described in Table 2
                        .

Participants ranged in age from 16 to 67 years and had been riding quad bikes between 1 and 24 years. The total number of LCEs reported were 197 (ranging from 0 to 20 per participant) with a median of 1 LCE (IQR 0–2). Male participants reported 94% of LCEs. Workplace satisfaction scores ranged from 24 to 71 with a maximum possible score of 75 and a minimum possible score of 15. Of the three factors extracted from the workplace satisfaction measure job satisfaction scores ranged from 7 to 30 (maximum possible score of 30 and a minimum possible score of 6), colleague support ranged from 6 to 15 (maximum of 15 and a minimum of 3) and job demands ranged from 7 to 20 (maximum of 20 and a minimum of 4).

Participants in this study ranged in age from 18 to 74 years and had been riding quad bikes between 1 and 28 years. The total number of LCEs reported were 372 (ranging from 0 to 50 per participant) with a median of 2 LCE (IQR 0.75–3.25). Male participants accounted for 97% of the reported LCEs. Workplace satisfaction scores ranged from 50 to 75. Job satisfaction scores ranged from 16 to 25 (maximum possible score of 25 and a minimum possible score of 5), colleague support scores ranged from 4 to 15 (maximum possible score of 20 and a minimum possible score of 4) and job demands ranged from 6 to 20 (maximum possible score of 20 and a minimum possible score of 4).

Using an independent samples t-test, statistically significant differences were found between the samples in the mean number of LCEs, quad bike experience, job satisfaction and colleague support. No significant differences were found between the samples with respect to age, workplace satisfaction and job demands. One-sample proportion tests showed statistically significant differences between the number of male and female participants, their occupational status and the type of farm they worked on.

Sample A and B variables stratified by LCE (yes or no) are shown in Table 3
                           . Statistically significant differences were found in quad bike experience, job demands and occupational status for Sample A whilst Sample B only showed significant differences in sex and job demands.

Results from Poisson regression were over-dispersed (mean < variance) and the Poisson distribution was not a good fit to the data in either sample. Negative binomial regression was a good fit and used for the regression analysis.

There was no statistically significant association between the 15-item workplace satisfaction score and LCE (p = 0.74) in the bivariate analysis. No association was found between the extracted factors of job satisfaction (p = 0.93), colleague support (p = 0.10) and job demands (p = 0.30). Age (p = 0.03), sex (p = 0.02), occupational status (p = 0.003), quad bike experience (p = 0.02) and farm type (p = 0.16) were accepted into the multivariate model. The model of best fit to explain the association between the 15-item workplace satisfaction score and LCEs in Sample A included workplace satisfaction (IRR 0.99, 95%CI 0.96, 1.02, p = 0.46), being female (IRR 0.47, 95%CI 0.22, 1.00, p = 0.05), being employed (IRR 0.61, 95%CI 0.35, 1.09, p = 0.09) and quad bike experience (IRR 1.02, 95%CI 0.99, 1.05, p = 0.25). The multivariate model using the three factors of workplace satisfaction included colleague support (IRR 0.92, 95%CI 0.83, 1.02, p = 0.12), being female (IRR 0.47, 95%CI 0.22, 1.01, p = 0.05) and being employed (IRR 0.52, 95%CI 0.31, 0.86, p = 0.01).

There was a statistically significant association between the 15-item workplace satisfaction score and LCE (p = 0.04) in the bivariate analysis in a positive direction. The factor ‘job demands’ was also significantly and positively associated with LCE (p ≤ 0.001). No association was found between the extracted factors of job satisfaction (p = 0.50) and colleague support (p = 0.44). Sex (p ≤ 0.001), occupational status (p = 0.05), quad bike experience (p = 0.04) and farm type (p = 0.17) were accepted into the multivariate model. Age (p = 0.53) did not meet the criteria for entry into the multivariate model. The model of best fit to explain the association between the 15-item workplace satisfaction score and LCEs in Sample B included workplace satisfaction (IRR 1.04, 95%CI 1.00, 1.09, p = 0.05) and being female (IRR 0.14, 95%CI 0.06, 0.30, p < 0.001). The multivariate model using the three factors of workplace satisfaction included job demand (IRR 1.14, 95%CI 1.05, 1.23, p = 0.002) and being female (IRR 0.16, 95%CI 0.07, 0.36, p < 0.001).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Two samples of livestock farmers were included in this exploratory study of the relationship between current workplace satisfaction and the prevalence of previous quad bike loss of control events. Workplace satisfaction was significantly associated with a history of quad bike LCEs in Sample B using count data regression analyses, whilst Sample A showed no significant association. The relationship, however, is weak (IRR 1.04, 95%CI 1.00–1.09) and may not be relevant in practice. It also appeared to be in a positive direction, which was unexpected, and suggested that the higher the workplace satisfaction score, the more LCEs reported.

Our literature search did not reveal any published studies that have investigated the role of workplace satisfaction in agricultural health and safety. In the general occupational literature, however, Dembe et al. (2004) found that job dissatisfaction was positively associated with occupational injury in a cohort of 7271 adults aged 33–41 years of age after controlling for occupation and industry (which included farming). Similarly, in a case controlled study of 300 miners in India, Paul and Maiti (2007) found that those workers who had experienced a previous accident had greater job dissatisfaction, negative affect and displayed more risk taking behaviours compared to those workers who did not report a work-related accident. Although current job dissatisfaction was directly related to injury, it was also indirectly associated through the factor of risk taking. Paul and Maiti (2007) suggested that workers who were less satisfied with their work may accept greater risks which lead to accidental injury. The contrasting findings in our study may be related to the significant difference between the groups with respect to the number of LCEs reported. Sample B included one participant who reported 50 LCEs in their 25 year history of using such vehicles, whilst the maximum in sample A was 20 LCEs. The definition of an LCE was the same for both samples with participants being asked the question directly by the interviewer. They were also given time to think about the question and the definition of an LCE could be repeated several times within this process. Fifty LCEs in a working lifetime appears, at first glance, to be excessive and could be regarded as an outlier. To assess the impact of this the participant's score was changed to 12 (LCE mean + 2sd) and the analysis re-run (Field et al., 2012 p. 191). Regression results and coefficients were very similar suggesting that the participant's high number of LCEs had not skewed the overall findings.

The measure of workplace satisfaction used in the present study revealed a high average score relative to the maximum possible score, suggesting that farmers felt positive about their work roles overall. There was little variability in scores suggesting low sensitivity of this instrument at least for these two groups of rural workers. Researchers in the field of occupational whole body vibration have used this measure (Okunribido et al., 2008, 2007) but its factor structure, reliability and validity have not been investigated. In this study exploratory principal components analysis revealed three independent factors in each sample, which demonstrated good internal consistency. The number of items in each factor differed slightly between samples however, suggesting further investigations of the psychometric properties of this measure are warranted to explore the stability of the ‘job satisfaction’ and ‘colleague support’ factors and whether these findings are present in the general population or are unique to farming.

Of the three factors extracted from the workplace satisfaction questionnaire ‘job demands’ in Sample B was significant in its relationship to LCEs (IRR 1.14, 95%CI 1.05–1.23). This is in line with the general occupational literature in which high levels of psychological job demands have been found to significantly increase the odds of occupational accident and injury (Krause et al., 1998; Lang et al., 2012; Rasmussen et al., 2011). This finding may explain the overall effect of workplace satisfaction, in this sample, being significantly associated to LCEs in a positive direction. The four items of job demands related to concentration, problem solving, responsibility and worry. Reporting high levels in each of these items does not necessarily mean that a job is dissatisfying. The demand/control model hypothesis (Karasek et al., 1998) predicts that job strain is a result of high psychological demands and low decision latitude whereas ‘good stress’ is found in occupations with high psychological demands and high decision latitude with the latter characteristics found to be dominant in farming (Karasek et al., 1998). How farmers respond to job demands, however, will determine the outcome. Financial risk taking can be considerable in the agricultural sector and the higher rates of suicide and mental health issues in farmers (Lovelock et al., 2008) suggests that some farmers have difficulty coping with such demands.

High psychological demands are indicative of high cognitive loading. A distracted farmer (by other thoughts, worries etc.), who is concentrating on other tasks while using a quad bike (e.g. mustering stock and controlling working dogs) may be inattentive of hazards ultimately resulting in an LCE. The link between distraction and driver error is well-established in on-road literature (Young and Salmon, 2012). Stress in farmers may also be a result of high job demands and Firth et al. (2007) identified several stresses for NZ farmers including ‘increased workload at peak times’, ‘dealing with ACC’, ‘bad weather’ and ‘complying with health and safety information’. Glasscock et al. (2006) reported that high levels of stress were associated with farm injuries in a cohort of farmers in Denmark. This association was enhanced via the interaction of stress with poor safety behaviour. They suggested that the concentration and attention levels of farmers may drop at times of high stress putting those who already flaunt safety at a greater risk of accidental injury (Glasscock et al., 2006). Higher levels of alcohol consumption have been associated with farm machinery injuries in the United States (Sprince et al., 2002) which could be a response to high stress levels and, although not considered in the current study, may be a confounding variable worthy of inclusion in future investigations. Exploring how psychological demands present in farmers and their impact on motivation and safety behaviour with respect to quad bike use may help to reduce the number of LCEs.

Colleague support had a negative relationship to the number of LCEs reported in Sample A and was included in the multivariate model of best fit. In light of farm vehicle safety promotion (ACC, 2010; Department-of-Labour, 2010) we consider collegial interaction will likely be linked to the benefits of networking within the rural community. Farm discussion groups exist within most rural communities in New Zealand and facilitation of such collegial support regarding issues of quad bike safety merits further exploration. Additional research, however, is required to confirm whether the relationship between having an LCE and the degree of self-reported colleague support truly exists and, if so, the direction of association.

The prevalence rates of 59% and 75% of participants reporting at least one quad bike LCE is comparable with other New Zealand studies in this area (Carman et al., 2010; Moore, 2007). Male participants reported significantly more events than female participants. It was, therefore, not surprising to find that sex was a significant predictor variable in all regression analyses. Women tended to work on dairy farms, usually located on rolling to flat terrain, compared to men who mainly worked on mixed stock farms with a greater variety of terrains, including steep hills that have been previously associated with LCEs (Milosavljevic et al., 2011). Future studies could account for this confounding by recruiting samples stratified by sex and farm terrain. Participants who reported having an LCE tended to have been riding quad bikes for longer which could reflect greater exposure time.

Occupational status was significantly associated with one or more LCEs in sample A. Self-employed participants were more likely to report LCEs than employed participants. This finding is in accord with a 1993 review of fatal work injuries in the USA which revealed that self-employed agricultural workers (the majority being male) were more likely to have a fatal accident than their employed counterparts (Personick and Windau, 1995). A further study investigating risk factors for occupational injury in older workers found that the injury risk was lower amongst the self-employed. Interestingly farmers were excluded from their analysis as preliminary findings suggested that they showed a different risk pattern compared to other occupations (Zwerling et al., 1996). Running a farm can be stressful with the need to manage profit and loss, make day to day and long term decisions, manage employees, contractors etc. Personick and Windau (1995) postulated that self-employed people, who characteristically worked longer hours than employed individuals, were more likely to be vulnerable to fatigue and less likely to have the resources to put into health and safety initiatives. In NZ the majority of farmers are self-employed and often work very long hours especially during spring lambing/calving; the resulting fatigue may play a role in accidental injury when using quad bikes as fatigue is known to slow reaction time and reduce concentration (Williamson et al., 2011). The responsibility of being self-employed and ensuring the farm is financially viable may lead to farmers being less focused on improving health and safety, especially if it comes at a monetary cost. Further investigation into the association between occupational status and occupational accidents and injuries is warranted.

The cross-sectional design and small sample size in both these studies are potentially limiting factors. With the number of variables measured, and to better account for the effect of females in the rural workforce, a greater sample size is needed to rigorously test the hypothesis that lower workplace satisfaction is associated with LCEs. Reporting of quad bike LCEs was dependent on participant recall which is a further limitation to the study. It was anticipated that an LCE would be memorable and, although participants may not remember the specific details, they are likely to be able to identify whether they have had such an event or not. The number of LCEs experienced in a lifetime, however, may not be accurately remembered and is a significant limitation. Importantly we also do not know what level of workplace satisfaction was present at the time of each LCE and it is an assumption that the scores at the time of survey are consistent with workplace satisfaction at the time the LCEs occurred. Longitudinal studies are required to examine recall bias and stability of workplace satisfaction scores, and to establish the convergent validity of the measure used in the present study with other measures of workplace satisfaction. Greater clarity around the meaning of what qualifies as an LCE may also be required. Participants were primarily from South Otago and thus do not necessarily fully represent the whole NZ rural population who use quad bikes in their work. Participants in this study worked with livestock so results cannot be generalised to other rural workers who use quad bikes such as orchard and vineyard workers.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The prevalence of having at least one quad bike accident in a working lifetime among two samples of rural workers was 59% and 75%. Workplace satisfaction in rural workers was generally high and found to be positively associated with having a quad bike LCE in one of these samples. This might be linked to a significant finding of high psychological job demands, an apparent subscale of workplace satisfaction. Exploring how psychological demands of concentration, problem solving, responsibility and worry present in farmers and whether these factors alter safety behaviour with respect to quad bike use over time, may help to address this important safety issue.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

