@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Interaction between physical and psychosocial work risk factors for low back symptoms and its consequences amongst Indonesian coal mining workers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Interaction between physical and psychosocial exposures was present and significant for reduced activities due to LBS.


                        
                        
                           
                           Interactions between physical and psychosocial exposures were also present and for LBS and absenteeism, but not significant.


                        
                        
                           
                           Workers with physical and psychosocial exposures were most likely to report LBS and its consequences.


                        
                        
                           
                           High psychosocial exposure appears to play a role in reporting LBS and particularly of its consequences.


                        
                        
                           
                           Current smokers increased the odds of reduced activities and absenteeism due to LBS.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Developing country

Musculoskeletal disorders

Work stress

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study assessed the interaction between physical and psychosocial factors for low back symptoms (LBS) and its consequences (reduced activities and absenteeism) in a developing country. A sample of 1294 Indonesian coal mining workers reported occupational exposures, LBS and its consequences using a self-administered questionnaire. Respondents were placed into one of four combination exposure groups: high physical and high psychosocial (HPhyHPsy); high physical and low psychosocial (HPhyLPsy); low physical and high psychosocial (LPhyHPsy), and; low physical and low psychosocial (LPhyLPsy). The attributable proportion due to interaction between physical and psychosocial factors was examined. Individuals in the HPhyHPsy group were most likely to report LBS (OR 5.42, 95% CI 3.30–8.89), reduced activities (OR 4.89, 95% CI 3.09–7.74), and absenteeism (OR 4.96, 95% CI 3.05–8.06). Interactions between physical and psychosocial factors were present for LBS, reduced activities, and absenteeism; although for LBS and absenteeism the interactions were not significant. Current smokers were more likely to report LBS consequences. Permanent employment and night shift work increased the odds of LBS and its consequences. We conclude that interventions aimed at reducing LBS and its consequences should address both physical and psychosocial factors, with a focus on smokers, permanent employment and night shift work.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Low back symptom (LBS) is an important health problem due to their serious worldwide economic and social impacts (National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (NRC & IOM), 2001). In a review using data collected between 1969 and 1998, the 12-month period prevalence of LBS from eight developed countries ranged between 22% and 65% (Walker, 2000). For the consequences of LBS, i.e. reduced activities and absenteeism, it ranges from 18% to 42% (Scuffham et al., 2010; Widanarko et al., 2012b) and from 9% to 14% (Ijzelenberg et al., 2004; Scuffham et al., 2010; Widanarko et al., 2012b), respectively. Since industrially developing countries (IDCs) may have a high proportion of workers engaged in heavy manual work, it might be expected that the prevalence of LBS and its consequences would be greater than for developed countries (Volinn, 1997). However, the prevalence of LBS in IDCs (32–75%) (Chen et al., 2005; Louw et al., 2007; Widanarko et al., 2013) and absenteeism (13%) (Widanarko et al., 2013) are similar to that in developed countries. The prevalence of reduced activities (10–16%) (Chen et al., 2005; Widanarko et al., 2013) in IDCs is lower than for developed countries, but it is hard to be confident that this difference is real because relatively few studies of LBS have been undertaken in IDCs (Volinn, 1997). In worldwide terms, the paucity of information about the magnitude of LBS and its consequences among IDCs is a concern, since more than 80% of the global workforce live and work in the industrially developing world (United Nations et al., 2011). Hence, any study that investigates the burden of LBS in an IDC is important as it will, at the very least, provide baseline data for future comparison.

Risk factors for LBS and its consequences involve physical and psychosocial factors. Physical risk factors for LBS that have been identified in various occupational groups include awkward back posture (Hooftman et al., 2009; Ijzelenberg et al., 2004; Lotters et al., 2003), lifting (Aasa et al., 2005; Elders and Burdorf, 2001; Hooftman et al., 2009; Lotters et al., 2003) and whole body vibration (Linton, 1990; Lotters et al., 2003). Risk factors for reduced activity include awkward posture (Aasa et al., 2005) and lifting (Aasa et al., 2005; Widanarko et al., 2012b). For absenteeism, they include awkward posture (Hoogendoorn et al., 2002; Widanarko et al., 2012b), lifting (Hooftman et al., 2009; Hoogendoorn et al., 2002) and whole body vibration (Hartman et al., 2005).

Psychosocial risk factors associated with LBS include high job strain (Ijzelenberg et al., 2004), high psychological demands (Aasa et al., 2005; Elders and Burdorf, 2001; Hooftman et al., 2009; Ijzelenberg et al., 2004), low decision latitude (Aasa et al., 2005; Ijzelenberg et al., 2004), low social support (Aasa et al., 2005; Hooftman et al., 2009), job dissatisfaction (Hooftman et al., 2009), high effort–reward imbalance (ERI) score (Rugulies and Krause, 2008) and high work stress (Widanarko et al., 2012a). Risk factors for reduced activities have been reported as high psychological demand (Aasa et al., 2005), low decision latitude (Aasa et al., 2005), low social support (Aasa et al., 2005) and high ERI score (Simon et al., 2008), whilst those for absenteeism include low job control (Hemingway et al., 1997), low social support (Hooftman et al., 2009; van den Heuvel et al., 2004) and job dissatisfaction (Hooftman et al., 2009; Hoogendoorn et al., 2002; van den Heuvel et al., 2004).

The relative role of physical and psychosocial factors in the aetiology of LBS and its consequences is complex. Davis and Heaney (2000) and Karsh (2006) proposed a model of the relationship between physical and psychosocial factors and LBS. These models suggest that both physical and psychosocial factors may independently influence LBS. The physical and psychosocial factors may also interact, giving rise to a probability of LBS being greater than the sum of the magnitude of the individual effects. Knol and VanderWeele (2012) recommend using relative excess risk due to interaction (RERI), attributable proportion (AP) and synergy index (S) to assess interaction for additive and multiplicative models. In the additive model, which is considered by Rothman (2012) to better reflect biologic interaction than the multiplicative model, RERI quantifies the extent to which the effect of the two factors together exceeds the effect of each considered individually. In contrast, AP, which has been used in many prior studies (e.g. Devereux et al., 2004, 1999, 2002; Lapointe et al., 2009; Tornqvist et al., 2001; Wahlstrom et al., 2004) measures the proportion of the joint effect of both exposures together that is due to the interaction (i.e. RERI divided by the relative risk of doubly exposed group). Although the synergy index (i.e. the ratio between combined effect and the sum of the individual effects) can also be used to assess interaction, it, however, is difficult to interpret if one or both of the exposures is preventive (Knol et al., 2011). For these reasons, the present study uses AP in an additive model to quantify the interaction.

To the best of our knowledge only eight studies have investigated the interaction between physical and psychosocial risk factors and LBS and its consequences (Devereux et al., 2004, 1999; Fernandes et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2003; Lapointe et al., 2009; Linton, 1990; Vandergrift et al., 2012; Waters et al., 2011). They have all shown that individuals exposed to both high physical and high psychosocial factors have the highest risk of LBS. Most of the studies that examined this interaction, as cited above, were conducted in developed countries and only one study (Fernandes et al., 2009) has examined this interaction in an IDC (Brazil).

With this background, the objective of the present study was to examine the interaction between physical and psychosocial exposures for LBS and its consequences (reduced activities and absenteeism). Since only one study has examined the interaction in an IDC, the present study was conducted in a coal mining company in Indonesia.

@&#METHODS@&#

With prior agreement and facilitation from the Safety, Health and Environmental manager of the company, invitations to participate in this cross-sectional study were delivered in person to 2150 coal mining workers involved in various occupations at three sites (two located in the province of East Borneo and one in the province of South Borneo). The activities, equipment and work environment between sites were very similar. Workers who had worked more than or equal to one year of work experience in the current position and had never previously had an accident involving the low back region were eligible for inclusion in the study. The workers were arranged to anonymously complete a self-administered questionnaire in groups of 20–25 under the supervision of two trained investigators, who were available to respond to queries and who, in advance, gave the groups a brief explanation about the questionnaire's content and the aims of the study. Company management were not present when the questionnaire was answered.

The first page of the questionnaire comprised an information sheet that had to be read prior to answering the questions. The information sheet clearly stated that completing and returning the questionnaire implied that respondents agreed to participate in the study. Since the questionnaire only sought information about demographic characteristics, occupation (and its related exposures), LBS and its consequences using self-reporting and was completed anonymously, a signed informed consent was not necessary. The study design was evaluated by peer review and judged to be low risk and was recorded on the Low Risk Database of the Massey University Human Ethics Committee.

The questionnaire was used to obtain information on demographic characteristics (age, gender, education), smoking status (never smoked – defined as never smoked 100 cigarettes; former smoker – defined as having smoked ≥100 cigarettes but quit smoking during the year prior to the survey or longer ago, and; smoker – defined as having smoked ≥100 cigarettes and currently smoke (Albanes et al., 1987)), organisational factors (current employment status – permanent; non-permanent and shift work – no shift work; shift work without night shift; shift work with night shift), physical and psychosocial exposures, LBS and its consequences (reduced activities and absenteeism), and any accident(s) that involved the low back region. Since the original questions were all in English and the study was conducted in Indonesia(n), a cross-cultural adaptation of the questionnaire was undertaken, in accordance with guidelines for adaptation of health related subjective data collection tools (Beaton et al., 2000).

Physical exposure questions asked respondents to estimate how much working time (not at all, 1–10%, 11–25%, 26–50%, 51–75%, and 76–100% of the time) during their work activities they were involved in any of these situations: sitting position (Leijon et al., 2002); squatting position (Wiktorin et al., 1996, 1993); bent trunk (Leijon et al., 2002); bent and twisted trunk in the same way several times an hour (Leijon et al., 2002); exposure to whole body vibration or working on an unstable surface (e.g. vibrating floor, vehicle seat) (Wiktorin et al., 1996), and; using hand tools which vibrate or give impact (Wiktorin et al., 1996). They were also asked to estimate the frequency (almost never/not at all, 1–3 days per month, 1 day per week, 2–4 days per week, and every workday) of lifting or carrying objects weighing between 6 and 15 kg (Torgen et al., 1997; Wiktorin et al., 1993) and between 16 and 25 kg (Torgen et al., 1997; Wiktorin et al., 1993). A question about lifting or carrying an object >25 kg was modified from Viikari Juntura et al. (1996). This modification was justified because lifting >25 kg more than once per day has been shown to increase the risk of LBS (Lotters et al., 2003) and is in accordance with internationally accepted guidelines (Fallentin et al., 2001).

Psychosocial exposures in the current working place were assessed using Job Content Questionnaire from Karasek et al. (1998) (nine questions about decision latitude; five questions about psychological demand, and; eight questions about social support) and a standardised short version of the ERI Questionnaire from Siegrist et al. (2008) (three questions about effort; seven questions about reward, and; six questions about over-commitment) with the following response categories: strongly agree; agree; disagree, and; strongly disagree. Information about job satisfaction (four questions) was obtained using the COPSOQ II (Pejtersen et al., 2010). An additional single question on perceived work stress was asked: “In general, how do you find your job?” with response categories: not at all stressful; mildly stressful; moderately stressful; very stressful, and; extremely stressful (Smith et al., 2000).

Questions about LBS and its consequences were asked using the standardised Nordic Musculoskeletal Questionnaire (NMQ) (Kuorinka et al., 1987). LBS were defined as any symptoms (such as aches, pains, discomfort, numbness, or fatigue) during the last 12 months in the low back region of more than 7 days duration with onset during the current job and with symptoms present within the 7 days immediately prior to the date on which the survey was carried out (Devereux et al., 1999). LBS consequences were defined as symptoms that prevented the person carrying out normal activities (reduced activities) and absence from work due to those symptoms (absenteeism) within the previous 12 months.

Although all the questions used in the present study have been validated previously, the present study assessed their validation in the target population as supportive information. The validity of the data collected using the questionnaire was assessed by comparing questionnaire responses with data collected by observation (for physical exposure) and interview (for psychosocial exposure). Observations were carried out on a total of 15 respondents (2 office workers and management, 4 mechanics, 3 welders, 4 dump truck operators, and 2 heavy vehicle operators) from all sites at the workplace during working hours. A modification of the Back-Exposure Sampling Tool (Back-EST) (Village et al., 2009) observational method was adopted to describe measures of seven physical exposures: sitting position, bent trunk, bent and twisted trunk, whole body vibration exposure, and lifting or carrying load 6–15 kg, 16–25 kg, and >25 kg. A total of 4 h of observation for each respondent was conducted. The 4-h observation summary of the total time exposed for sitting position, bent trunk, bent and twisted trunk, and whole body vibration risk factor were multiplied by two to represent the estimated exposure during a given working day of 8 h duration. For lifting, the number of times each participant lifted or carried each load weight in 4 h was observed and multiplied by two to obtain an estimate of lifting activity per day. The interviews used for validation of the eight psychosocial exposures (effort, reward, over commitment, decision latitude, psychological demands, social support, job satisfaction, and work stress) were semi-structured and conducted without any interruptions with a total of 14 worker respondents (2 office workers and management, 3 mechanics, 3 welders, 4 dump truck operators, and 2 heavy vehicle operators) from all sites in a quiet room that was provided by company management. The respondents were asked to explain more about the psychosocial conditions in the workplace according to the items relating to psychosocial exposure in the questionnaire.

The validity of the questionnaire was determined by calculating the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) (Altman, 1991). In order to calculate the sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV, those who work ≤50% of working time in sitting position, bent trunk, bent and twisted trunk and whole body vibration were classified as unexposed group, whereas those who work >50% of working time in those condition were classified as exposed group. Those who did lifting 6–15 kg and 16–25 kg <2days/week were classified as unexposed group whereas those who did lifting ≥2 days/week were classified as exposed group. For lifting >25 kg, those who did lifting almost never were classified as unexposed group whereas those who did lifting <2days/week or more were classified as exposed group. The cut-off points to classify high/low psychosocial exposure to classify unexposed and exposed group in calculating the sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV were: upper mean-based quartiles for effort (Siegrist et al., 2008), over commitment (Siegrist et al., 2008), and psychological demand (Karasek et al., 2007); lower mean-based quartiles for reward (Siegrist et al., 2008) and decision latitude (Karasek et al., 2007); median for social support (Landsbergis et al., 1994); and mean for job satisfaction (Pejtersen et al., 2010). Also, kappa statistic analysis was conducted to provide a quantitative measure of the agreement between the observation/interview data and self-report data adjusted for the level of agreement expected from chance alone (Altman, 1991). Cronbach's alphas were computed for each scale of psychosocial exposure to quantify reliability.

Analysis of the data based on the five or six response categories for physical exposure showed clear trends in LBS prevalence. Low numbers of cases in each of the strata meant that the confidence intervals (CI) around the LBS prevalence estimates were unreasonably large. Therefore the 5- or 6-point categories were collapsed into three.

Before examining the interaction between physical and psychosocial factors, it was necessary to determine the criteria for high and low physical and psychosocial exposures. For physical factors this was done in three steps. First, logistic regression was conducted to quantify the association between each explanatory physical factor and LBS, adjusted for age, gender and duration of work. The strength of association between each of the explanatory variables and the outcome variables are reported in terms of adjusted odds ratio (OR) and their 95% CI (Hosmer and Lemeshow, 2000). Second, to assess the effect of the cumulative effect of physical factors on the outcome, five cumulative physical factors groups were created. The first group (as the reference) consisted of those who were free from physical exposure. The second, third, fourth and fifth groups consisted of those who were exposed to one, two, three and more than four significant physical factors (i.e. those with ORs significantly greater than 1 with its 95% CI excluding 1). Logistic regression then was performed to quantify the association between each cumulative physical factor group and LBS, adjusted for age, gender and duration of work (Table 1). Finally, since the cut-off point to classify high physical exposure was those cumulative physical groups that had strong association with the outcome, i.e. OR > 2 (Heneweer et al., 2011; van der Windt et al., 2000), respondents were classified as having high physical exposure if they were exposed to at least two significant physical risk factors (i.e. those who were in third, fourth and fifth group in the second step) whereas respondents were classified as having low physical exposure if they were exposed to none or one physical risk factor (i.e. those who were in the first and second group in the second step). The same procedure was done for the other two outcomes (reduced activities and absenteeism due to LBS).

Similar to physical exposure, there are three steps to determine the criteria for high and low physical and psychosocial exposures. First, logistic regression was conducted to quantify the association between each explanatory psychosocial factor and LBS, adjusted for age, gender and duration of work. The cut-off points to classify high/low psychosocial exposure for this step were: upper mean-based quartiles for effort (Siegrist et al., 2008), over commitment (Siegrist et al., 2008), and psychological demand (Karasek et al., 2007); lower mean-based quartiles for reward (Siegrist et al., 2008) and decision latitude (Karasek et al., 2007); median for social support (Landsbergis et al., 1994); and mean for job satisfaction (Pejtersen et al., 2010). Second, to assess the effect of the cumulative of psychosocial factors on the outcome, five cumulative psychosocial factors groups were created. The first group (as the reference) consisted of those who were free from psychosocial exposure. The second, third, fourth and fifth groups consisted of those who were exposed to one, two, three and more than four significant psychosocial factors. Logistic regression then was performed to quantify the association between each cumulative psychosocial factor group and LBS, adjusted for age, gender and duration of work (Table 2). Finally, the cut-off point to classify high psychosocial exposure was those groups that had strong association with the outcome, i.e. OR > 2 (Heneweer et al., 2011; van der Windt et al., 2000). Hence, for LBS, respondents were classified as having high psychosocial exposure if they were exposed to at least two significant psychosocial risk factors (i.e. those who were in third, fourth and fifth group in the second step) whereas respondents were classified as having low psychosocial exposure if they were exposed to none or one psychosocial risk factor (i.e. those who were in the first and second group in the second step). For LBS consequences, respondents were classified as having high psychosocial exposure if they were exposed to at least three significant psychosocial risk factors (i.e. those who were in fourth and fifth group in the second step) whereas respondents were classified as having low psychosocial exposure if they were exposed to none or one psychosocial risk factor (i.e. those who were in the first, second and third group in the second step).

To examine the interaction between physical and psychosocial risk factors, all respondents were grouped into one of four combination exposure groups based on the final physical and psychosocial exposure categories: high physical and high psychosocial (HPhyHPsy), high physical and low psychosocial (HPhyLPsy), low physical and high psychosocial (LPhyHPsy), and low physical and low psychosocial group (LPhyLPsy) (as the reference group). Three logistic regression models were developed to quantify the association between physical and psychosocial exposure group and each outcome: LBS, reduced activities, and absenteeism. In all models, gender (Davis and Heaney, 2000), age (Burdorf and Sorock, 1997; Davis and Heaney, 2000), duration of work (Devereux et al., 1999), education (Burdorf and Sorock, 1997), smoking status (Burdorf and Sorock, 1997), and organisational factors were included a priori as confounders. The strength of association between each of the explanatory variables and the outcome variables are reported in terms of OR and their 95% CI (Hosmer and Lemeshow, 2000). The Hosmer–Lemeshow test was used to assess the fit of the final logistic regression models, with a non-significance indicative that lack-of-fit was not sufficient to reject the models (Hosmer and Lemeshow, 2000). To assess the discriminatory ability of the logistic regression models Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves were constructed for each model (Hosmer and Lemeshow, 2000).

A departure from additive interaction models was used to assess the interaction between physical and psychosocial factors on the outcome. Whilst it is recognised that this can be done in various ways, one of the most commonly accepted ways is by computing the attributable proportion (AP) (and its 95% CI), using the following formula: [(OR11 − OR10 − OR01 + 1)/OR11] (Hallqvist et al., 1996; Rothman et al., 2008), where OR11 represents the OR for high physical and high psychosocial exposure, OR10 represents the OR for high physical and low psychosocial exposure, and OR01 represents the OR for low physical and high psychosocial exposure. A value for AP (and its 95% CI) greater than zero indicates the presence of statistically significant interaction between physical and psychosocial factors, whereas an AP of less than or equal to zero is indicative of no interaction. These analyses were carried out separately for each outcome. The statistical analyses were conducted using Stata for Windows version 12.1 (StataCorp, 2012).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Of the 1565 completed the questionnaires (73%), 271 were excluded from the analysis: 260 were completed by individuals who did not meet the study eligibility criteria (211 had less than 1 year work experience in the current position and 49 had had an accident involving the low back region previously) and 11 answered less than 50% of the questions. A total of 1294 questionnaires were considered to be valid and were used in the present analysis.

Of the total sample (n = 1294), 97% were answered by males. The median age was 26 (interquartile range 10 years) and the median duration of work was 3 years (interquartile range 4 years). The distribution for education was 13% (primary); 85% (secondary), and; 2% (tertiary). Thirty-seven per cent of respondents never smoked, 13% were former smokers and 50% were current smokers. The survey group was comprised of managerial staff (2%), general office staff (11%), group leaders (6%), drivers of buses, trucks and light vehicles (3%), mechanics (26%), dump truck operators (34%), heavy vehicle operators (10%), and others (e.g. welder, tyre man, etc.) (8%). Fifty-seven per cent of the respondents were permanent employees and 43% were non-permanent employees. The shift work distribution was 16% non-shift work; 6% shift work without night shift, and; 78% shift work with night shift. The prevalence of LBS was 23 (95% CI 21–26) per 100 workers. Sixteen per cent (95% CI 14–18%) and 13% (95% CI 11–15%) of the entire study population reported that they had reduced activities and absenteeism due to LBS during the previous 12 months, respectively.

The sensitivity of the questionnaire to detect the presence of each of the 15 physical and psychosocial exposures ranged from 71% to 100% (except for working with bent and twisted trunk – 50%). Questionnaire specificity ranged from 83% to 100% (except for decision latitude – 66%). The PPV for all physical and psychosocial exposures ranged from 83% to 100% (except for working with bent and twisted trunk – 50%, and lifting >25 kg – 60%) whereas NPV ranged from 71% to 100% (except for decision latitude – 66%). Although the relatively small number of respondents observed and interviewed made the CI around the point estimates of kappa wide, the kappa values for physical and psychosocial exposures ranged between 0.61 and 0.86, indicating good agreement (except for working with bent trunk, bent and twisted trunk, lifting 6–15 kg, lifting >25 kg, reward, and work stress, which showed moderate agreement). Although the sensitivity and specificity reported here may not be representative of the construct used for classifying high/low exposures since the full scales were not used, these results indicate that physical and psychosocial exposures obtained from the self-report questionnaire used in the present study were valid measures. The Cronbach's alphas for each psychosocial scale were as follows: effort (0.70); reward (0.79); over commitment (0.69); decision latitude (0.56); psychological demands (0.54); social support (0.78), and; job satisfaction (0.70). This indicates that the reliability of almost all psychosocial scales was acceptable.


                        Table 1
                         shows the association between single and cumulative physical factors and all outcomes (LBS, reduced activities, and absenteeism due to LBS). Vibration (either whole body or using vibrating tools) and lifting >25 kg were significantly associated with all outcomes after adjustment for age, gender and duration of work. Workers exposed to two or more significant physical factors had more than two times the odds than workers exposed to no significant physical factors of having LBS, reduced activities and absenteeism due to LBS. Hence, those who were exposed to two or more significant physical factors were grouped as having high physical exposure when assessing the interaction between high physical and high psychosocial exposure for LBS, reduced activities and absenteeism due to LBS.


                        Table 2
                         shows the association between single and cumulative psychosocial factors and all outcomes. High effort, low reward, job dissatisfaction and work stress were significantly associated with all outcomes after adjustment for age, gender and duration of work. Workers exposed to two or more significant psychosocial factors had more than two times the odds as workers exposed to no significant psychosocial factors of having LBS, whereas workers who were exposed to three or more significant psychosocial factors had more than two times the odds than workers exposed to no significant psychosocial factors of having reduced activities and absenteeism due to LBS. Hence, those who were exposed to two or more significant psychosocial factors were grouped as having high psychosocial exposure when assessing the interaction between high physical and high psychosocial exposure for LBS, whereas those who were exposed to three or more significant psychosocial factors were grouped as having high psychosocial exposure when assessing the interaction between high physical and high psychosocial exposure for reduced activities and absenteeism due to LBS.

All models showed that the HPhyHPsy group had the highest odds ratios for LBS (OR 5.42, 95% CI 3.30–8.89), reduced activities (OR 4.89, 95% CI 3.09–7.74), and absenteeism (OR 4.96, 95% CI 3.05–8.06) (Tables 3–5
                        
                        
                        ). Those in the LPhyHPsy group had a higher OR than those in the HPhyLPsy group for LBS and both consequences. Current smokers had a higher OR of LBS consequences than non-smokers. Permanent employment and night shift work increased the OR of LBS and its consequences. The AP values for LBS, reduced activities and absenteeism were 0.09 (95% CI −0.35 to 0.54), 0.35 (95% CI 0.02–0.68) and 0.28 (95% CI −0.07 to 0.64), respectively. It indicates that interactions between physical and psychosocial exposures were present for all outcomes although for LBS and absenteeism they were not significant.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The present study found that interactions between physical and psychosocial exposures were present for all outcomes although for LBS and absenteeism they were not significant. This is consistent with the findings of most previous studies (Devereux et al., 2004, 1999; Lapointe et al., 2009; Thorbjörnsson et al., 2000), which also reported the presence of interaction (or potential interaction) between physical and psychosocial work factors for LBS and its consequences.

The present study also indicates that the combination of physical and psychosocial exposures increased the OR of LBS, reduced activities and absenteeism due to LBS. Individuals in HPhyHPsy group were most likely to report LBS and its consequences. Although it is difficult to compare this finding with other studies due to differences in risk factor criteria and the characteristics of the populations studied, it is in agreement with cross-sectional studies of LBS among a working population in Sweden (Linton, 1990), UK workers (Devereux et al., 2004, 1999), US Marines (Huang et al., 2003), a Brazilian working population (Fernandes et al., 2009) and two prospective studies among female workers in Canada (Lapointe et al., 2009) and automobile manufacturing workers in Michigan (Vandergrift et al., 2012).

Psychosocial exposure appears to play a role in the occurrence of LBS, and particularly of its consequences. There are two possible explanations for this finding. First, globalisation has impacted developing countries in many sectors, particularly in the socioeconomic sector. To be able to compete globally with competitors, IDCs may have to face the challenge of managing the changing nature of work, such as the demands of flexible contracts, increased job insecurity, a high work pace, long and irregular working hours, low income, etc. (Houtman et al., 2008) with limited resources. This, in turn, may increase psychosocial problems and stress at work for workers in IDCs. A recent study about psychosocial risks and work-related stress in IDCs found that psychosocial risk factors at work were the second most important issue that needed urgent attention after injury/accident prevention (Kortum et al., 2010). Additionally, employers in IDCs may lack awareness of psychosocial factors and stress at work (Kortum et al., 2011) and thus be unaware of the importance of managing these and consequently may not have put in place any prevention strategies to manage them. Non-work factor stressors may also make the psychosocial problems at work worse for workers in developing countries.

Second, the possibility of some study bias in physical exposure classification may be present in the present study. The results from the validity assessment show that most of the self-reported physical and psychosocial exposure questions used in the present study were valid. However, since this study did not include validation for lifting questions based on weekly activities, there is a possibility of reporting bias for the lifting questions. The small numbers in HPhyLPSy group for LBS (n = 52), suggests there may be bias in physical exposure classification. This condition, in turn, may mask the effect size of physical exposure. A higher OR for this group would impact on the AP due to interaction. Despite this potential limitation to address interaction effect with greater confidence, combined exposure to both sets of risk factors would be important for intervention research.

Current smokers were more likely to report LBS consequences (reduced activities and absenteeism) compared with those who had never smoked. This finding is similar to that of Palmer et al. (2003) for reduced activities, Tubach et al. (2002) and Hartman et al. (2005) for absenteeism due to LBS, and also to that of Widanarko et al. (2013) for the same population as in the present study but using a different analysis with a different set of explanatory variables.

The present study showed that non-permanent employees were less likely to report LBS and its consequences. Schneider et al. (2005) hypothesised that full-time workers (permanent employees) were more likely to be exposed to risk factors at work (due to a longer working time and period of employment) and more likely to report LBS than part-time workers (non-permanent employees). Alternatively, non-permanent employees might be at higher risk of losing their jobs than permanent employees, if health impairment occurs. Therefore, bias due to under-reporting of LBS and its consequences among non-permanent employees may occur.

Shift workers had a higher risk of LBS and reduced activities due to LBS than non-shift workers in the present study. This is in line with a previous study by Lipscomb et al. (2002). It is consistent with Theorell et al. (1991), who proposed that disturbed sleep may increase muscle tension which can lead to pain in the low back region. It also fits with observations by Jansen et al. (2003), who found that shift workers had a higher OR for an elevated need for recovery compared to non-shift workers. An explanation for these findings could be that shift work, particularly night shifts, is associated with short or disturbed sleep (Härmä, 2006) and may reduce the production of testosterone and growth hormone, which stimulate anabolism to assist musculoskeletal tissue regeneration (Theorell, 1996).

The advantage of the present study was the outcome definition for LBS. For a study that investigates work-related LBS, the lack of information about the occurrence of first symptoms (whether before or after employment) may also lead to bias. Therefore, defining LBS by their presence during the last 12 month with symptoms more than 7 days and onset during the current job and also present within the past 7 days at the time of survey, as was done in the present study, may provide appropriate estimation. Furthermore, additional questions about reduced activities and absenteeism due to LBS might reflect real symptoms with important impacts on function and quality of life.


                     Widanarko et al. (2013) who examined potential non-response bias using the same data set as the present study found that there were no differences in the characteristics (i.e. median age and median duration of employment in the current job) and the 12-month period prevalence of LBS between respondents and non-respondents. It indicates that the selection bias (particularly due to non-response) in this study population was relatively minor.

There are four limitations in the present study. First, there may be a bias due to under-reporting of LBS consequences which may have influenced the combined effects. Despite having LBS, workers may not take sick leave due to their concern about job security and income. In addition, there was a disincentive to take leave since absence from work would reduce income. So, if workers reported that their work activities were reduced or limited due to LBS, their supervisor might ask them to take sick leave which may result in a reduction in their income. Hence, it is possible that workers may tend not to have reported reduced activities nor to have taken sick leave. Second, although the questions used in this study to assess physical exposure had been validated by previous studies, they were not developed for mining workers that have specific jobs, e.g. haul truck and heavy equipment drivers that may have very high magnitude vibration exposures. Hence, some of the exposures encountered in this study (i.e. mine sites) may have not been adequately addressed by the observational tools used. Also, this method may have mixed various determinants of physical exposure which may lead to biased results. For example, the association between using vibrating hand tools and LBS may have been influenced by other exposure(s), such as work posture. Therefore, in future studies, addressing ergonomics at a mine site, which is the ultimate application, requires addressing specific issues that go beyond observation. Third, an issue that affects all cross-sectional studies, including the present one, concerns a study bias called the healthy worker effect. A previous study (Widanarko et al., 2013) that examined the possibility of healthy worker effect found that the duration of employment decreased the hazard of LBS by a factor of 0.04 (95% CI 0.03–0.06). It included speculation that workers who experienced LBS in the early years of employment had already left the workplace, whereas relatively healthy workers remained in employment and were preferentially included. Since the participants were the same in both Widanarko et al. (2013) and the present study, the same healthy worker effect bias may have occurred in the present study. The fourth and last limitation of the present study was typical of the design of all cross-sectional studies, in which the temporal sequence between exposures and outcomes can be difficult to distinguish. Hence, longitudinal studies are needed to develop more definitive conclusions about the causal relationship between LBS (and its consequences) and its risk factors (Hartvigsen et al., 2001). However, Linton (2005) and Nixon et al. (2011) suggest that similar patterns of results have been found in both cross-sectional and prospective studies, indicating that despite the possibility of a healthy worker effect, cross-sectional studies (and therefore by implication the present study) may have considerable value.

In conclusion, the present study has shown that interactions between physical and psychosocial exposures were present for LBS, reduced activities and absenteeism, although for LBS and absenteeism the interactions were not significant. Indonesian coal mining workers with both high physical and high psychosocial exposures were most likely to report LBS and its consequences. It also showed that a high psychosocial exposure appears to play a role in reporting LBS and particularly of its consequences. Current smokers were more likely to report LBS consequences than non-smokers. Permanent employment and night shift work increased the odds of LBS and its consequences. Interventions in this kind of workplace should address both physical factors (i.e. reducing exposure to vibration and lifting activities) and psychosocial factors (i.e. reducing effort, increasing reward, improving job satisfaction, and managing work stress) with a focus on smokers, permanent and night shift workers.

We acknowledge funding support from Directorate General of Higher Education Overseas Postgraduate Scholarship Program, Department of National Education, Republic of Indonesia and Postgraduate Student Support, School of Management, Massey University, New Zealand.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We would like to thank Rahmadani Arnur, BScPH and Dimas Ari Dharmawirawan, BScPH, who conducted the data collection and completed the data entry, and also Setyo Rohadi, MD, MOHS, who managed hosting during the survey.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

