@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Use of body armor protection with fighting load impacts soldier performance and kinematics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Large increases in body armor protection decrease soldier performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Increased body armor protection did not decrease soldier mobility.


                        
                        
                           
                           Adding the fighting load carrier was detrimental to mobility.


                        
                        
                           
                           The fighting load carrier increased trunk extension during soldier specific tasks.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Torso load

Gait

Obstacle negotiation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The purpose of this evaluation was to examine how increasing body armor protection with and without a fighting load impacted soldiers' performance and mobility. Thirteen male soldiers performed one performance (repeated 30-m rushing) and three mobility tasks (walk, walk over and walk under) with three different body armor configurations and an anterior fighting load. Increasing body armor protection, decreased soldier performance, as individual and total 30-m rush times were significantly longer with greater protection. While increasing body armor protection had no impact on mobility, i.e. significant effect on trunk and lower limb biomechanics, during the walk and walk over tasks, greater protection did significantly decrease maximum trunk flexion during the walk under task. Adding fighting load may negatively impact soldier mobility, as greater maximum trunk extension was evident during the walk and walk over tasks, and decreased maximum trunk flexion exhibited during the walk under task with the fighting load.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

During combat, soldiers wear body armor for protection against ballistic injury. Depending on the nature and threat of injury, different combinations of body armor and ballistic plates may be worn. At a minimum, soldiers wear ‘soft body armor’, a fabric based vest, in the field. The U.S. Army has two soft armor types in use: the improved outer tactical vest (IOTV, Fig. 1
                     A) and the scalable plate carrier system (PC, Fig. 1B). The IOTV provides full coverage of the torso while allowing for mobility of the shoulder, hips, and neck. The PC affords increased shoulder, hip, and neck mobility at a lesser weight, but covers less of the torso as compared to the IOTV. To increase protection with either armor system, ballistic (hard) plates can be inserted into front, back and/or side pockets of the fabric vest, adding up to 7.3 kg of body borne load. Generally, as the protection increases, so does the body borne load. For instance, the IOTV can weigh up to 12.1 kg with front back and side ballistic plates, while PC only weighs 9.8 kg for a similar ballistic configuration (Table 1
                     ).

Body armor is just one component of soldiers' total body borne load. During dismounted operations, soldiers are encumbered with a combat load that typically includes a body armor, weapon, helmet, ammunition, rucksack (i.e. backpack), and other essentials. Depending on the operation, a combat load can add between 9 kg and 60 kg of weight, in addition to the body armor worn by the soldier (FM 21-18. 
                     1990). However, during short duration missions, where enemy contact may be expected, soldiers must remain mobile and keep the body borne load to a minimum. For these missions, soldiers use a ‘fighting load’ which minimizes body borne load, but still provides the essential equipment, such as ammunition, via a fighting load carrier attached on the anterior of their body armor. To ensure optimal soldier performance and agility during such operations, the fighting load, including body armor, is recommended not to exceed 21 kg (FM 21-18. 
                     1990).

In order to optimize soldier performance during dismounted operations, researchers have examined the effect that body borne loads (i.e. body armor and essential military equipment) has on soldier performance. Previous experimental evidence has shown that both a posterior load (Knapik et al., 2004) and body armor (Hasselquist et al., 2012) decrease performance on timed physical maneuvers, such as long runs, sprints, agility tasks, and obstacle courses. Holewijn and Lotens (1992) found that on average, physical performance decreased by 1% for every additional kilogram of load. Recently, Dempsey et al. (2013) found that police officers decrease performance on average 13–42% while loaded with body armor and a utility belt (∼10 kg), compared to no load, during a variety of mobility tasks. However, Peoples et al. (2010) reported no performance differences during a 5-m rush (i.e. sprinting) task between closely weighted (two and three kg difference) body armor configurations. A longer sprinting task like the repeated 30-m rushing task used by Hasselquist and colleagues (2012, 2013) found that both the addition of extremity body armor and posterior backpack loads do, in fact, decrease performance.

Reductions in soldier performance may stem from significant biomechanical alterations that occur during load carriage, such as trunk and lower limb kinematic (Attwells et al., 2006; Harman et al., 2000b; Kinoshita, 1985) or spatiotemporal adaptations (Birrell and Haslam, 2010). While these biomechanical adaptations reportedly increase walking stability (Harman et al., 1999), it may also impair the mobility of the soldier, especially during complex locomotor tasks such as when negotiating or avoiding an obstacle. To date load carriage research has limited its biomechanical analysis to continuous straight-line ambulation (i.e. walking) (Attwells et al., 2006; Hasselquist et al., 2013, 2012), static standing (Rugelj and Sevšek, 2011; Schiffman et al., 2006), or vertical jump performance (Fallowfield et al., 2012). Therefore, biomechanical assessments of load carriage, especially configurations recommended for dismounted operations, during a wide range of complex locomotor tasks is warranted.

Biomechanical assessments of load carriage have focused primarily on posterior torso borne, combat loads (16 kg–60 kg). Recently, Park and colleagues (2013) reported that participants increased stance time and decreased stride length to improve stability while walking with police body armor and varied anterior loads. Anteriorly loaded participants also demonstrated trunk (Rietdyk et al., 2005) and lower limb (Perry et al., 2010) kinematic adaptations to aid stability (but potentially at the detriment of mobility), when avoiding and negotiating an obstacle. Both Rietdyk et al. (2005) and Perry et al. (2010), however, examined small handheld, non-militarily relevant, anterior loads (2 kg–10 kg). Heavier anterior loads may have a significant, and potentially larger, impact on soldiers performing complex locomotor tasks. Therefore, research is needed to examine the effects of body armor and militarily-relevant anterior fighting load on avoiding and negotiating (i.e. walking over and under) an obstacle.

The main purpose of this evaluation was to examine if the addition of the fighting load had a greater impact on soldiers' mobility with every increase in body armor during complex locomotor tasks. It was hypothesized that adding the fighting load would produce a significantly larger reduction in mobility with every increase in body armor. Our second purpose was to examine how increases in body armor when worn with the anterior fighting load, would impact soldiers' 30-m rushing performance. It was hypothesized that with increases in the armor protection soldiers would perform the task more slowly.

@&#METHODS@&#

Thirteen male soldiers (age: 21.2 ± 2.5 yrs, height: 1.8 ± 0.6 m, weight 83.4 ± 9.8 kg) participated in this evaluation. Potential participants were excluded if they had any lower extremity injury that would inhibit their ability to complete the study. The evaluation was completed at the Center for Military Biomechanics (Natick, MA) in accordance with the Natick Soldier Research Development and Engineering Center (NSRDEC) Assurance for the Protection of Human Subjects (DoDA20124 dated 1 April 2008). Institutional Authority Approval was obtained before data collection took place.

Participants performed the study tasks (one performance (rush task) and three mobility tasks) wearing three body armor configurations (IOTV light, PC heavy, and IOTV heavy) (Table 1 and Fig. 2
                        ). Each body armor configuration was tested on a different day, and the testing order was randomly assigned to each participant prior to beginning the study from a 3 × 3 Latin Square. For each body armor configuration, participants wore a helmet and boots, and carried a mock weapon. For the IOTV light condition, participants wore the improved outer tactical vest (IOTV, Fig. 2A) with no ballistic hard plates (light). For the PC heavy condition, participants wore the scalable plate carrier (PC, Fig. 2C) with front, back, and side ballistic plates (heavy). For the IOTV heavy condition, participants wore the IOTV with front, back, and side ballistic plates (heavy). Furthermore, for each body armor configuration, participants performed the mobility tasks with (+FL) and without (No FL) a fighting load, which was fabric ammunition panel attached on the anterior portion of the body armor over the abdomen (Fig. 2B and D). Participants either started a mobility task with (+FL) or without the fighting load (No FL). After completing the requisite number of successful trials, the fighting load was either added or removed and then the participant performed the same mobility task again. Then the participant started the next mobility task and completed the first five successful trials before adding or removing the fighting load. Participants only performed the rush task (30-m rush) with the fighting load (for military relevance purposes).

The rush task was a repeated 30-m rush task that was completed as quickly and as safely as possible (Fig. 3
                        ), similar to Hasselquist et al. (2013, 2012). During the rush task, timing gates (Bower Timing Systems Draper, UT, USA) recorded individual rush and turn times, and total rush time. For the rush task, the timing gates were placed in front of two padded gym mats (Mat A and B), separated by 30 m, with Targets A and B placed approximately 5 m behind the mats at either end of the testing space. To start the task, each participant lay prone on Mat A with the weapon aimed at a target at the opposite end of the rushing area (Target A). Upon an auditory signal, the participant stood up and ran to Mat B (Rush 1). At Mat B, the participant assumed (dropped to) the prone position and aimed at Target A (i.e. acquired the target). After acquiring Target A, the participant announced “set”, stood up, turned (Turn 1), and rushed back toward Mat A (Rush 2). At Mat A, the participant dropped to prone and aimed at Target B. After acquiring Target B, the participant announced “set”, stood up, turned (Turn 2) and rushed back toward Mat B (Rush 3). The participant repeated the Rush–Turn–Rush cycle until 10 successive rushes and nine successive turns were performed. The time to complete all Rush–Turn–Rush cycles was recorded as the total rush time, while the individual rush time was time taken to run from one timing gate to another (e.g. Rush 1) and turn time was time taken to drop to prone, aim at target, get back up and turn (e.g. Turn 1). The rush task was performed after the mobility tasks during each testing session to prevent fatigue from confounding the performance of the mobility tasks. Participants were given approximately 10 min of rest after completing the mobility tasks before starting the 30-m rush task.

During each testing session, participants completed ten successful trials, five trials for each of the +FL and No FL conditions, for three, randomly ordered mobility tasks. The three mobility tasks performed at each session were unobstructed overground walking (walk), walking over a 30 cm obstacle (walk over), and ducking under a shoulder height obstacle (walk under). For each mobility task, participants walked (1.3 m/s ± 5%) across a 10-m walkway. For the walk task, participants walked across an unobstructed walkway. For the walk over task, participants stepped over a 30 cm obstacle placed approximately 5 m from the start of the walkway. For the walk under task, participants ducked under an obstacle suspended from the ceiling at their shoulder height placed approximately 5 m from the start of the walkway. For both the walk over and under tasks, the obstacle was easily movable (e.g. from contact by the participant) to prevent tripping and falling by the participant during testing. Walking speed was monitored by timing gates (Bower Timing Systems Draper, UT, USA) placed at beginning of the walkway and just before the obstacle, approximately 5 m from the beginning of the walkway. A trial was considered successful if the participant walked at the proper speed and avoided the obstacle without contacting it. The walking speed was selected in accordance with previous research regarding soldier load carriage and it has been recommended that soldiers not walk faster than 1.33 m/s with body borne loads (Harman et al., 2000a). Additionally, the speed was held constant in order to not introduce speed as a covariate in the statistical analysis, and in accordance with prior work (Harman et al., 2000a; LaFiandra et al., 2003). For each mobility task, participants were allowed up to 5 practice trials in order to acquire the proper walking speed. Participants were given approximately 5 min rest in between mobility tasks.

During the mobility tasks, a 12-camera (Oqus Qualysis AB, Gothenburg, Sweden) motion capture system recorded the 3D trajectories of markers placed on the trunk and lower extremity. Specifically, clusters of four markers, joined by a rigid plastic plate, were secured on eight segments (bilateral lateral thigh, shank, and foot, and pelvis and torso) using double sided and athletic tape wrapped around the segment. The thigh and pelvis clusters were placed over tight fitting spandex shorts, the chest cluster was placed on the back of the body armor, and the foot clusters were placed on the hard soled heel portion of the shoe. Additionally, calibration markers were created by digitizing pre-determined anatomical landmarks on bilateral foot (first/fifth metatarsal head), shank (medial/lateral malleolus), and thigh (medial/lateral epicondyle and greater trochanter) and pelvis (right/left anterior and posterior iliac spine and right/left iliac crest) and trunk (right/left acromion processes) according to the technique of Leardini et al. (2005).

Following maker placement, participants stood in a neutral (static) position and two high speed (120 Hz) video recordings were taken, one with the volunteers wearing the fighting load (+FL) and one without the fighting load (No FL). Using both the digitized landmarks and static recordings a kinematic model was created in Visual 3D (v4.96, C-Motion, Germantown, MD) for both the +FL and No FL conditions. For both kinematic models, the pelvis was defined with respect to the global (laboratory) coordinate system and assigned six (three translational and three rotational) degrees of freedom (Wu et al., 2002). The trunk, knee, and ankle joint centers and associated orthogonal local segment (3 degrees of freedom) coordinate systems were defined in accordance with previous literature (Bell et al., 1990; Grood and Suntay, 1983; Seay et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2002). For the hip joint, a standing trial with circular motion between the pelvis and thigh was used to calculate a functional joint center with Visual 3D, from a method adapted from Schwartz and Rozumalski (2005).

For each mobility trial, marker trajectories were low pass filtered with a fourth order Butterworth filter at a cut-off frequency of 6 Hz. For the walk and walk over tasks, Visual 3D processed the filtered marker trajectories at each time frame and absolute joint rotations were calculated and expressed relative to the static posture for the trunk, hip, and knee. For the walk under task, only trunk rotations were calculated from the filtered marker trajectories. For all mobility tasks, joint rotations were calculated for a single stride, which was defined as heel strike of the dominant limb to ipsilateral heel strike of the non-dominant limb. For the walk task, the stride was selected when the participant was in the middle of the walkway, whereas, for the walk over and under tasks, the stride selected was from heel strike immediately before the obstacle, to the ipsilateral heel strike immediately after the obstacle.

The dependent variables for the rush task included individual rush and turn time and total rush time. Before being submitted to analysis the individual rush and turn times were averaged across all 10 rushes and 9 turns for each participant, respectively. Then total rush time, and average individual rush and turn times were submitted to a one factor repeated measures ANOVA to test the effect of body armor (IOTV light + FL, PC heavy + FL, and IOTV heavy + FL) on rush performance. Analysis comparing rush performance with and without a fighting load was not run because participants did not perform the rush for the No FL condition.

For the walk and walk over task, the dependent variables included maximum trunk extension during the stride; trunk extension and hip and knee flexion angle at heel strike; and peak hip and knee flexion angle during stance of the dominant limb. For the walk under task, the dependent variable was maximum trunk flexion during the stride. Initial analysis revealed no significant trial effect for any dependent measure during any mobility tasks, therefore each dependent variable was averaged across all trials to calculate a ‘participant-based mean’. Then, for each dependent measure, the participant-based mean was submitted to a two-factor repeated measures ANOVA to test the main effects and possible interaction of the three body armor configurations (IOTV light, PC heavy, and IOTV heavy) and two fighting load conditions (+FL and No FL). In analyses where sphericity was significant, the Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment was applied to the degrees of freedom. Where statistically significant differences were observed, a step-up sequential Bonferroni correction was used (Hommel, 1988) for post-hoc analysis. Significant interaction effects were submitted to one-way ANOVAs stratified by fighting load and followed up with t-tests to test simple main effects.

All statistical analyses were performed using PASW Statistics 18.0 (IBM Inc. Chicago, IL, USA). Statistical significance was set at 0.05 for analyses.

@&#RESULTS@&#

There was a significant effect of body armor on individual (p = 0.037) and total rush time (p = 0.017) during the rush task (Table 2
                        ). The average individual rush time was significantly longer (p = 0.004) with the IOTV heavy compared to the IOTV light, but similar differences (p = 0.05) were not evident between the IOTV heavy and the PC heavy, or between the PC heavy and the IOTV light. Post-hoc analysis, however, revealed no significant differences (p = 0.025, corrected α = 0.016) in total rush time between any of the body armor configurations. Body armor configuration had no significant effect (p = 0.428) on average turn time during the rush task.

The ANOVA revealed a significant two-way interaction for trunk extension at heel strike (p = 0.039) during the walk task (Table 3
                            and Fig. 4
                           ). Further analysis indicated that without the fighting load (No FL) participants exhibited greater trunk extension while wearing the PC heavy compared to the IOTV light, but, after correcting for type I error, this difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.034, corrected alpha = 0.016). Additionally, there were no significant differences found between body armor configurations with the fighting load. However, the addition of the fighting load to the body armor did significantly increase trunk extension for each body armor condition (IOTV light, p < 0.001; PC heavy p < 0.001, IOTV heavy p < 0.001), with the IOTV heavy exhibiting a larger increase in trunk extension than the IOTV light or the PC heavy.

A two-way interaction was also evident for trunk extension at heel strike (p = 0.048) during the walk over task (Table 3 and Fig. 5
                           A). At heel strike, significantly greater trunk extension was evident with the fighting load compared to without fighting load for each body armor condition (IOTV light, p < 0.001; PC heavy p < 0.001, IOTV heavy p < 0.001), with the IOTV heavy exhibiting a larger increase in trunk extension than the IOTV light or the PC heavy.

There was also a two-way interaction for maximum trunk extension (p = 0.041) during the walk over task (Table 3 and Fig. 5B). Maximum trunk extension was significantly greater with the fighting load compared to without the fighting load for each body armor condition (IOTV light, p < 0.001; PC heavy p < 0.001, IOTV heavy p < 0.001), but again, trunk extension increased more for the IOTV heavy than the IOTV light or the PC configurations.

During the walk task, the addition of fighting load had a significant main effect on trunk, hip and knee posture (Table 3). Specifically, with the fighting load participants' increased trunk extension at heel strike (p < 0.001), maximum trunk extension (p < 0.001), and hip flexion at both heel strike (p = 0.032) and peak stance (p = 0.002); and decreased knee flexion at heel strike (p = 0.027) compared to without the fighting load. Body armor configuration, however, had no significant effect on trunk or lower limb kinematics (p > 0.05) during the walk task.

The addition of the fighting load also had a significant main effect on trunk, hip, and knee posture during the walk over task (Table 3). Again, with the fighting load, participants' increased trunk extension at heel strike (p < 0.001), maximum trunk extension (p < 0.001), and hip flexion at both heel strike (p = 0.015) and peak stance (p = 0.018); and decreased knee flexion at heel strike (p = 0.023) compared to without the fighting load. Additionally, there was a main effect for body armor configuration on the knee flexion angle at heel strike (p = 0.012), but post-hoc analysis did not reveal significant differences between any of the body armor configurations (p > 0.05).

During the walk under task, the addition of the fighting load (p < 0.001) decreased the participants' maximum trunk flexion compared to without the fighting load (Table 3). Body armor configuration also had a significant main effect on maximum trunk flexion (p = 0.020) posture during the walk under task (Table 3). Post-hoc analysis, however, revealed no significant differences (p > 0.05) in maximum trunk flexion between any of the body armor configurations.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Soldier rush performance decreased with greater body armor. In agreement with previous experimental evidence (Hasselquist et al., 2012; Peoples et al., 2010) soldiers' rush performance significantly decreased with increasing body armor. However, rush performance was only statistically different between the lightest and heaviest body armor configurations evaluated. Increasing the torso borne load 7 kg, from the IOTV light to heavy, resulted in 5.3% and 4.5% longer total and individual rush times, respectively. Previously, Hasselquist and colleagues, (2012) demonstrated that the addition of extremity body armor (∼6.5 kg) significantly increased soldiers' rush times up to 10% for a similar 30-m rush task; and Peoples et al. (2010) reported that soldiers increased rushing time by 3.6% with a 10 kg increase in body borne load during a similar, but substantially shorter, 5-m rushing task. Peoples et al., however, did not report significant increases in rush time (0.7%–2.8%) with closely weighted armor configurations (two and three kg difference). Similarly, in support of this contention, significant differences in performance, i.e. rush time, between the closely weighted body armor configurations currently examined here (2% between IOTV light and PC, and 3% between IOTV heavy and PC heavy) were not found. This lack of differences may be due to the symmetric addition of load from the ballistic plates (front, back and sides) to the body armor for the tested configurations. Knapik et al. (2004) postulated that a symmetric load, distributed close to the body center of mass, may be less detrimental to performance on short sprints than an asymmetric load. However, the decrement in performance between the IOTV light and the IOTV heavy may also stem from the kinematic changes between the body armor configurations.

During the mobility tasks there was a significant interaction of body armor and fighting load. The addition of the anterior fighting load to the heaviest body armor configuration (IOTV heavy) yielded a larger (18%–43%) increase in trunk extension compared to the IOTV light and the PC heavy configurations, during both the walk and walk over tasks. Body borne loads typically produce adaptations of trunk posture that move the center of mass within the base of support (Harman et al., 1999; Martin and Nelson, 1986) to maintain stability of the load carrier. In the current study, the greater trunk extension evident with the addition of the fighting load was likely an effort to increase the stability (Rietdyk et al., 2005) during the walk and walk over tasks. This extended posture is a proactive strategy used to keep the center of mass within the base of support while walking with an anterior load (Rietdyk et al., 2005), and is vital to maintaining upright posture and stability with body borne loads (Harman et al., 1999; Martin and Nelson, 1986; Winter, 1991). Proactive strategies use visual, vestibular, and kinesthetic inputs to make biomechanical adjustments that aid in maintaining stability in estimation of unexpected perturbations and have long been identified as methods to control balance during adaptive locomotion (Patla, 2003); such as when walking with a load. Increased trunk extension also may be dependent on the weight of the body borne load, with larger loads (e.g. IOTV heavy compared to light) requiring greater alterations in trunk posture to adequately maintain stability. The increased instability and greater trunk extension evident, especially with IOTV heavy, was likely present during other tasks, such as the 30-m rush, and may have resulted in the decreased performance currently observed. However, a direct relationship between kinematic changes and performance cannot be concluded due to lack of biomechanical data collection during the rush task. Additional study, is warranted to determine whether biomechanical adaptations as a result of body borne loads during the walk and walk over mobility tasks are also present during other soldier tasks, e.g. rush tasks.

Similarly, as evidenced by the significant main effect, adding the fighting load to the body armor altered trunk and lower limb kinematics for all mobility tasks. Specifically, the asymmetrical loading that resulted with the addition of the fighting load significantly increased trunk extension and hip flexion, and decreased knee flexion of soldiers during the mobility tasks. In agreement with previous experimental evidence (Rietdyk et al., 2005), adding the anterior fighting load resulted in a more extended trunk (i.e. leaning backward) during the walk and walk over tasks. Further, the increased hip flexion evident with the addition of the fighting load during the walk and walk over tasks may have been a proactive strategy to increase stability during mobility tasks. The hip joint plays a major role in controlling sagittal plane rotations of the torso (Patla, 2003) and thus, may contribute to maintaining the center of mass within the base of support with the anterior fighting load. Additionally, the increased hip flexion may contribute to increased stability by lowering the center of mass, and aid with accepting the additional weight of the body borne load (Harman et al., 2000a). Previously, Harman et al. (2000b) and Attwells et al. (2006) reported the increased knee flexion during load carriage also aided with weight accepting the body borne load during gait. The current outcomes, however, demonstrate that the load carrier decreased knee flexion at heel strike during the walk and walk over tasks. This extended knee posture may aid the stance limb to bear the responsibility of accepting the increased weight, prevent overwhelming the lower limb (McNitt-Gray, 1991), and increase stability of the load carrier. Discrepancies in knee kinematic results between the current study and previous findings, however, may be attributed to differences between anterior and posterior torso loading, on which most previous work has focused.

The anterior fighting load also impeded soldiers' ability to pass under obstacles. Specifically, during the walk under task, the addition of the fighting load restricted the soldiers' maximum trunk flexion by approximately 13%. The inability to bend forward at the waist when wearing the fighting load likely made the task more difficult. Difficulty in overcoming an obstacle or dropping to cover from fire in combat, may lead to vulnerability of the soldier and diminish his/her lethality and/or survivability. Future research ought to examine walking under low hanging obstacles with varying distributions of load (anterior/posterior), to better investigate the effects of diminished trunk flexion ability on obstacle negotiation.

Increased body armor protection had little effect on the trunk and lower limb kinematic patterns exhibited during the walk and walk over tasks. Specifically, the 5 kg and 7.3 kg increase in body borne load for the PC heavy and the IOTV heavy, compared to the IOTV light, had no significant effect on trunk extension, and hip flexion during the walk and walk over tasks, as well as knee flexion during the walk task. During the walk over task, however, greater body armor (i.e. body borne load) had a significant effect on knee posture. In agreement with previous experimental evidence (Attwells et al., 2006; Harman et al., 2000b), soldiers' demonstrated an increase in knee flexion at heel strike with the addition of load during the walk over task. However, post-hoc analysis failed to identify significant differences in knee flexion between specific body armor configurations. Greater body armor load also had a significant effect on maximum trunk flexion during the walk under task. Specifically, soldiers exhibited approximately 12% and 10% more maximum trunk flexion with the IOTV light compared to the PC heavy and the IOTV heavy, respectively; but again post-hoc tests revealed no significant differences between configurations. The lack of significant post-hoc biomechanical differences found between body armor configurations during the walk over and under tasks may be due to the small differences in weight with increases in protection. The results of this study suggest that the lack of differences found with small increases in load is common among performance and mobility tasks. Future research should focus on determining the precise weight differences that result in significant biomechanical changes, during a variety of militarily relevant locomotor tasks.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

One limitation of this evaluation may be the constraint placed on speed of walking for the mobility tasks. We constrained speed in our methodology to make sure that biomechanical changes found were due to the change in load, not speed (LaFiandra et al., 2003). The shortfall of this constraint is that we were not able to find if increases in load, impacted the time to complete the mobility tasks. Additionally, placing markers on body armor and clothing may have introduced variation into our biomechanical outcomes from resultant movement artifact. To limit this movement artifact, however, we ensured markers clusters were securely wrapped to the segment, which has been shown to significantly reduce these errors (Leardini et al., 2005). Another possible limitation of the study was that all participants were male. Previous researchers have reported a sexual dimorphism in lower limb biomechanics during similar dynamic movements (Harman et al., 1999). We limited our study sample to males to prevent confounding biomechanical outcomes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Soldier rush performance decreased with increasing body armor coverage and weight. Specifically, both average individual and total rush times were significantly longer with greater body armor weight. While rush performance was only statistically different between the lightest (IOTV light) and heaviest (IOTV heavy) armor configurations tested, soldier rush performance generally decreased as body armor, i.e. body borne load, increased. This reduction in rush performance evident with the IOTV heavy may stem from larger biomechanical adaptations that result with the addition of the fighting load for that armor configuration. For instance, a larger increase in trunk extension occurred when adding the fighting load to the IOTV heavy as compared to when adding it to the IOTV light or the PC heavy during the walk and walk over tasks. While this adaptation of trunk posture may be a necessary proactive strategy to maintain adequate stability with the heaviest armor configuration, it also may negatively impact load carrier performance. Interestingly, while the addition of the fighting load had a significant, and potentially negative impact on trunk and lower limb biomechanics during the walk and walk over tasks, substantial modifications in trunk and lower limb biomechanics were not evident with increasing body armor for those tasks. During the walk under task, however, both the addition of the fighting load and increasing body armor decreased maximum trunk flexion posture, which may negatively impact soldiers' mobility. Future research is needed to further identify how changes in load distribution (i.e. symmetric, anterior, and/or posterior), individually and collectively effect soldier performance and mobility on increasingly complex militarily relevant locomotor tasks. Furthermore, a biomechanical connection (kinematic and kinetic) between performance and mobility needs to be further documented on such tasks.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

