@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Pre-flight safety briefings, mood and information retention

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Mood is a moderating factor that is known to affect performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           The delivery of the pre-flight safety briefing on aircraft is an opportunity to affect one's mood.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results suggest that mood can be affected by a humorous safety briefing.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Mood

Memory

Aviation

Cabin safety

Pre-flight safety briefing

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Mood is a moderating factor that is known to affect performance. For airlines, the delivery of the pre-flight safety briefing prior to a commercial flight is not only an opportunity to inform passengers about the safety features on-board the aircraft they are flying, but an opportunity to positively influence their mood, and hence performance in the unlikely event of an emergency. The present research examined whether indeed the pre-flight safety briefing could be used to positively impact passengers' mood. In addition, the present research examined whether the recall of key safety messages contained within the pre-flight safety briefing was influenced by the style of briefing. Eighty-two participants were recruited for the research and divided into three groups; each group exposed to a different pre-flight cabin safety briefing video (standard, humorous, movie theme). Mood was measured prior and post safety briefing. The results revealed that pre-flight safety briefing videos can be used to manipulate passengers' mood. Safety briefings that are humorous or use movie themes to model their briefing were found to positively affect mood. However, there was a trade-off between entertainment and education, the greater the entertainment value, the poorer the retention of key safety messages. The results of the research are discussed from both an applied and theoretical perspective.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In time critical situations, such as a rapid disembarkation during an aircraft emergency evacuation, passengers' irrational, counterproductive, and erroneous behaviour has the potential to cause serious consequences. As a result, aviation governing bodies such as the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in the United States and the Civil Aviation Safety Authority (CASA) in Australia mandate that airlines brief passengers on emergency procedures prior to every flight (FAA Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) 135.117 – FAA, 2014; CASA Civil Aviation Orders (CAO) 20.11.14 – CASA, 2009). However, not all passengers attend to these briefings (National Transportation Safety Board – NTSB, 2000) and for those that do, some behave contrary to the information or instructions given. The NTSB (2000) noted that improper behaviour such as arguments, pushing or climbing over seats and removing baggage from overhead lockers were all common behaviour during emergency evacuations.

While failure to attend to the safety briefing in the first place may in part account for unruly behaviour, considering the relationship between mood and performance, ensuring passengers are prepared cognitively (i.e., in the right state of mind) to deal with the stressors of an emergency situation has also the potential to improve performance. Thus, the pre-flight safety briefing may provide airlines a unique opportunity to not only educate passengers about the safety features of the aircraft, but a chance to positively influence their state of mind, ultimately affecting performance. Since mood is often linked to performance (Kelly and Barsade, 2001) and is relatively simple to manipulate (Valdesolo and DeSteno, 2006), the present study sought to investigate if varying the content of the pre-flight safety briefing was a simple and effective way of achieving this goal.

Mood is a moderating factor similar to fatigue or noise, which affects behaviour (Tehrani and Molesworth, 2015). According to Russell (2003), mood is a prolonged affective state which is said to be divorced from any direct event or object. In contrast to emotion, which relates to specific events or objects and is short lasting, mood is generally long lasting. Positive mood has been linked to performance improvements in areas such as maths (Bryan and Bryan, 1991), attitudinal changes (Smith, 1993) and cognitive processing (i.e., heuristic processing; Batra and Stayman, 1990). Similarly negative mood has been linked to poor performance in areas such as team process (i.e., social cohesion, workload sharing, team conflict; Jordan et al., 2006), academic achievement (Lane et al., 2005) and computational game-based learning (Jackson and McNamara, 2013).

In aviation, Tehrani and Molesworth (2015) exploited the benefits of manipulating mood in a study which involved examining participants' response to a simulated aircraft ditching scenario (emergency landing in water) shortly after take-off. They found by simply presenting images of unpleasant scenes such as violence, they were able to instil a negative mood state in participants, as measured using Shacham (1983) Total Mood Disturbance (TMD) score. Conversely by presenting pleasant images such as flowers, they were able to instil a positive mood state in participants. Following mood manipulation and shortly after exposing all participants to the same pre-flight safety briefing, they simulated an in-flight emergency, resulting in an emergency aircraft ditching. They found that participants who were in a negative mood state committed seven times more errors during the evacuation procedure than participants in the positive mood state, errors such as failing to take personal life vest and carrying personal belongings to the emergency exit. Similarly participants in the negative mood state took almost twice as long to evacuate the aircraft than participants in the positive mood state.

According to Johnson (1979), airline passengers that fail to attend to the pre-flight safety briefing often underestimate the importance of the material contained within these briefings. A large proportion of the non-attenders were young educated males who felt they already knew the content of the pre-flight safety briefing. Fennell and Muir (1992) and Seneviratne and Molesworth (2015) report that frequent travellers find the pre-flight safety briefings repetitious, uninteresting and boring; as a result, a large portion of passengers remain inattentive during such briefings (NTSB, 2010). However, Molesworth (2014) contends that both airlines and aviation authorities need to take some responsibility for poor passenger behaviour in an emergency. For example, a review of three commonly employed pre-flight safety briefings found that there are between 34 and 41 key safety messages presented, which passengers are expected to extract and remember. The time provided to extract these messages average three and a half minutes. Not surprising, Molesworth found that participants attending to these messages could recall no more than 50 per cent of the key safety messages, which may explain why passengers behave contrary to the instructions in these safety briefings during an emergency (NTSB, 2000).

In 2012, a Jet2 B737 filled with fumes and smoke from one of the aircraft engines aborted take-off at Glasgow Airport and the crew completed an emergency evacuation (Air Accident Investigation Branch – AAIB, 2013). Some passengers reported they were hampered during the emergency evacuation by other passengers recovering personal items from the overhead lockers, a behaviour that is condemned in the safety briefing. Other passengers reported that after exiting the aircraft via the emergency exit over the wing, decided to re-enter the aircraft to exit by a door with a slide, rather than sliding down the surface of the wing. In a separate incident in the United States involving the forced ditching of a US Airways Flight (Flight 1549), passengers appeared to also behave in a manner contrary to the instructions provided in the pre-flight safety briefing and/or on the safety card. Moreover, only three per cent of passengers (5 passengers) retrieved their life vest from under their seat after the emergency ditching (NTSB, 2010). The NTSB also uncovered that less than one fifth of passengers (17% – 25 passengers) reported watching the majority of the pre-flight safety briefing while even less (8% or 12 passengers) reported reading the safety card before or during the flight (NTSB, 2010).

In an attempt to boost passengers' interest in the safety briefing, some airlines are utilising marketing techniques, such as employing humour to convey information or using celebrities to deliver the message (Nataraajan and Chawla, 2008). For example, Qantas in Australia and Virgin America in the United States employ celebrities to attract the attention of passengers in one of their safety briefing videos, while Air New Zealand model some of their briefing videos on popular movies or sporting events such as the Hobbit series of movies or the rugby world cup. Delta Air Lines in the United States employ humour in one of their safety briefing videos as a method to boost passengers' attention.


                     Tehrani and Molesworth (2015) contend that there are added advantages to improving the quality of the safety briefing on aircraft. Apart from the obvious improvements in knowledge, providing a briefing that carefully incorporates humour can positively impact on passengers' mood, which in turn can translate into improved performance (i.e., during an emergency evacuation). However, Smith (1993) offers a word of caution when using humour in advertising. He contends that humour can disrupt the systematic processing of target/advertising material/information, resulting in the target message being lost to the humorous message. Chan (2011) found that indeed humour can disrupt the processing of the target message in a study with 253 university student and five different advertisements (two humorous, two non-humorous and one neutral). Moreover, while the humorous advertisements were more successful in gaining the attention of the students, they were found to cause more disruptions during the processing of the message.


                     Mackie and Worth (1989) found similar results in an experiment with university students where after manipulating the mood state of half of the students through a process where they were led to believe they were lucky in a lottery draw, students read a recently delivered speech on government control and acid rain. The other half of the students did not enter a lottery draw and hence did not have the opportunity to win money, as a result were categorised as mood neutral. Two versions of the speech were presented, one containing weak arguments and a second containing strong arguments. Under time pressure to review the speech, the students in a positive mood evaluated both speeches similarly, while the students in the neutral mood relied on the persuasive augments in the strong argument speech to alter their perception. Mackie and Worth interpreted these results as evidence that positive mood adversely affects individuals ability to systematically process information.

The present research extends the research conducted by Tehrani and Molesworth (2015) and investigates the benefits of including humour or familiar movie themes/characters in pre-flight safety briefings on improving passengers' mood as well as their ability to recall key safety messages presented within the briefing. Hence, the present research seeks to investigate if:
                        
                           1.
                           Employing humour or celebrities in a pre-flight safety briefings can positively affect individuals' mood, and

Whether the use of humour or celebrities in a pre-flight safety briefing adversely affect the retention of the key safety messages conveyed in the briefing?

@&#METHOD@&#

A total of 82 participants (55 male, average age of 19.36 years and 27 female, average age of 19.26 years) with an overall average age of 19.33 (SD = 2.04) years were recruited from the student population at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) Australia for the research. All students volunteered their time and as a result, no reimbursement was provided. The research was approved in advance by the UNSW Australia Ethics Panel.

A 2 × 3 mixed repeated measures design with mood comprising two levels (mood prior and mood after) as the repeated measure variable and the pre-flight safety briefing video as the between groups variable (standard video, humorous video, movie theme video) was employed. Mood as measured by the Total Mood Disturbance (Shacham, 1983) featured as one of the dependent variables and recall performance in terms of key safety messages represented as a percentage featured as the second dependent variable.

The material comprised: an information sheet, consent form, demographics form (i.e., age, sex, previous flight experience), Profile of Mood State Questionnaire – Short Form (POMS-SF; Shacham, 1983), pre-flight safety briefing video A (standard video), pre-flight safety briefing video B (humorous video), pre-flight safety briefing video C (movie theme video), and a comprehension test form. The comprehension test form, previously employed by Barkow and Rutenberg (2002) and Molesworth (2014) contained a number of headings corresponding to the key safety message themes within each safety briefing video (see Table 1
                        ). In completing the comprehension test form, participants' task was to recall as much as they could from each video as guided by each safety message heading. Not surprising, and since the three pre-flight safety videos were produced for the same organisation, and the material to be covered in the briefings is dictated by governing bodies such as the FAA in the Unites States and CASA in Australia, the main safety themes in each video were largely the same.

The standard pre-flight safety video (video A) used a male narrator to deliver the safety message. Each section of the video was signposted by a theme heading such as cabin baggage, seatbelt, oxygen and so on as outlined in Table 1. In each theme, actors demonstrated the desired behaviour relating to the safety messages. In addition, for the purpose of this study, the video subtitles were removed. The total duration of this video is 2 min and 55 s (see Table 2
                        ).

The humorous pre-flight safety video (video B) is designed to be a humorous safety video which follows the same format as video A. However, introducing the video are two personnel dressed as cabin safety officers. In contrast to video A, each section of the video is not signposted and the personnel featured in the video are all dressed in aerobic clothes and when possible, dance between key safety messages. A male who is similarly dressed in aerobic clothes explains the safety features of the aircraft, interjecting humour where possible while performing choreographed disco moves. Throughout the video, the dance music similar to the 70s disco music features and the lyrics to the song are only audible when there are long breaks between safety messages. The video concludes with the same two people introducing the video and wishing passengers an enjoyable flight. The total duration of this video is 3 min and 39 s (see Table 2).

The movie theme pre-flight safety video (video C) is set in the theme of a popular movie series and as such uses appropriately dressed individuals to both convey safety messages and feature in the video. The video delivers the same key safety messages as in the other two safety videos however, with additional information specific to the aircraft and its configuration such as Business Premier. The total duration of this video is 4 min and 27 s (see Table 2).

The equipment comprised an IBM compatible personal computer, NEC (PA550W) data projector, 2 × 3 m projector screen and two Bose speakers. Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 21 was used to analyse all data.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

All participants were recruited by direct invitation from selected lecture theatres of the University of New South Wales and randomly divided into three groups. After a short introduction they were asked to complete the consent form followed by the POMS-SF questionnaire. Then each group was asked to watch their respective pre-flight safety briefing video. Directly following the video, they were asked to complete a second POMS questionnaire, followed by the comprehension task and finally the demographics questionnaire. The total time taken to complete the study per group was approximately 25 min.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The aim of the present research was twofold. First, to investigate if the pre-flight safety briefing provided by airlines prior to a commercial flight was effective in manipulating individuals' mood. Hence, participants' mood was assessed using Shacham (1983) Total Mood Disturbance score, extracted from the POMS-SF questionnaire. The formula for the TMD was: Depression-Dejection + Tension-Anxiety + Anger-Hostility + Fatigue-Inertia + Confusion-Bewilderment + (24 – Vigor-Activity). Second, the present research sought to examine the extent to which individuals could recall the key safety messages in the safety videos. In relation to the second aim, namely examining participants' recall of key safety messages, number of key safety messages recalled was represented as a percentage based on the total number of safety messages in each briefing. However, prior to being able to calculate this, the number of key safety messages present in each safety video had to be extracted. The process to achieve this involved, writing out each script from the respective video, extracting key safety messages, and then categorising the safety messages. To ensure consistency and accuracy of coding, two coders independently extracted the key safety messages from each pre-flight safety briefing. A consensus was achieved and a final list of key safety messages was produced for each safety briefing video. These lists were employed by the coders who scored all responses independently. Any discrepancies were discussed, resulting in a consensus, thereby achieving an inter-rater reliability of 100%. Finally, in order to reduce the likelihood of prior exposure to the pre-flight safety video adversely influencing the results, data from only the participants who had not seen their respective pre-flight safety video was analysed; 10 participants (# 4, 5, 56, 57, 58, 63, 64, 68, 72, 78; two from video group B, eight from video group C) had previously seen the respective pre-flight safety video and hence were removed from the study.

Prior to the main analysis, it was important to determine that the random allocation of participants to three experimental groups was successful. As a result, participants' mood score (i.e., TMD score) prior to watching the pre-flight safety video for the three groups (Standard video, Humorous video, Movie Theme video), was analysed with a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). With test assumptions of normality and homogeneity of variance satisfactory, the results failed to reveal a statistically significant difference between groups, F(2, 66) = 1.376, p = .260. This result suggests that all participants had a similar mood prior to the experimental condition.

To determine if participants' mood changed as a result of exposure to the various videos, a second ANOVA was conducted comparing mood scores between groups. With test assumptions of normality and homogeneity of variance satisfactory, the results revealed a statistical significant difference between group, F(2, 66) = 7.469, p = .001. In order to determine where the differences lie, three separate repeated measures tests were performed, comparing TMD scores prior to the video with TMD scores post video. With alpha adjusted to .017 to control for family wise error (i.e., Bonferroni adjusted; α = 0.05/3 when three analyses were performed), the result of the first repeated measures analysis comparing TMD scores prior and post the Standard video (video A) failed to reveal a statistical difference t(24) = .911, p = .372. Hence, the mood of participants in the Standard video group (video A) did not change significantly. In contrast, a significant difference was noted between TMD scores pre and post pre-flight safety video for participants in the Humorous video group (video B), t(25) = 2.652, p = .014, as well as for participants in the Movie Theme video group (video C), t(20) = 3.546, p = .002 (see Table 3
                        ). A lower TMD score indicates a more positive mood. Hence, this result suggests that the Humorous video as well as the Movie Theme video were effective in improving participants' mood.

In order to determine if prior viewing experience influenced participants mood following the video, in particular with video C (Movie Theme pre-flight safety briefing video) since there are to date five movies which relate to the content of the pre-flight safety briefing video (video C), a correlational analysis examining exposure to these five movies (i.e., the number of videos participants had seen from this series) and mood following the pre-flight briefing video C was conducted. The results of a Pearson product–moment correlation failed to reveal a relationship between prior video viewing and mood post pre-flight safety video C, r(20) = −.392, p = .088. This result suggests that prior exposure to the five movies had no noticeable effect on participants' mood.

In order to determine if participants' ability to recall the key safety messages in each pre-flight safety video differed, a separate one-way ANOVA was conducted. Consistent with the previous analyses, the number of key safety messages recalled for the three groups (Standard, Humorous, Movie Theme) was analysed. With test assumptions of normality and homogeneity of variance satisfactory, the result revealed a statistically significant difference between group, F(2, 69) = 17.13, p < .001. Fisher's Least Significant Difference (LSD) post hoc comparisons revealed the significant difference lie between the Standard video (video A) and the Humorous video (video B; M
                        Diff = 17.54, p < .001) and between the Standard video (video A) and the Movie Theme video (video C; M
                        Diff = 13.30, p < .001). As can be seen in Table 4
                        , this result suggests that the use of humour in a pre-flight safety video or movie theme is not an effective method of facilitating recall of information compared to a pre-flight safety briefing video without humour.

Since aviation authorities largely govern the safety material covered in safety briefings and 75 participants noted that they had flown on a commercial aircraft at least once in the last five years, it is plausible that prior exposure the pre-flight safety briefing in the present research acted as a reminder to this material, and therefore facilitated in recall of information not specific or unique to the safety briefing viewed in the present research. However a review of the key safety messages suggest that if this occurred, it may have been minimal. This is because a number of the key messages recalled such as ‘electronic devices even cool ones can interfere’ (e.g., electronic devices can interfere with aircraft equipment) or ‘Captain says let's kick butt’ (e.g., smoking is not permitted on board aircraft) were unique to the videos under examination. This result seems to be further supported by a series of correlational analyses which failed to find a relationship between prior flight experience (number of flights in last year or five years) and safety information recall, largest r, r(69) = .060, p = .622.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The primary focus of aviation governing bodies such as FAA in the United States, Transport Canada and CASA in Australia is to enhance safety by setting regulations for their local carriers (Chena and Chena, 2012). For airlines this translates into rules, procedures and systems to either eliminate or reduce the likely impact of hazards on their operation (i.e., manage risk). For passengers of these airlines, one obvious risk control measure is the pre-flight safety briefing provided prior to the flight that is made to educate them about the safety features of the aircraft they are flying and how to behave in the unlikely event of an emergency. However for many passengers, the pre-flight safety briefing is deemed repetitive, familiar (i.e., old information), and/or boring (Fennell and Muir, 1992; Seneviratne and Molesworth, 2015). According to Tehrani and Molesworth (2015), the preflight-safety briefing is also an opportunity for airlines to positively influence passengers' mood. The benefit of positively influencing passengers' mood would be evident in situations such as the US Airways (Flight 1549) accident in 2009, which experienced an in-flight emergency shortly after take-off and cabin crew were left with little time to prepare the cabin for emergency evacuation (NTSB, 2010).

The results of the present research suggest that indeed the pre-flight safety briefing video can be used as a tool to manipulate passengers' mood. Moreover, providing participants with an entertaining safety video that is either comical or familiar to them serves as a method of enhancing their mood. In contrast, providing a video that is void of humour or entertainment value fails to positively influence mood. However there appears to be a trade-off between entertainment and education. Specifically the results of this research suggest that the greater the entertainment value, the poorer the retention of key safety messages. For many airlines, this result would be disappointing as it fails to reward their efforts for being creative and trying to re-engage passengers with crucial safety related information (or marketing). Similarly for passengers, this result would appear disappointing as such videos appear to directly address their complaints as to the reasons why they fail to attend to such information (e.g., repetitive, familiar with content, boring).

The results of the present research reinforce the concerns expressed by Molesworth (2014), Tehrani and Molesworth (2015) and Seneviratne and Molesworth (2015) who note that passengers' retention of information following exposure to safety briefing information is poor at best. Remember Molesworth found that on average participants could recall approximately half of the key safety messages presented in the safety videos. The results of the present research found that recall rates were slightly less, on average 44%. These results are alarming and suggest that the aviation industry need to rethink their strategy of passenger education and either examine alternate methods to delivering this information or investigate methods of improving the delivery of this information so that it is more memorable.

The results also highlight the complex relationship between mood and performance. While Tehrani and Molesworth (2015) found participants in a positive mood performed better during the simulated emergency evacuation compared to participants in a negative mood state, in terms of time to complete the evacuation as well as number of errors committed during the evacuation procedure, the results of the present research suggest that improved mood adversely affects recall of key safety messages. This is despite the script employed to deliver the key safety messages in each video being largely the same (safety briefings all from same airline however slight variations in script specific to aircraft type).

There are various reasons which may account for these results, the most notable relates to the cognitive processing of the information in the safety videos. Specifically, in both the Humorous and Movie Theme video, addition stimuli required to set the theme of each video (i.e., attire and humour) is present, such stimuli has the potential to increase the cognitive load and or disrupt the cognitive processing of key information (i.e., safety messages). Similarly, flying or the thought of flying may increase an individual's anxiety level or conversely reduce these (i.e., low level of arousal) in the case of a frequent flyer. In both situations, experiencing less than optimum levels of stress or arousal can hinder passengers' ability to acquire desired information.

In terms of the former, Batra and Stayman (1990) found a similar effect with humour in advertisement where humour seemed to secure attention, but disrupted processing of the key messages. It is thought that this results from participant paying close attention to the humorous part of the message (or advert) at the expense of the advertised message (Chan, 2011). In the case of the latter, Eysenck (1979) noted that people perform poorly in exams because of stress and anxiety which is due to wariness and unlike arousal it slows down memory and other responses. Hence, future researches should be directed to investigate the link between mood and information processing and examine other techniques to manipulate mood as humour, while attracts attention, can hide or mask the key messages being delivered (i.e., flight safety). This can be examined by employing different stimulus modes such as using colours (Yildirim et al., 2007), music (Young et al., 2012), pictures or motivational methods (Richards and Whittaker, 1990) such as winning prizes to determine if the recall performance is as the result of the positive mood itself or the method in which the mood is attained.

Future research should also examine response accuracy decrements over time. Moreover, the present research focused on examining participant’ recall performance directly following exposure to a pre-flight safety briefing. However an in-flight emergency may occur at any time throughout a flight, and as a result, passengers may be required to recall and apply knowledge acquired from the pre-flight safety briefing which they were exposed to at the start of the flight. One simple and effective method to examine response accuracy decrements over time is to pair the recall point with key segments of flight, such as: take-off, climb, cruise, top of descent, and landing.

Furthermore, future research should also be directed to investigate how contextual factors such as the environment of an aircraft, namely noise, seating and how visual acuity affects individuals recall of the safety messages as well as mood. It is important to note that the quality of the videos employed in the present research along with the respective audio was of high quality. Considering these factors have been reported prior as key determinants as to why passengers fail to attend to preflight safety briefings (Fennell and Muir, 1992), future research should examine their impact on retention of information from briefings. In addition, future research should attempt to duplicate these findings with a more diverse range of participants since the average age of the participants in the present study was approximately 20 years of age.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

As required by law, airlines provide all passengers a safety briefing prior to every flight. For many passengers, this briefing is viewed as repetitious and boring. This has led some airlines to transform their briefings, making them more humorous and entertaining. Humour has many benefits, one of which includes positively affecting mood, which can affect performance (i.e., reduce errors and time to complete task). However, the results of the present research suggest that there appears to be a trade-off between improving the entertainment value of a pre-flight safety briefing using humour and education, and safety information retention. For airlines these results suggest careful attention needs to be provided towards the creation of pre-flight safety briefings so that they capture and maintain the attention of the passengers, while at the same time refrain from diverting important cognitive resources away from processing the key safety messages contained in the safety briefing.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

The authors would like to thank members from the Asia Pacific Cabin Safety Working Group (APCSWG) who contributed to a draft of this manuscript. We would also like to thank the participants who volunteered their time to assist with the research.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

