@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Action slips during whole-body vibration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examine whether whole-body vibration (WBV) increases frequency of action slips.


                        
                        
                           
                           There were more errors of commission (i.e. action slips) during 17 Hz vertical WBV.


                        
                        
                           
                           Responses to stimuli were faster during 17 Hz vertical WBV.


                        
                        
                           
                           17 Hz vertical WBV can induce impulsive responding.


                        
                        
                           
                           The number of action slips may increase because responses are faster during WBV.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Response inhibition

Sustained attention

Human error

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Helicopter aircrew members engage in highly demanding cognitive tasks in an environment subject to whole-body vibration (WBV). Sometimes their actions may not be according to plan (e.g. action slips and lapses). This study used a Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART) to examine whether action slips were more frequent during exposure to WBV. Nineteen participants performed the SART in two blocks. In the WBV block participants were exposed to 17 Hz vertical WBV, which is typical of larger helicopter working environments. In the No-WBV block there was no WBV. There were more responses to the rare no-go digit 3 (i.e. action slips) in the WBV block, and participants responded faster in the WBV block. These results suggest that WBV influences response inhibition, and can induce impulsive responding. WBV may increase the likelihood of action slips, mainly due to failure of response inhibition.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

We all experience occasions when we suddenly become aware that our minds have been ‘absent’ from an ongoing task and that we are no longer behaving according to plan, examples from everyday life include swiping an identification card instead of a credit card; throwing away the vegetables instead of the peelings; trying to drive off without releasing the hand brake (Reason, 1990; Reason and Mycielska, 1982). In almost all cases these commonplace slips and lapses cause us little more than momentary embarrassment. In aviation, however, the consequences of similar slips and lapses could be catastrophic. The difference lies not in the nature of the error, but in the extent to which circumstances affect the severity of the consequences.

According to an analysis of all European helicopter accidents between 2000 and 2005, pilot judgement and actions was the most common causative factor, and was involved in almost 70% of the accidents (European Helicopter Safety Team (EHEST), 2010). Undesired Aircraft States (UAS) are flight-crew induced aircraft position or speed deviations, misapplication of flight controls or incorrect system configurations associated with a reduction in margins of safety. An inappropriately managed UAS may lead to an incident/accident (EHEST, 2014).


                     Reason and Mycielska (1982) summarized information on private aircraft accidents in which an error committed by a pilot was implicated, and concluded that the errors displayed many of the characteristics of absent-minded slips in that they involved apparently unintentional execution of well-established control actions, or omission of such actions. Such errors are important in many working environments. Specialists such as aircraft pilots will easily be able to imagine circumstances in which omitting to execute particular actions in the event of engine failure would have catastrophic consequences. The resemblance between these pilot errors and everyday absent-minded slips does not in itself constitute an explanation for these accidents but the underlying mechanism may be similar; as Reason and Mycielska (1982) put it ‘the resemblance between these pilot errors and everyday absent-minded slips does suggest we could learn a good deal more about catastrophic errors from a closer scrutiny of action slips of our daily life’. In addition, action slips provide important clues about the organization of human performance and the role of conscious attention in the guidance of action especially when sustained attention to action is required to execute a task successfully.

During operations a helicopter pilot has to maintain attention to ongoing tasks. Insufficient attention can result in slips of action when action sequences are triggered automatically, unintentionally and inappropriately. Such action slips tend to happen when attention to task is degraded through such factors as boredom, worry or division of attention among several tasks (Robertson et al., 1997). Sustained attention to ongoing tasks is important in preventing action slips; if attention is not sustained then absent-mindedness or mind-wandering is likely. Absent-mindedness or mind wandering in this context is not limited to daydreaming, it encompasses all conscious cognitive activity not focused on the immediate demands of the current task (Cheyne et al., 2011).

For the purposes of this study we have followed Robertson et al. (1997) in defining sustained attention as the ability to sustain mindful, conscious processing of stimuli whose repetitive, non-arousing qualities would otherwise lead to habituation and vulnerability to distraction. Robertson et al. (1997) developed the Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART) which requires a high level of continuous attention to responses and is sensitive to transitory reductions in attention or ‘lapses’ yet minimizes demands on other cognitive processes such as memory, planning and general intellectual effort. The SART is a go/no-go continuous performance task in which the no-go stimulus appears infrequently and is used as a measure of sustained attention, mind-wandering and the response inhibition element of executive function.

The primary SART measures of interest are errors of commission, errors of omission, and reaction times to frequent go-stimuli (Wilson et al., 2015). Helton and colleagues suggested that commission errors in the SART (i.e. a failure to withhold a response to a rare no-go stimulus) reflected failures of response inhibition while the omission error measure (i.e. a failure to respond to a go-stimulus) could be used as an indicator of sustained attention. Failures of sustained attention and response inhibition measured by the SART have been related to a number of real-world problems and psychological variables, including self-reported everyday failures of attention and attention-related cognitive errors (Cheyne et al., 2006; Manly et al., 1999; Robertson et al., 1997; Smilek et al., 2010; Wilson et al., 2015).

Whole-body vibration (WBV) is one of the more distinctive features of the helicopter working environment. The frequency and intensity of vibration to which the helicopter aircrew is subjected depend on the aircraft type, weather and flight profile (Kåsin et al., 2011). In every helicopter, peak WBV is related to the blade pass frequency, which varies normally between 15 and 24 Hz according to rotor velocity (3–7 revolutions per second) and number of rotor-blades (Kåsin et al., 2011).

WBV has an impact on performance of various tasks involving vision, motor activity and information processing (Conway et al., 2007; Griffin, 1990; Hopcroft and Skinner, 2005; Mansfield, 2005). The effects of WBV may be attributable to the direct effects of WBV on input processes (such as the collection of information via the various senses, particularly vision) and output processes (such as task-related responses in various modalities, usually manual responses). Indirect effects on motivation, mood and arousal may moderate the direct effects of WBV. The negative impact of WBV can be seen in many work environments but is perhaps most significant in those that require the concomitant use of both transportation and information systems (Conway et al., 2007). Operator performance in aviation or land-based vehicle operations is consistently affected by WBV (Mansfield, 2005).


                     Conway et al. (2007) conducted a meta-analysis of empirical studies assessing the influence of WBV on human performance; they showed that WBV generally caused a decrement in performance. The disruptive effects of WBV were related to the type of task being performed. The impact was greatest on perceptual tasks such as vigilance or target detection tasks. There was also a negative impact on continuous and discrete fine motor tasks (such as tracking and switching tasks) and on cognitive performance. The impact of WBV was also related to the type of outcome investigated; accuracy of response was degraded more than speed of response.


                     Newell and Mansfield (2008) investigated effects of WBV and sitting posture on performance of a four-choice reaction time task and perceived workload. They revealed that the task performance was degraded irrespective of sitting postures during 1–20 Hz random WBV with an unweighted magnitude of 1.4 m/s2 in the x-direction (i.e. fore-and-aft direction) and 1.1 m/s2 in the z-direction (i.e. vertical direction). Participants' workload measured by the NASA-Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) also increased during the WBV. Interestingly, Newell and Mansfield found that the performance decrements during WBV were associated with increased perceived workload.

Although previous research has examined whether or how performance is degraded, it is not clear why this happens. This paper focuses on the mechanism underlying WBV effects, more specifically on information processing (i.e. perceptual, cognitive and response processes). There has been much less research on the impact of WBV on higher cognitive processes rather than health and discomfort, in spite of its prevalence in certain occupational contexts.

The purpose of this study was to examine how WBV at frequencies likely to be experienced in helicopter working environments influenced sustained attention. We hypothesized that WBV would increase the probability of failure in sustained attention. If failure of sustained attention is more likely during exposure to WBV one would expect a higher frequency of errors of commission (i.e. action slips), errors of omission (i.e. lapses) and faster response times during exposure to WBV than when WBV is absent.

The data presented here is part of a larger study of the effects of WBV and hypoxia on control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention. The study was performed in a hypobaric chamber. The results in hypoxic conditions will be reported in a separate paper. The experiments were conducted at the Institute of Aviation Medicine, Oslo, Norway.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Nineteen healthy volunteers (10 women; 9 men) with a mean age of 22.8 years (SD = 4.4) participated in this study. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. All participants gave written informed consent before taking part and the study was approved by the Regional Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics, Oslo, Norway.

All participants were elite orienteering runners. In order to reduce the effects of workload, we capitalized on a close cooperation with Norwegian elite athlete organizations and gained access to 19 elite runners in orienteering competing at a national level. The athletes were recruited via the national coaches. Orienteering is a highly cognitive sport and these athletes were highly trained in carrying out information processing tasks under environmental stress and could be expected to adapt readily to environmental changes, similar to helicopter pilots.

The stimuli were presented on a 27-inch LCD display (Samsung SyncMaster SA350) located at eye level, keeping the distance to the required 64 cm from participants in order to get the correct visual angle of stimuli. The timing of the events, generation of stimuli and recording of reaction times were controlled by a laptop computer connected to the LCD running SuperLab 4.0 software (Cedrus Corporation, San Pedro, California, U.S.).

Vibration was generated using an electrodynamic vibrator (LDS Model 725 LIN-E-AIR, Ling Dynamic System Ltd., Royston, Herts., UK); a chair with a high backrest and a footrest was mounted on the vibrator (see Hansen et al., 2012). The vibrator was powered by a solid state Modular Power Amplifier (LDS MPA 1, Ling Dynamic Systems Ltd.) situated outside the hypobaric chamber. Vibration frequency and acceleration were monitored using a seat pad with accelerometers placed along three axes (Endevco type 2560, Brüel & Kjær, Nærum, Denmark). The pad was connected to a front end (type 3560C, Brüel & Kjær, Denmark). Vibration data were processed and monitored in real time using specialized software (Pulse Labshop 12.1, Brüel & Kjær). WBV in the vertical axis (z-axis) was 17 Hz with an unweighted magnitude of 1.0 m/s2 RMS throughout the experiment.


                        Fig. 1
                         shows the experimental setup.

The SART was used in this experiment. Single digits (1–9) were presented centrally on a 27-inch LCD; each digit was presented 25 times giving a total of 225 stimulus presentations during a 4.3 min period. Each stimulus presentation consisted of a 250 ms presentation of the digit followed by a 900 ms presentation of the mask (an encircled X). Digit presentation was regularly paced, with an onset-to-onset interval of 1150 ms. Both digits and mask were white against a black background. Participants responded to the go digits (i.e. 1, 2, and 4–9) with a key press on a handheld response device; when the no-go digit (3) was presented they were required to withhold this response. The 25 no-go trials were randomly distributed among the 225 trials. The 225 trials were presented in a single continuous block. Participants responded by pressing the key on the response device with the thumb of their dominant hand. Digits were presented in one of five randomly assigned font sizes (48-, 72-, 94-, 100- and 120-point size; Symbol font) following the procedure described by Robertson et al. (1997). Participants were instructed that speed and accuracy were equally important.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants were tested individually. After completing a practice session consisting of 18 trials, two of which were no-go trials (i.e. digit 3) participants walked into the experimental chamber and sat in the chair mounted on the vibrator. Participants used noise cancelling headphones (Bose A20, Bose Corporation, Massachusetts, U.S.) throughout the experiment in order to avoid confounding noise effects. Participants performed two SART blocks, one without WBV (No-WBV) and one with WBV. Before the WBV block participants were exposed to the WBV for one minute to allow them to adapt to the situation. Ten participants performed the No-WBV block first; the remaining 9 started with the WBV block. Block presentation order was pseudo-randomly determined.

At the end of each block participants reported the mental demand (How do you rate the mental demand required to complete the task?) and effort (How do you rate the effort required to complete the task?) using subscales of the NASA-TLX which is a multi-dimensional scale designed to obtain estimates of workload (Hart and Staveland, 1988). Responses were given on a twenty-point scale. At the end of the WBV block participants also reported perceived discomfort associated with exposure to WBV using a five-point scale (1, not uncomfortable; 2, a little uncomfortable; 3, fairly uncomfortable; 4, uncomfortable; 5, very uncomfortable).

Four scores were derived from the SART data: number of errors of commission (responses to the rare no-go digit), number of errors of omission (failures to respond to go digits), mean reaction time (RT), and a coefficient of variance (Cheyne et al., 2009). Mean RTs were calculated from the number of go-trials on which the RT was over 100 ms. The coefficient of variance (RTCV) was calculated for all go-trials with a RT over 100 ms. It was calculated by dividing standard deviation in RTs by mean RT for each participant, and provided a measure of variability which was independent of differences in mean RT.

To examine the primary hypotheses, errors of commission, errors of omission, RT and RTCV in the WBV block were compared with those of the No-WBV block. Second, the relationships among the SART variables were investigated to understand the mechanism underlying errors of commission. Thirdly, mental demand and effort were compared between the WBV block and the No-WBV block to examine the effect of WBV on subjective workload.

Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS (SPSS version 22.0 for Windows, IBM Corporation). Considering the sample size of the current research, we statistically tested the differences in the SART variables between the WBV block and the No-WBV block by using Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Given the problem of multiplicity, the FDR controlling method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) was used to control the false discovery rate (FDR) at .20. In line with the previous studies (e.g. Cheyne et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2015), Pearson product–moment correlations were used to assess relationships between variables. Two-tailed p-values and effect sizes (r) were reported.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Errors of commission, errors of omission, RT and RTCV in each block are shown in Fig. 2
                        . Errors of commission were found more frequently in the WBV block than in the No-WBV block (Z = −2.08, p = .037, r = −.34). The number of errors of omission in the WBV block was similar with that of the No-WBV block (Z = −1.22, p = .223, r = −.20). Mean RT was shorter in the WBV block than in the No-WBV block (Z = −2.13, p = .033, r = −.35). RTCV was similar in the WBV block and the No-WBV block (Z = −.20, p = .841, r = −.03).

Pearson product–moment correlations among the SART variables are shown in Table 1
                        .

In the No-WBV block, errors of commission were highly correlated with mean RT (r = −.875, p < .001). Errors of omission were highly correlated with RTCV (r = .745, p < .001). There was a negative correlation between mean RT and RTCV (r = −.588, p = .008).

In the WBV block, the number of errors of commission was highly correlated with mean RT (r = −.721, p < .001) and RTCV (r = .503, p = .028). Errors of omission was correlated with RTCV (r = .605, p = .006). There was a negative correlation between mean RT and RTCV (r = −.790, p < .001). None of the SART measures correlated significantly with subjective ratings of mental demand, effort or discomfort.

Mean RT was correlated with errors of commission and RTCV, so partial correlations were calculated (Table 2
                        ) to control for the influence of mean RT (i.e. control for the speed-accuracy trade-off). In the No-WBV block, errors of commission were highly correlated with RTCV even after controlling for mean RT (r = −.559, p = .016). RTCV was positively correlated with errors of omission (r = .675, p = .002). In the WBV block, errors of commission were not correlated with other SART variables after controlling for mean RT, although there was a significant correlation between errors of omission and RTCV (r = .629, p = .005).

Participants' ratings for the mental demand, effort and discomfort are reported in Table 3
                        . Ratings of mental demand and effort were not significantly different between the two experimental blocks (mental demand: Z = −1.63, p = .103, r = −.27; effort: Z = −1.67, p = .095, r = −.27).

Ratings of discomfort associated with WBV ranged from 1 (not uncomfortable) to 4 (uncomfortable). Discomfort was not associated with ratings of mental demand and effort, but there was a correlation between ratings of mental demand and effort (Table 1).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study was designed to evaluate sustained attention and response inhibition during WBV using the SART, which provides a measure of sustained attention, mind-wandering and response inhibition. Errors of commission, errors of omission, mean RT and RTCV were compared across two experimental blocks (the No-WBV block vs. the WBV block); the mental demand and effort required to carry out the SART under these two conditions were also compared. The results revealed significant effects of WBV on SART performance.

Errors of commission on the SART increased during exposure to WBV. Errors of commission are usually considered analogous to real-world action slips (Cheyne et al., 2009) suggesting that WBV with the parameters used in this experiment may cause an increase in the frequency of action slips. Given that there were more errors of commission under WBV, one might expect that responses would be faster (indicating a speed-accuracy trade-off). Speed-accuracy trade-offs on the SART have been reported previously (e.g. Cheyne et al., 2006; Cheyne et al., 2009; Helton, 2009; Robertson et al., 1997; Seli et al., 2013; Wilson et al., 2015). We found that mean RT was shorter in the WBV block than the No-WBV block. However, errors of omission in the WBV block did not significantly differ from those of the No-WBV block, supporting the notion that WBV decreases response inhibition, rather than sustained attention.

In this study, errors of commission were negatively correlated with mean RT in both the No-WBV and the WBV blocks, suggesting a speed-accuracy trade-off. To control for the effects of a speed-accuracy trade-off, partial correlation coefficients were calculated for each experimental block. In the No-WBV block, errors of commission were negatively correlated with RTCV after controlling for mean RT, suggesting that errors of commission and RTCV are causally related, as Cheyne et al. (2009) suggested. It is also interesting to note that after controlling for mean RT errors of commission in the WBV block were not correlated with other SART measures. This implies that RT mediates the relationship between errors of commission and the other SART variables. Thus, shorter RTs during WBV may be responsible for much of the increase in errors of commission, that is, the increase in action slips. In other words, WBV may cause faster responding thus producing more errors of commission on the SART.

The mental demand and the effort required to perform the SART was not different between no-vibration and vibration, in this elite athlete sample. This was contrary to Newell and Mansfield (2008) study using students. The reason for this may be that the elite orienteering runners in our study were accustomed to perform information processing tasks under environmental stress, and might not feel disturbed or affected by the vibration. However, compared to previous research, the perceived mental demand and effort to complete and maintain performance levels of the SART in No-WBV block were higher in the current study. This may be due to the task demand of the SART. For instance, Newell and Mansfield (2008) used a four-choice reaction time task which arguably is a less demanding task compared to a go/no-go task.

There were more action slips (i.e. errors of commission in the SART) under WBV primarily due to the shortening of mean RT. However, there are some possible explanations as to why mean RT became shorter during WBV. The recent suggestion that the SART is a compound task tapping both response inhibition and sustained attention means that the majority of errors of commission may actually be due to failure of response inhibition rather than failure of sustained attention (Carter et al., 2013; Helton et al., 2009; O'Connell et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2015). Inhibitory control is an important executive function, allowing us to suppress, interrupt or delay an activated action (Aron et al., 2004; Logan and Cowan, 1984). The SART is sensitive to impulsive responding (Helton, 2009; Sakai et al., 2013) and the higher error rates in the WBV block may reflect more impulsive responding during WBV.

An increase in the frequency of errors of commission under WBV could be interpreted as an indication that paying more attention to visual stimuli enhances response speed at the expense of accuracy, thus resulting in more failures of reactive inhibitory control on no-go trials (Helton, 2009; Sakai et al., 2013). Proactive inhibitory control functions as a brake on responding when future events are uncertain i.e. it enables slow but accurate responding (Aron, 2011; Sakai et al., 2013). If proactive inhibitory control is compromised, responses can be triggered automatically by external events regardless of their implications. Thus, failures of both reactive and proactive inhibitory control are possible causes of the shorter mean RT on go-trials during WBV.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

This study has some limitations. The WBV used in this study was unidirectional (vertical axis) and single frequency (17 Hz). Seventeen Hz is the dominant WBV frequency in many helicopters (Kåsin et al., 2011) but any helicopter working environment may have a different dominant frequency, and WBV is likely to be made up of a wider spectrum of frequencies in three orthogonal axes. There is also both inter- and intra-individual variability in resonant frequencies in the human body. Some caution must therefore be exercised in extrapolating our results to other vibration environments. The blade passing frequency for most helicopters is normally between 15 and 24 Hz. We could have chosen another frequency within this limited range, but we wouldn't expect any major differences in the results. By choosing a frequency closer to the typical resonant frequency of the human body (5 Hz) the impact of the exposure might be different (Griffin, 1990). However, such an experiment would have a lower validity for the working environment of helicopters.

These experiments were conducted under specific laboratory conditions and the participants received only brief training on the task investigated. It is uncertain whether the same pattern of errors and similar trends in RTs would be observed in helicopter aircrew performing a real life task, for which they have received special training and are highly experienced. However, by recruiting elite runners in orienteering competing at a national level, we could capture the effect of WBV on the SART performance excluding the possible effects of perceived workload during the task. Therefore, our findings should also be relevant for helicopter aircrew.

In this study, the duration of vibration was short, and it is possible that the decreased RT would not have been sustainable over a longer time period. During prolonged exposure to WBV we might also have been able to detect effects on perceived mental demand and effort required to perform the task, as well as discomfort associated with WBV.

We cannot rule out the effects of biomechanical factors. The WBV could be causing a tonic reflex response, which means that the muscle is pre-primed and can activate a response more quickly. Due to the use of a handheld response device separated from the chair, we believe such biomechanical effects were of minor importance in the current experiment.

Further research is required to improve understanding of how WBV affects performance on cognitive tasks sensitive to sustained attention and response inhibition in helicopter working environments.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Our findings suggest that exposure to WBV at a frequency which is common in helicopter working environments increases the probability of committing errors of commission on the SART (i.e. action slips). The reduction in response latencies to incoming stimuli under WBV may be the main cause of the increase in the frequency of action slips, reflecting impulsiveness and failures of response inhibition.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported in part by the Research Council of Norway and Japan Society for the Promotion of Science under FY2014 Japan–Norway Researcher Mobility Program (Project Number: 238615/F11). The authors would like to thank Eivind Tonna from the Norwegian Orienteering Association for the assistance in recruiting participants, and John Ragnar Hørthe from the Norwegian Institute of Aviation Medicine for technical support in the hypobaric chamber.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

