@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Optimizing the physical ergonomics indices for the use of partial pressure suits

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The results showed that 12 pairs of ergonomics indices were linearly correlated.


                        
                        
                           
                           An optimal ergonomics index system for partial pressure suits (PPSs) was determined.


                        
                        
                           
                           It includes manipulative mission, operational reach and operational strength indices.


                        
                        
                           
                           The ergonomics performance of PPSs can be conveniently and quickly evaluated.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Partial pressure suit

Manipulative mission

Ergonomics index system

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study developed an ergonomic evaluation system for the design of high-altitude partial pressure suits (PPSs). A total of twenty-one Chinese males participated in the experiment which tested three types of ergonomics indices (manipulative mission, operational reach and operational strength) were studied using a three-dimensional video-based motion capture system, a target-pointing board, a hand dynamometer, and a step-tread apparatus. In total, 36 ergonomics indices were evaluated and optimized using regression and fitting analysis. Some indices that were found to be linearly related and redundant were removed from the study. An optimal ergonomics index system was established that can be used to conveniently and quickly evaluate the performance of different pressurized/non-pressurized suit designs. The resulting ergonomics index system will provide a theoretical basis and practical guidance for mission planners, suit designers and engineers to design equipment for human use, and to aid in assessing partial pressure suits.
               
            

personal protective clothing

target pointing

pull down the veil

drawing-back a leg

controlling-joysticks

accomplishing time of task

buttons

buttons and switches

right wrist bar thumb side

right wrist bar pinkie side

right knee

right ankle

left elbow

right elbow

right shoulder

AT of right arm with B group for TP

AT of left arm with BS group for TP

AT of right arm with BS group for TP

inverse orientation AT of right arm with BS group for TP

partial pressure suit

movement of RWRA for PDV

flexion angle of RKNE joint for DBL

movement of RANK for DBL

pushing forward of RWRA for CJ

pushing left of RWRA for CJ

pushing right of RWRA for CJ

maximum vertical movement of RELB for lateral lift

maximum vertical movement of RELB for forward extension

maximum vertical movement of RELB for backward extension

maximum horizontal movement of RELB for adduction

maximum horizontal movement of RELB for abduction

range of motion of RSHO in the coronal plane

motion angle of RELB joint

movement of RKNE

range of motion of right hip joint

movement of LELB

movement of RELB

maximum grip strength

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Personal protective clothing (PPC) is equipment used to ensure the safety of wearers in extreme environments, such as high altitude, low-pressure conditions for pilots and high-temperature environment for firefighters. Williams et al. (1997) performed a series of experiments to study the influence of chemical protective clothing during various activities of sailors. When they marched at medium speed with heavy backpacks, it was found that the chemical protective clothing not only limited their flexibility and field of vision but also decreased cognitive performance, including prolonged reaction time and increased number of physical and cognitive errors.

In order to evaluate the performance of a new style of protective suit for firefighters, Coca et al. (2008) studied a series of ergonomics indices, such as the wearer's range of movement, ability to accomplish tasks, and comfort. They analyzed the ergonomic qualities of the clothing by comparing the variation of each ergonomics index under two conditions: wearing a new prototype firefighter ensemble (PE) with additional chemical/biological hazard protection and a standard ensemble (SE). They found that in spite of design features to enhance chemical/biological hazard protection, the PE design does not decrease the wearer's overall functional mobility compared to the SE. However, subjects seem to be more comfortable wearing the SE compared to the PE. These overall findings support the need for a comprehensive ergonomic evaluation of protective clothing systems to ascertain human factors issues. Berson (2002) found that pressurized clothing restricts the wearers' movement when inflated, affecting control of the ambulance and ability to perform emergency operations.

In order to increase the ability of pilots to efficiently fly within a U-2 cockpit, movement-related indices should be considered in the design phase of PPS. O'Hearn et al. (2005) studied the influence of Army cold weather clothing's operating dexterity as well as physical security and comfort. Based on their research, they established ergonomics evaluation methods and an ergonomics index. However, this clothing is used on the ground environment and is very different with pilot's PPS. Partial pressure suits (PPSs) are one type of personal protective clothing designed to ensure the safety of pilots when flying at high altitudes (Hu et al., 2008b). A PPS is worn by pilots to protect them from both high altitude hypoxia and hyperventilation. It is a potentially life saving piece of equipment when coupled with a high-altitude oxygen-supply protection system (Kozloski, 1994). A PPS utilizes the mechanical forces and ergonomics of the clothing to provide counter pressure for the body surfaces. As a result, the negative effects on the body from a pressurized oxygen-supply can be reduced, providing greater endurance (Berglund and Marklund, 2005).

In recent years, with the improved performance of fighter planes, the protective capability requirements of PPS have increased as well, leading to concerns about the tradeoffs between a PPS's function and efficiency (Færevik and Eidsmo Reinertsen, 2003; Murray et al., 2011). Ergonomics research on high-altitude partial pressure suits (PPSs) can provide evidence to develop an optimal ergonomics index that can be used to evaluate the design of PPS. Past research (Adams and Keyserling, 1996; Hu et al., 2008a, 2007; Liu et al., 1998) on PPS neglected two vital aspects: (1) The lack of a valid index system for PPSs based on engineers' design of safe and ergonomic protective wear. To date, there have been no studies researching indices based on human mechanics and anatomy. Therefore, it is useful to establish an integrated and valid ergonomics evaluation index system for PPSs that is primarily based on the environment, cockpit layout, flight operation tasks, human mechanics and anatomy. (2) The lack of research on optimization of a PPS ergonomics evaluation index. In order to increase efficiency while minimizing the costs and time for PPS evaluation, it is essential to optimize an index system to increase its practicality and functionality.

The present study focuses on optimization of an ergonomics evaluation index system. This system has three interrelated levels. Level 1 includes three ergonomics indices, level 2 includes 10 ergonomics indices and level 3 includes 23 ergonomics indices. Since there are many indices in this system, it would be too time-consuming to measure and analyze all of them, especially since some of them cannot be measured in a limited time frame. For example, when a PPS is pressurized, the wearer has only a short time before breathing becomes a problem due to external positive pressure, which would make it difficult to complete the required measurements. Therefore, the present research optimized the ergonomics evaluation index system using regression and fitting analysis. In this way it provided a more convenient and efficient way to evaluate the ergonomics performance of PPS.

A series of ergonomics experiments on PPSs were conducted to establish this systematic evaluation to improve the flight performance of pilots, their ability to perform tasks efficiently in a PPS and the ergonomics design of the human–machine interface in an aircraft cockpit.

@&#METHODS@&#

Based on pilot recruitment standards of China, twenty-one healthy right-handed Chinese males were recruited for this study. Females were not recruited since most pilots in China are male. The demographics and anthropometric parameters of the subjects are listed in Table 1
                        .

Two different types of clothing were tested: conventional clothing (CC) and the partial pressure suit (PPS). The casual attire consisted of shorts and a vest, while the PPS was a capstan anti-G and counter pressure suit widely used by pilots (Fig. 1
                        ).

The ergonomics indices considered in this study, shown in Table 2
                        , were established from the studies of Hu and Li (Hu et al., 2007, 2008b; Li et al., 2013). All of the following indices have been shown to be effective for measuring the performance of PPSs. These indices can be classified into three levels. Level 1 includes three indices (dexterity for tasks, operational reach, and operational strength); Level 2 consists of ten ergonomics indices ranging from end-effort pointing performance to range of motion of the shoulder; and Level 3 is comprised of twenty-three elementary ergonomics indices including micro-movement analysis of a timed finger pointing exercise, a timed range of motion test for the movement of knees, and the time to vertically displace the elbow. In this study the functional relationships among ergonomics indices and the three levels were analyzed.

We utilized a three-dimensional video-based motion capture system (VICON460, England). Six infrared cameras were placed in a circle, which encompassed a full range view of all actions. The acquisition sample rate was 120 Hz. The equipment consisted of hardware (computer workstation, video cameras, etc.) and software applications systems (Polygon, Bodybuilder, for example) used to record and analyze body movements. Motion capture involves recording these movements via infrared video cameras and then reproducing them in a digital environment.

A mock-up of a real cockpit made up of a flat rectangular board with five buttons and four switches (Fig. 2
                           ) was used to simulate a flight mission. The board was fixed on a table with a gradient angle of 17° from the vertical plane. The length and width of the board were 800 mm and 600 mm, respectively.

A standard hand dynamometer (WCS–100II), composed of a sensor and digital display unit, was used to measure maximum grip strength. The scale spanned a range from 0 to 100 kg, with a precision of 0.1 kg.

All tests were conducted at the Man-Machine-Environment System laboratory at Beihang University. Every subject completed the spectrum of tests randomly wearing both conventional clothing and a PPS. The subjects were given a 1-h rest period between tests, during the rest period, the subjects were required to sit or stretch their limbs and joints to relax their body. Each subject sat with an erect posture in the center of the motion capture area. The seat height and seat surface inclination are set similar with the seating in the cockpit. The anthropometric dimensions of the subject were measured prior to the experiment and used to select the appropriate PPS clothing size. After donning the PPS, the subject maintained the required sitting posture. Then a qualified laboratory assistant adjusted the PPS to ensure a proper fit. Finally, 39 reflective markers were attached to the subject by the assistant, each corresponding to an anatomical landmark. Fig. 3
                         shows the marker positions for an entire body capture. Formal tests were carried out after these preparations and each test was performed 3 repetitions. The detailed testing procedure has been previously described by Hu et al. (2008b).

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

Two types of tests were performed in order to optimize the ergonomics indices for PPSs on tasks with different levels of complexity. The subjects were divided into two test groups. The B group was placed in front of five buttons, while the BS group negotiated five buttons and four switches. The BS group's tests measured flexibility of the left and right arm and range of right arm extension, while the B group's tests measured the flexibility and extension of the right arm only. The tests required the subject to sit in front of a target-pointing board with his arm on an armrest. The subject was required to maintain erect posture at all times during the test. We measured the time taken to fully extend his arm, press down targets as quickly as possible, and then pull back his arm to the initial position. These actions were repeated five times and the subject was asked to not only touch the targets but also press down the buttons or accurately manipulate the switches. This test was designed based on the panel operations task. The time required to accomplish all tasks was defined as the accomplishing time of the task (AT). The following tests took place: The B group was required to point at a target with the right arm (TP1); The BS group pointed at a target with the left hand (TP2); The BS group pointed at a target with the right hand (TP3), while TP4 measured the inverse orientation time of pointing at a target with the right arm for the BS group.

In the event of ejection from the cockpit, the pilot must be able to adjust his or her helmet. In this experiment the subject was asked to raise both arms as high as possible and then pull them down as far as possible. The test variable, defined as pulling down the veil (PDV1), was the maximal movement of right wrist bar little finger side (RWRB) (Fig. 4
                              a).

This task was designed to measure the peak leg extension required to reach the rudder pedals and to determine if the PPS impeded the ability to bring the legs close to the seat when preparing for ejection. Both legs were first placed in a standard position where the relative angle of the thigh and lower leg was at 90°. Then the subject attempted to extend both legs and draw them back till the knees reached their maximum angle. These two test variables are shown in Fig. 4b.

While sitting upright, the subject was asked to push a joystick forward, then left, then right. Fig. 4c displays the three test variables: pushing forward of right wrist bar thumb side (CJ1), pushing left with the right wrist thumb bar side (CJ2), pushing right with the wrist bar thumb side to control the joystick (CJ3).

Measurements of the range of motion index included right arm lateral lift, fore/aft extension and adduction/abduction. The subject moved his arm in the specified plane without rotation while performing these tasks. The six test variables are shown in Fig. 5
                              a.

Keep the subject's upper arm extended downward and the range of motion of the elbow was measured when the subject was asked to move his forearm until the elbow reached its maximal flexion angle. Fig. 5b gives the definition of the test variables.

At first, the subject kept his right foot on the ground and his right knee joint at a 90° angle. Then the subject raised his right leg as high as possible.

Starting from an erect sitting position, the subject bent his waist laterally to the left and then to the right as far as possible without twisting.

While sitting with erect posture, the subject reached out with his right hand and grasped the hand dynamometer as firmly as possible (Fig. 6
                              a).

While keeping the torso erect, the subject extended his right leg to step on the tread sensor (Fig. 6b).

The relationships between ergonomics indices were obtained via linear regression analysis using the statistical packages SPSS 12.0 and OriginPro7. The significance level was set at p < 0.05.

Tests validated whether or not the indices were significantly associated with PPS compared to conventional clothing (CC). Table 3
                      shows these comparison for each index variable. Results indicated that all the index variables were significantly affected by the use of the PPS (p < 0.01). The relationships among the indices were examined using regression analysis.

To validate whether or not the optimized ergonomics index system can efficiently evaluate the ergonomics performance of PPS a study which tested the range of motion, operational dexterity and grip strength of ten male subjects wearing PPSs under six different pressure conditions was conducted to determine their effects on pilots' operational performance using the optimized ergonomics index system.

From the scatter plots of the BS group pointing at a target with the right index finger (TP3) versus pointing with the left index finger (TP2) and the inverse orientation of time to point with the right index finger (TP4) (Fig. 7
                           ), it is clear that both TP2 and TP4 were linearly related to TP3. TP3 can be considered as the independent variable of x, and TP2 and TP4 were the dependent variables of y
                           1 and y
                           2, respectively. The correlation coefficient for TP2 and TP3 was r
                           1 = 0.894 > r
                           0.01(n − 2) (p < 0.001), indicating that an effective functional relationship exists between TP2 and TP3. The correlation coefficient of TP3 and TP4 was r
                           2 = 0.992 and p < 0.001. In contrast, TP1 is not significantly linearly related to TP2, TP3 and TP4.


                           Fig. 8
                            shows that the flexion angle of the right knee for drawing back the leg (DBL1) was linearly related to movement of right ankle for drawing back the leg (DBL2) (r = 0.06, p = 0.005 < 0.01). Assuming DBL2 was the dependent variable of y and DBL1 was the independent variable of x, then DBL1 was significantly associated with DBL2. Using this equation, DBL2 can be derived from DBL1.

Pushing forward of right wrist bar thumb side to control a joystick (CJ1), pushing left with the right thumb bar side (CJ2) and pushing right wrist bar thumb side (CJ3) were found to be correlated. In our linear regression models (Fig. 9
                           ) the independent variable of x was CJ3; the dependent variables of y
                           1 and y
                           2 were CJ1 and CJ2, respectively. The results of the linear regression and variance analysis showed that CJ1 and CJ2 were positively correlated with CJ3. The results showed that CJ3 and CJ1 were significantly linearly correlated (r = 0.634, p = 0.00202 < 0.01), indicating that this equation would be useful as a predictive model. A positive correlation was found between CJ2 and CJ3 (r = 0.639, p < 0.01).

These aspects were both used to examine the right arm's lateral lift. They represented linear and angular movement when measuring the shoulder's ROM.

In Fig. 10
                               they axis was range of motion of the right shoulder (RS6) and the x axis was vertical movement of the right elbow (RS1). By linear regression and variance analysis, the second variable was significantly positively associated with the first (r = 0.722, p = 0.0002 < 0.001).

No significant correlation was found between RS2 and RS3. Therefore, one variable cannot be used to predict the other.

The scatter plot of RS4 and RS5 is shown in Fig. 11
                              . They are defined as the independent variable of x and the dependent variable of y, respectively. An effective functional relationship was obtained through linear regression and variance analysis between RS4 and RS5 (p = 0.04 < 0.05). Note that r was only 0.451.

As seen in Fig. 12
                           , movement of the right knee (RH1) and range of motion of right hip (RH2) tend to be linearly correlated. RH1 is denoted by x while RH2 by y (r = 0.8626, p = 0.0001).

As shown in Fig. 5d, movement of left elbow (RW1) and movement of right elbow (RW2) are the indices used to measure the left and right bending of the waist by VICON460. The scatter plot (Fig. 13
                           ) revealed a linear relationship between them. RW2, the independent variable of x, was linearly correlated with RW1 (r = 0.764, p < 0.001).

TP could be correlated with RE, due to the kinematic process of the elbow extending to place the hand in a position near the target to allow extension of the finger into a pointing position. Because the other indices of TP are linearly correlated to accomplishing of task time using the right arm with the B group for target pointing (TP3), we chose TP3 and the motion angle of the right elbow (RE1) from level 3 as the variables that represent TP and RE from level 2. Fig. 14
                            reveals that TP3 and RE1 are linearly correlated. We used x and y respectively to denote RE1 and 1/TP3. The regression coefficient was r = 0.775 and p = 0.041 < 0.05. The equation shows that any of the two variables can predict the other within the model.

PDV involves a complex combination of various types of motions including the shoulder, elbow, and wrist. We hypothesized that PDV would be correlated with the right shoulder (RS) and right elbow (RE). However, regression analysis indicated that there was no significant relationship between PDV and RE, which may be partially explained by wrist movements and scapular orientation of the gleno-humeral joint.

The scatter plot of movement of the right wrist bar thumb side (PDV1) and maximum vertical movement for the right elbow for forward extension (RS2) (Fig. 15
                           ) shows that there is a linear relationship between them. The independent variable of x is RS2 and the dependent variable of y is PDV1. An effective regression model was developed using linear fitting, which showed that PDV1 and RS2 were significantly positively correlated (r = 0.725, p = 0.0004 < 0.001).

CJ3 (y) (Fig. 16
                           ) was positively correlated with maximum vertical movement of right wrist bar thumb side (RS1) (x) (r = 0.647, p < 0.01). Therefore, a predictive relationship exists between them.

The interrelation analysis on ergonomics indices of level 2 demonstrated that the range of motion and dexterity for tasks indices of level 1 are correlated with the ROM indices of level 1. Increased range of movement could lead to greater dexterity for successful completion of tasks. However, dexterity is a derived ergonomics factor that encompasses many elements, so it is impossible to describe it solely by ROM indices. Therefore, ergonomics indices in level 1 should be preserved.

To validate the optimized ergonomics indices, we used them in the ergonomics evaluation of pressurized partial pressure suits. Analysis of variance was used to test the effects of various pressures. It was concluded that a PPS had a significant impact on the pilot's range of motion (ROM) and dexterity but no significant effect on his or her grip strength. Range of motion and dexterity decreased as pressure increased, but they were not affected to the same extent. These results were highly similar with the results from ergonomics indices before optimization, hence the optimized ergonomics indices were validated.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The following is a summary of the objectives of this study: (1) to discuss and develop the functional relationships between ergonomics indices, (2) to determine the predictive models among ergonomics indices, and (3) to optimize and validate the ergonomics indices system. As expected, there are some significant interrelationships between the ergonomics indices of PPS (Table 4
                     ). Moreover, the equations obtained were able to serve as predictive models; thus some indices can be obtained from the models and need not be derived through experiments.

We will now consider the relationship of the 23 indices within level 3. Nine pairs of effective linear equations were derived (Table 4). Between accomplished time of task using the right arm with B group for target pointing (TP1), accomplished time of task using left arm with BS group for target pointing (TP2), accomplished time of task using right arm with BS group for target pointing (TP3) and inverse orientation accomplished time of task using right arm with BS group for target pointing (TP4) two pairs of suitable equations were obtained. These findings demonstrate that TP3 can act as a predictor for TP2 and TP4. Moreover, TP2 and TP4 were positively correlated with TP3. The slope was 0.960, and the intercept −0.352. These results indicated that TP3 is almost identical to TP4. Therefore, we concluded that subjects were just as capable of completing the target pointing task with their left arm as their right. Therefore, under restricted experimental conditions, for example, lack of time to study both arms, it is sufficient to only measure TP3. The predicted model for TP3 can affectively predict TP2 and TP4. However, TP1 is a simpler manipulation task than TP3. Moreover, TP3 is also more comparable to the tasks that must be accomplished during an actual flight. Thus, a conclusion can be drawn that TP3 is a preferable ergonomics index to examine target pointing than TP1.

Flexion angle of the right knee for drawing back a leg (DBL1) and movement of right ankle to draw back a leg (DBL2) are two indices used to assess the same operational task. Our statistical results confirmed that they are interchangeable terms of the descriptive linear equation. In addition, our prior study (Hu et al., 2008a,b) concluded that DBL1 was more sensitive to PPS than DBL2; thus we can conclude that DBL1 is a better ergonomics index than DBL2.

CJ1, CJ2 and CJ3 were adopted to examine three different tasks of CJ. Each motion should have different effects on the ability to accomplish tasks. Thus, it was initially considered that these three indices were not correlated with each other. However, significant relationships were found between them. The reason might be the integration of all motions. These findings imply that measuring only one variable is sufficient and the predictive models can determine the other two. It was found from these experiments that accomplishment of CJ3 is more exact and uniform when compared to the other two indices; thus, CJ3 is the optimal element that reflects the ergonomics characteristics of CJ more objectively than the other two.


                     Table 3 shows that maximum vertical movement for drawing back a leg (RS1) and maximum motion of the right shoulder in the coronal plane (RS6) are linearly correlated. In order to unify dimensions, RS1, which is in agreement with the other indices of RS, measured in mm, was selected as the preferred index from RS1 and RS6. Though RS4 and RS5 are also linearly correlated, their regression coefficient is only 0.451. Therefore, RS4 and RS5 must both be measured at the same time.

Similar to the principle of determining DBL1 as the optimal ergonomics index, RH2 is the optimal index between RH1 and RH2.

As RW1 and RW2 are also linearly correlated, the two indices can be used to replace one another in the predictive model of RW1 = 31.342 + 0.661RW2. Human kinematic characteristics suggest that right oriented body motions are more easily executed than left oriented motions for right handed people. Accordingly, when performing the tasks, right oriented motions are preferable to left oriented motions. Our previous investigations showed that RW2 was slightly more sensitive to a PPS than RW1. The performance of RW1 and RW2 were reduced by 16% and 18% with a PPS, respectively. Based on the above, RW2 was chosen as the better ergonomics index for RW1 and RW2.

Subsequently, correlations between ergonomics indices in level 2 were also studied. Three pairs of effective linear equations were developed (Table 4). These three pairs of functional relations suggest that dexterity and operational reach, which belong to the ergonomics indices of level 1, are linearly correlated. However, dexterity and operational reach cannot predict one another because not all of their ergonomics indices are linearly correlated.

The optimized ergonomics index system was validated by applying it to the study of PPSs' ergonomics performance under six different pressure conditions.

The optimal ergonomics evaluation index system developed is shown in Table 5
                     . We can use the index system to evaluate the effects of PPS with fewer experiments in less time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The present study investigated the relationships between 36 ergonomics indices used to evaluate the effects of personal protective suits. The results showed that 12 pairs of ergonomics indices were linearly correlated. Based on these effective functional relationships an optimal ergonomics evaluation index system of PPSs was proposed (Table 5). However, some caution needs to be exercised in interpreting the results because when evaluating a PPS, the pressurization time must be limited to ensure the safety of the participant, and this time is too short to measure all the indices before optimization. Consequently, not all indices can be fully tested in this situation. The proposed optimal index system reduces the number of indices that must be measured under a variety of test conditions. By establishing the functional relationships among these ergonomics indices and determining redundant measures, the proposed optimal index system also significantly reduces the difficulties of appraising the performance of PPSs. Use of the proposed index system can improve the ergonomics design and evaluation of PPSs.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, grant No. 51175021. We would like to thank Chunguang Zhang and the test subjects for helping complete this experiment. We are also grateful to Feng Yang, Guoquan Huang, Hao Wu and Huidan Wang for their helpful suggestions and careful review of this manuscript. The authors also thank Professor Xiugan Yuan for kindly offering some of the experimental equipment.


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Markers
                                    Definition
                                    Position
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    LFHD
                                    Left front head
                                    Left temple
                                 
                                 
                                    RFHD
                                    Right front head
                                    Right temple
                                 
                                 
                                    LBHD
                                    Left back head
                                    Left back of head
                                 
                                 
                                    RBHD
                                    Right back head
                                    Right back head
                                 
                                 
                                    C7
                                    Seventh cervical vertebrae
                                    Base of the neck
                                 
                                 
                                    T10
                                    Tenth thoracic vertebrae
                                    Center mid-back
                                 
                                 
                                    CLAV
                                    Clavicle
                                    Top of the breast bone
                                 
                                 
                                    STRN
                                    Sternum
                                    Base of the breast bone
                                 
                                 
                                    RBAC
                                    Right back
                                    Center of the right shoulder blade
                                 
                                 
                                    LSHO
                                    Left shoulder
                                    Placed on the bony prominence on top of the left shoulder
                                 
                                 
                                    LUPA
                                    Left upper arm
                                    Placed on the outside of the upper arm
                                 
                                 
                                    LELB
                                    Left elbow
                                    Placed on the bony prominence on the outside of the elbow joint
                                 
                                 
                                    LFRM
                                    Left forearm
                                    Placed on the outside of the lower arm
                                 
                                 
                                    LWRA
                                    Left wrist
                                    Extended from the thumb side using a wrist bar
                                 
                                 
                                    LWRB
                                    Left wrist
                                    Extended from the little finger side using a wrist bar
                                 
                                 
                                    LFIN
                                    Left finger
                                    Placed just below the middle knuckle on the left hand
                                 
                                 
                                    RSHO
                                    Right shoulder
                                    Placed on the bony prominence on top of the right shoulder
                                 
                                 
                                    RUPA
                                    Right upper arm
                                    Placed on the outside of the upper arm
                                 
                                 
                                    RELB
                                    Right elbow
                                    Placed on the bony prominence on the outside of the elbow join
                                 
                                 
                                    RFRM
                                    Right forearm
                                    Placed on the outside of the lower arm
                                 
                                 
                                    RWRA
                                    Right wrist bar thumb side
                                    Extended from the thumb side using a wrist bar
                                 
                                 
                                    RWRB
                                    Right wrist bar pinkie side
                                    Extended from the little finger side using a wrist bar
                                 
                                 
                                    RFIN
                                    Right finger
                                    Placed just below the middle knuckle on the right hand
                                 
                                 
                                    LFWT
                                    Left front waist
                                    Left front waist
                                 
                                 
                                    RFWT
                                    Right front waist
                                    Right front waist
                                 
                                 
                                    LBWT
                                    Left back waist
                                    Left back waist
                                 
                                 
                                    RBWT
                                    Right back waist
                                    Right back waist
                                 
                                 
                                    LTHI
                                    Left thigh
                                    Placed on the outside of the thigh below hand swing
                                 
                                 
                                    LKNE
                                    Left knee
                                    Placed on the outside of the knee joint
                                 
                                 
                                    LSHN
                                    Left shin
                                    Placed on the outside of the lower leg
                                 
                                 
                                    LANK
                                    Left ankle
                                    Placed on the bony prominence on the outside of the ankle
                                 
                                 
                                    LHEE
                                    Left heel
                                    Placed on the back of the foot
                                 
                                 
                                    LTOE
                                    Left toe
                                    Placed on the tip of the big toe
                                 
                                 
                                    RTHI
                                    Right thigh
                                    Placed on the outside of the thigh below hand swing
                                 
                                 
                                    RKNE
                                    Right knee
                                    Placed on the outside of the knee joint
                                 
                                 
                                    RSHN
                                    Right shin
                                    Placed on the outside of the lower leg
                                 
                                 
                                    RANK
                                    Right ankle
                                    Placed on the bony prominence on the outside of the ankle
                                 
                                 
                                    RHEE
                                    Right heel
                                    Placed on the back of the foot
                                 
                                 
                                    RTOE
                                    Right toe
                                    Placed on the tip of the big toe
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

