@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Delivering meat carcasses/cuts to craft-butcher shops: An investigation of work characteristics and manual handling hazards

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We gathered information about work techniques, and good practices, to characterise the handling practices.


                        
                        
                           
                           We gathered information about driver injury to determine underlying causes, and proneness to incidents.


                        
                        
                           
                           A number of factors that can increase the risk of injury are identified along with measures to mitigate them.


                        
                        
                           
                           An approach for risk assessment is suggested which could be applied in similar peripatetic delivery work situations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Shoulder

Anterior handling

Reported injuries

Retail Deliveries

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study investigated delivery scenarios of service drivers working in the retail meat industry. The methodology included analysis of accident reports, and field investigations of deliveries at craft-butcher shop premises, including semi-structured interviews with managers and workers. The findings provide greater clarity about the hazards in this job, and suggest for peripatetic delivery activities, four main factors on which decisions about risk and good practice may be made: composition of the orders; characteristics of the delivery vehicle/truck; handling method most often used; and, the road/access conditions.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Despite the dominance of supermarkets in Europe over the past few decades, smaller retail shops are still fairly prevalent. These include craft-butcher shops (craft shops) where consumer-specified portions of meat are prepared and sold on needs basis, or used in affiliated ‘cottage’ food service establishments. An in-house survey of craft shops by one Local Authority in the South West region of England identified that there were 54 such premises across four Local Authorities, which when scaled across 407 Local Authorities in the UK, suggested the existence of 5500 premises. Unlike supermarkets, which are often large scale purpose-built businesses with mechanical aids and/or automated systems to move goods around, most craft shops (often family run businesses) lack the resources to install automated handling systems and rely on service drivers for delivery of their meat orders.

Service drivers in the meat industry are responsible for driving a pre-stocked truck/van, from one craft shop to another, and transferring individual items into each premise, sometimes to awkwardly positioned storage areas and over distances of more than 30 m. Like many other delivery drivers, their work is primarily decentralised, and includes an alternation of driving and manual handling activities (Van der Beek, 2012). However, according to the needs of the industry, the work involves large non-uniform standardised loads (meat cuts and carcasses), which may weigh more than 25 kg, and self-selected male workers i.e., those with considerably more than average strength (up to 90% strength capability of the UK population). These factors often make it difficult to implement norms for management of the associated risks. Though the manual handling hazards and risks of injury for delivery drivers have received increased research attention over the last few decades, the efforts have mainly been concerned with movement/delivery of boxes/sacks and palletised loads (Hedberg, 1985; Okunribido et al., 2006; Friswell and Williamson, 2010; Shibuya et al., 2010), work within/around the delivery vehicle (Van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1995; Olson et al., 2009; Reiman et al., 2013), and work at a specific worksite or area (Magnusson et al., 1987; Venn-Brown, 1998; Wright and Haslam, 1999; St-Vincent et al., 2005). The scientific literature about peripatetic meat delivery activities and manual handling away from employer-controlled worksites is sparse (Sinsoiliez, 1984; INRS, 2002). Providing greater certainty about the work of meat delivery service drivers, in terms of the main factors affecting risk of musculoskeletal injury, is therefore particularly important.

In Great Britain the Manual Handling Operations Regulations, 1992 (MHOR) (HSE, 2004) places a duty upon employers to avoid, as far as reasonably practicable, the need for workers to undertake manual handling tasks which involve a risk of being injured. Specifically, employers are required to: identify the tasks performed that present hazards; assess the risk of injury associated with these tasks; and, to eliminate or reduce the risk as far as is reasonably practicable. When considering such risks, employers can refer to the guidance on the regulations (HSE, 2004), and derived risk assessment help tools such as the Manual Handling Assessment Charts (MAC) (HSE, 2003). Employers whose employees undertake manual handling operations away from the home premises (for example delivery drivers), are also required, where possible, to liaise closely with those in control of premises where deliveries are made, to plan how the work can be done safely; those in charge of premises where visiting employees work are required to ensure that the premises and plant there are in a safe condition. The Regulations do not set any specific requirement such as weight limits; instead, they encourage an ergonomics assessment approach (based on a range of relevant factors), to determine the risk of injury and point the way to remedial action. An example risk assessment for a butcher's shop including manual handling during deliveries is also provided by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE, 2008).

The present study was undertaken to investigate meat delivery scenarios to better understand the nature of the work. More specifically, it aimed to identify main aspects of the work that affect the risk of musculoskeletal injury and on which decisions about good practice may be made, i.e., macro risk factors. Hence the study was not aimed at quantifying the exposures to micro factors, i.e., those aspects associated with the individual and/or the immediate workstation. The study therefore involved:
                        
                           •
                           Gathering information about the work techniques, including good practices (use of manual handling assist devices, dedicated loading bays, extended rail systems, minimal lifting) to determine whether the handling practices are efficient and suitable; and,

Gathering information about worker injury during delivery of meat carcasses to craft shops to determine the underlying causes of any injuries, and also whether service drivers are particularly prone to incidents of injury.

In the context of this study, the delivery activity begins when the driver arrives at the premises and ends when the last item in the order is deposited in a chilled storage or processing area.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

This was an observation study of craft shops and meat service drivers during deliveries, to investigate the work methods and environments in delivery activities. Interest was in:
                           
                              •
                              The effort required at different stages in terms of the types and quantities of carcasses delivered, frequency of load carriage and weights of loads handled, postures and movements of the drivers;

The physical environments at craft shops, including types of flooring and space restrictions/obstructions; and,

Workers' experiences of injuries and discomfort.

Examples of good practices were noted and video recordings were taken. In addition, semi-structured interviews were conducted with shop managers about compliance with the MHOR and injuries to workers, and with other workers and the drivers about their work and injuries suffered. The areas of questioning are outlined in the Table 1
                        .

Drivers who delivered meat carcasses and quarter cuts to craft shops within one English county (short-haul driving) were studied. Four craft shops affiliated to two abattoirs, one wholesale processing centre (wholesale centre), and 12 independent craft shops were identified with the help of Local Authority Inspectors and Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Inspectors. Managers/supervisors at the two abattoirs and at two craft shops helped identify the drivers that were observed. This was, therefore, a convenience sample of drivers and craft shops.

The two abattoirs, the wholesale centre and 16 craft shops were visited between June 2007 and February 2008. From each of the abattoirs, one driver was followed from the moment they left the abattoir and videotaped while delivering goods at two affiliated craft shops; two other drivers were observed while they each delivered goods to one independent craft shop. At the wholesale centre, workers were observed and videotaped during the offloading of carcasses from the vehicle after the driver had backed onto a loading bay. The observed deliveries occurred between 10 am and 4 pm. In all, six craft shops were visited to observe service drivers (all male) during deliveries and to investigate the physical environment scenarios, and 10 craft shops were visited to investigate only the physical environment scenarios. The 16 craft shops visited (four affiliated shops and 12 independent shops) are herein identified as sites A to P, and the wholesale centre is identified as site Q.

The HSE Corporate Operational Information System (COIN) database was searched for reports, made under the Reporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 1995 (RIDDOR 1995), of manual handling accidents and incidents in the meat industry. The search was restricted to the four-year period from 2005 to 2008. Reports of incident to workers during deliveries and/or during loading/offloading of meat carcasses at a specific centre were retrieved.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Table 2
                      presents the summary information about the observed delivery scenarios.

The majority of the premises (n = 12 craft shops and the wholesale centre, had firm, clean and level flooring, and no fixed obstacles en-route; four craft shops had raised edges, flights of steps, and fixed obstacles en-route. The typical obstacles en-route were: restricted space (due to shop furnishings when access was through the entrance into the shopping area), and relatively narrow corridors and doorways (Fig 1
                        ). At one craft shop a flight of seven steps and a gravelled pathway were traversed to reach the chilled storage area.

Twelve of the craft shops were located in terraced buildings without dedicated parking spaces. At eight of these shops, access to the storage area was through the customer entrance, while at four shops there was a separate goods-in entrance. The four remaining craft shops visited were located in detached or semi-detached buildings, and they each had dedicated goods-in entrances as well as off-road parking spaces. At the wholesale centre (site Q) and one craft shop (site I), the goods-in entrance was at a loading bay, which for site I was within a shopping complex on an upper floor. Two of the deliveries observed involved on-road parking, and occurred at “off-peak” periods of the day, i.e., when there were few cars parked along the road. However, discussions with the drivers indicated that deliveries were more often made very early or late in the day, i.e., when many more cars were parked along the road, and finding suitable parking space was difficult. At these times, the drivers said that they often had to navigate parked cars and/or traverse narrow spaces while carrying carcasses.

Beef forequarter and hindquarter cuts were the bulk of the orders to nine craft shops, and lamb carcases (whole bodies) the bulk of the orders to three craft shops. On average, the lamb carcasses weighed 20 kg, pig carcasses 45 kg, beef forequarters 65 kg, and beef hindquarters 85 kg. Many of the orders also included boxes of diced meat and/or bags of offal, which generally weighed less than 15 kg.

Five different delivery vehicles (single body Lorries) were observed, all of which had ceiling rails with hooks on which beef quarters and pig carcasses were hung. Lamb carcasses, boxes and bags were generally stacked on the vehicle bed, except for one driver whose lamb carcasses were also hung on ceiling hooks in the vehicle. Two of the vehicles had a mechanical hoist system at the entrance of the load compartment (Fig. 2
                        ), and one had a retractable staircase for access into the load compartment but no hoist system (Fig. 3
                        ); none of the vehicles had a tail lift.

At the wholesale centre (site Q), a mechanical arm device (Fig. 4
                        ) was used to move individual beef quarters from the vehicle into the premises. At site I, an A-frame trolley was provided (Fig. 5
                        ) to move the carcasses from the loading bay to the storage area; the storage area for this shop was a considerable distance away from the loading bay and on a lower floor. At site L and site O, the overhead ceiling support rail system was extended to run from the storage area through the processing area to the dedicated goods-in entrance. The access gate and roadway into the premises at site L had also recently been widened so that a delivery vehicle could be parked close to the goods-in entrance.

During the deliveries at craft shops, the drivers performed three basic tasks:
                           
                              •
                              Pick-up, when a meat cut or carcass was collected from within the vehicle;

Carry, when a meat cut or carcass was manually held or supported and the driver walked with the load away from the vehicle to the shop; and,

Deposit, when a meat cut or carcass was hung onto a rail system in the storage area or deposited onto a table in the processing hall of the craft shop.

Twelve of the craft shops received carcass orders on a weekly basis; the remaining four received on a more frequent basis (Table 2). For the observed deliveries (n = 7), the drivers handed an average of, 8 lamb carcasses [range 6–10], 9 pig carcasses [range 3–10] and 14 beef quarters [range 4–52]. The drivers' load pick-up frequencies ranged between 0.40 and 3.50 per minute (see Table 3
                        ), and their inter pick-up times (time between consecutive pick-ups) ranged between 18.5 s and 150 s. The periods when drivers walked with load were short, generally ranging between 8.3 s and 40 s; on one occasion, it reached 133.4 s (see Table 3).

Two techniques were used to offload the carcasses and beef quarters from the vehicle: direct and indirect techniques (see Table 4
                        ).

Direct offloading: In this technique, the products and carcasses were collected from the vehicle, and moved straight into the premises. This technique was used at two shops (sites B, and D) and the wholesale centre (site Q), facilitated by a retractable staircase at the back of the truck (sites B and D), and a mechanical arm installed on the loading bay (site Q). Indirect offloading: In this technique, the products and carcasses were moved to intermediate positions within and/or outside the vehicle before they were moved into the premises. Thus, at site H and site P where there was no loading bay and the vehicle had a fitted mechanical hoist but no retractable staircase, first, in the vehicle, the carcasses were pushed along the rail to the mechanical hoist (Fig. 6
                        ), and then the hoist's controls were operated to transfer them out of the vehicle (Fig. 2). At site J, where there was no loading bay and the vehicle did not have a retractable staircase or mechanical hoist, the driver carried each carcass to the entrance of the vehicle and dropped them on the floor of the vehicle. He then assisted as other workers outside the vehicle collected the carcasses one after another and moved them into the premises (Fig. 7
                        ). At site I the carcasses were moved from the vehicle to a trolley on the loading bay.

In the tasks performed, the drivers generally used two handling methods (Fig. 8
                        ): the shoulder-support method (shoulder handling) and the arm/hand-support method (anterior handling). The discussions with the drivers and staff at premises visited indicated that shoulder handling is the industry-preferred mode for manually transporting carcasses over long distances and that achieving an optimal balance of the carcass on the shoulder is an important part of the technique. According to the workers, optimal balance of the carcass on the shoulder is reached when only one hand can be used to stabilise/maintain its position; it is more likely to be unbalanced when two hands are required.

Shoulder handling: This method was used for pick-up and transport of beef quarters, and pig carcasses, and for transport of lamb when the travel distance was long (more than 3 m). During pick-up of beef quarters and pig carcasses, the driver moved close to the hanging carcass, grasped it, and squatted slightly and/or bent forward until the lower end of the carcass was on/against the shoulder/upper chest area of the body. He then moved from the squat/bent position back to an upright standing position while taking a step forward, thereby progressively transferring the carcass on the shoulder and its weight fully borne. Thus, the carcasses were generally collected onto the shoulder without lifting. Once the carcass was fully on the shoulder, the arms/hands were used to hold/stabilise it (Fig. 8a). To load the carcasses onto a ceiling rail hook, the driver squatted and/or stooped with it still on the shoulder, until the upper end latched onto the open hook, and then moved away gradually to transfer the weight from their shoulder to the hook. Occasionally, the driver first pushed down on the leading end of the carcass so that the meat was almost vertical and allowed it to slide down the chest into his arms or he hugged the meat to the chest after it was wholly anterior to the body; he then lifted the carcass and manoeuvred the upper end onto the hook.

Anterior handling: This method was generally used for pick-up and transport of lamb carcasses, boxes and bags, and for pick-up and transport of beef quarters and pig carcasses over short distances (less than 3 m); it was occasionally used for loading of beef quarters and pig carcasses onto overhead hooks in the storage area. The products were grasped with the hands and carried in front or at the sides of the body, or they were rested against the chest and hugged/supported by the arms (Fig. 8b). The first version of the method was used with lamb carcasses, boxes and bags, and the second version was used with beef quarter cuts and pig carcasses. For pick-up of the cuts/carcasses, the driver first squatted slightly and hugged the meat to the chest or he supported the lower end in the arms. The driver then moved from the squat position back to an upright standing position, progressively increasing support of the carcass in the arms and sliding the upper end off the hook. When carcasses were deposited onto a ceiling hook with this handling method, the drivers always needed to lift them.

Prior to the time of study all the sites involved in the study had been visited by local authority inspectors and the managers queried about the risk of injury from handling of meat carcasses. As such, they were aware of the MHOR and the guidance on the regulations (HSE, 2004), and all had attempted risk assessments of meat handling activities, using the checklist provided in the guidance on the regulations. Generally, the managers reported that the guidance on the regulations was useful for assessing and simplifying handling tasks involving boxes/regular shaped loads, and which are held/supported with the hands/arms in front of the body; they are less certain about what to do to achieve compliance when carrying on the shoulder/back (a more efficient means of moving large weight loads), is mainly involved. This they attributed to the fact that the guidance weight values for loads handed are too conservative (much lower than the weights of meat loads handled during deliveries).

None of the drivers involved in the observed deliveries reported being injured in the last 12 months, and none identified time pressure as a safety concern; three of the drivers reported that they were physically active in their spare time (including weight lifting).

Over the search period 616 incident records about handling in the meat industry were found on HSE's RIDDOR database, of which 23 (3.7%) incidents concerned large meat cuts or carcasses (see Table 5
                        ), i.e., an injury rate of 3.73 per 100 full-time workers, and they all involved male workers. In 13 (56%) incidents the workers sustained sprain and strain injuries to the back and in five (22%) incidents the workers sustained upper limb injuries. In 16 (69%) of the incidents a beef quarter was being handled when the injury occurred, and a pig carcass in five (26%) incidents; none of the incidents involved a lamb carcass.

Service drivers were involved in 13 (57%) of the incidents, 11 of which occurred while a beef-quarter was being handled, i.e., when it was lifted onto/off a support hook (n = 4), and while it was transported carried on the shoulder (n = 7). The underlying causes identified in the RIDDOR database for the carrying related incidents, were: stumbling/tripping over an obstacle en-route while walking (n = 1); traversing a narrow corridor (n = 1); carcass incorrectly balanced/positioned on the shoulder (n = 1); and, long duration carrying (n = 4). In addition two service drivers were injured when carrying a box down spiral stairs.

The remaining incidents (n = 10) involved production/factory operatives (n = 6), meat cutters (n = 3), and a head chef. Five of these incidents occurred while a beef cut was handled and five occurred while a pig carcass/cut was handled. In two incidents the worker was attempting to lift a pig carcass from floor level to a processing table, and in four incidents, they were injured while lifting a pig carcass or beef cut onto/off a support hook. For four incidents where the worker was injured while transporting beef quarters carried on the shoulder, the underlying causes identified were slipping on a step/ladder rung while going down (n = 2), and faulty footing, i.e., the foot becoming trapped in a gap (n = 1), or miss-stepping (n = 1).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

By complimenting direct observation of delivery scenarios with analysis of reported accidents, it was possible to realise a clearer picture of the meat delivery work in terms of the main hazards. In the following sections, macro perspectives of the current results on injury prevention, good practices observed and implications for risk assessment of peripatetic delivery activities are discussed.

Two types of handling methods (shoulder handling and anterior handling) were used to move the meat carcasses. With each method, pickup of the heavier pig carcasses and beef quarters was achieved largely by holding the load against the body while upright and invariably close to the central vertical axis. Though non-neutral trunk positions were adopted, this was often before the load was fully supported and the postures were not held for any appreciable length of time. During transport, the driver's posture was upright throughout (similar to unloaded walking), and none of the drivers reported time pressure as a safety concern, which suggested that there was good opportunity for recovery between the instances of handling. The anterior handling method was only used for short distance transfers of meat loads (<3 m), and distances that exceeded 10 m were traversed when the shoulder handling methods was used. Research concerning physical workload during handling activities, shows that when the load centre of mass is located as close as possible to the centre of mass to the body, the body keeps an upright position similar to unloaded walking, and the energy cost during carrying is lowest (Abe et al., 2004; El-Rich and Shirazi-Adl, 2005; Knapik et al., 2004; Faber et al., 2011). In these regards, the results here indicate that the two handling methods applied are essentially low energy cost handling methods. Secondly, the findings suggest that the shoulder handling method is a physically less demanding technique for transporting the same weight of load compared to anterior handling.

All the orders delivered during the site visits included, in various ratios, beef forequarter and hindquarter, lamb carcases (whole bodies) and/or pig carcasses, as well as boxes of diced meat and/or bags of offal, which generally weighed less than 15 kg.

Concerning anterior handling of loads, lifting and lowering with the arms/hands, the MHOR (HSE, 2004) guideline load weight figures for ‘close’ handling, i.e., at about waist height and directly in front of the body (16 kg and 25 kg for females and males respectively) compare favourably with the weights of lamb bodies but they are much lower than the weights of pig carcasses and beef quarters. The MAC guidance for repeated handling indicates that handling of lamb carcasses presents a low to medium risk of injury while handling of pig carcasses and beef quarter presents a high to very high risk. However, considering that anterior lifting of beef quarters onto/off a ceiling hook was directly implicated as a causal factor for injury of drivers in accidents reports, but not lifting of pig carcasses (Table 5), it is more likely that pig carcasses presents a lower risk of injury compared to beef quarters. Overall, therefore, the findings indicate that meat service drivers are less likely to be injured during deliveries, when the bulk of the orders are lamb and/or pig carcases compared to when the bulk of the orders are beef quarters.

The characteristics of the delivery vehicle (in terms of access and handling aids) influenced how pig carcasses and beef quarters were offloaded at premises without a loading bay, and suggested different levels of risk. The results indicate that vehicles with no access steps and no hoist system or other mechanical device to move the loads out of the vehicle, present the highest level of risk while those with a clear means of access into and out of the storage area present the lowest risk.

When the vehicle had no access steps and no hoist system, meat loads were handled within the confines of the truck, and the driver performed frequent but short-duration anterior handling of carcasses as well as lifting from close to floor level to facilitate their offloading. In these instances, the offloading activity precluded use of handling aids to offload the carcasses, due to the high number of carcasses stored in the vehicle and consequently limited space for manoeuvring. When there was a hoist system, the meat loads were moved in the truck with push exertions instead of anterior handling and when outside, the driver was able to collect the loads directly onto the shoulder without lifting prior to their transfer into the premises (indirect offloading). When the truck had a means of access into and out of the storage area (in this case a retractable stairway), the need for both anterior handling and pushing of the carcasses was largely eliminated. In the truck, the driver was able to collect the carcasses directly onto the shoulder from the ceiling hooks without lifting (shoulder handling) and thereafter to move them straight out of the truck and into the premises (direct offloading). Considering, however, that slippage on steps was directly implicated as a causal factor for injury in accident reports reviewed here (Table 5), a portable ramp system of suitable length could be utilised to eliminate the need to traverse step rungs. This will also facilitate the use of various wheeled trolleys and carts that could help further reduce the amount of physical stress experienced by the driver, particularly during deliveries of large beef quarters. Where a ramp cannot be utilised but the pathways around the vehicle and to the shop entrance are clear, a vehicle with a tail lift system would facilitate the use of lift carts and utility carts for loading/unloading carcasses onto ceiling hooks, instead of anterior handling, and for moving them from the vehicle into the premises (INRS, 2002).

On-road parking and lack of a dedicated entrance to the cold store often necessitated longer walking distances with a load compared to when the truck could be parked close to the entrance (Table 2). All the premises visited that required on-road parking were within residential buildings, and the drivers who took part in this study stated that they often needed to carry/manoeuvre the loads past parked vehicles and that under the conditions, handling assist devices were difficult if not impossible to apply. To avoid this problem operators of shops in residential areas without assigned parking may be able to negotiate the allocation of a dedicated parking space with their landlord/local council, that is as close to the entrance of the shop as possible, and of a size to accommodate a delivery vehicle with a hoist system, an access ramp, and/or a tail lift. However, as space for offloading during deliveries may be suitable for parking 3 or more cars when free, the aim should therefore be to operate the space as a flexible loading/unloading zone with time frame stated for when delivery vehicles will use it. Thereby, it will be available to the craft-shop customers as parking space at other time, otherwise, vacant for 90% of the time.

There were indications from the accident reports reviewed that narrow doorways/corridors and steps, and the need to negotiate obstacles and uneven surfaces could cause problems for the drivers to the extent of increasing their risk of injury. Drivers therefore needed to proceed particularly carefully when moving through narrow doorways, in narrow corridors and when negotiating shop furnishings, particularly where the customers' entrance is the only entry route to the storage area. Owners and operators of shops could also help in this regard by ensuring that the route is, as far as possible, clear and free.

The present study identified examples of implemented good practices and interventions for moving the carcasses were identified during this study, which although they did not always avoid the need for manual handling of the carcasses, gave indications that they reduced the risks of musculoskeletal injury. Thus, the mechanical arm used at the wholesale centre (site Q) meant that workers only needed to exert push/pull forces sufficient to move the carcass from one position to another. Secondly, the provision of a new goods-in area and extension of the ceiling rail support system out from the storage area to the entrance, which occurred at two premises (site L and site O), meant that drivers traversed considerably reduced distances whilst carrying a load. However, installation of a mechanical arm to move loads from the vehicle may not be economically suitable for craft shops that only process small order quantities and extension of the ceiling rail system may not be very effective when the access area into the shop cannot be modified to enable close parking of the delivery vehicle.

Concerning manual lifting and transporting of loads, the MHOR requires that hazardous manual handling operations are avoided so far as is reasonably practicable, by automating or mechanising the process; otherwise that a suitable and sufficient assessment of the operation is carried out. When evidence of risk due to the load is identified, i.e., the loads involved weigh more than 25 kg, and they are most often/always held and moved ahead (anterior) of the body, the simplest and most direct ergonomic solution recommended is weight reduction so that the load is no more than 25 kg (Davis, 2000). Other implemented solutions are reorganisation of the workstation so that loads can be collected with little or no bending of the body, or introduction of a mechanical handling aid to remove the need to carry the load and reduce the extent of lifting that is performed. Caution is however, required when trolleys and carts are introduced. While their introduction replaces the need for lifting and carrying operations with pushing and pulling operations, they may be over loaded in a bid to avoid repeat trips or to reduce the time of the activity, and thereby introduce new risks. Furthermore, their operation requires that adequate space is available for manoeuvring within the vehicle including around the stored carcasses.

Unlike manual handling activities that occur at a specific worksite or area, the meat delivery work involves working at two or more worksites that are not under the control of one employer, and handling of large loads that are not readily amendable to weight/size reductions, on the basis that they keep better than small cuts, provide greater yield, and enable a craft butcher to be more creative than is possible with small cuts (Nortje et al., 1989; Gill and McGinnis, 2000; Bass et al., 2009). Furthermore, the work involves environments that vary considerably, are often not easily subject to modification, and that make use of mechanical handling aids difficult. For these and other peripatetic delivery activities e.g. of white goods & domestic furniture to different homes, the findings from the current work, suggest four factors on which decisions about risk and good practice may be made: composition of the orders; characteristics of the delivery vehicle/truck; the handling method mainly applied; and, the road/access conditions. The results indicate that the delivery activities can be managed by paying attention to macro aspects, rather than traditional micro factors such as the load weight, instantaneous postures adopted, and position of the load relative to the body. Examples of good practice identified during this study, which could be applied in other delivery situations, include the following:
                           
                              •
                              Use of mechanical handling devices available to assist handling activities where appropriate.

The provision of a portable ramp system of suitable length to facilitate the use of wheeled trolleys and carts.

Shoulder handling of loads in preference to anterior handling whenever possible.

That carrying loads down stairs or several steps is avoided.

The use of delivery vehicles with a tail lift system to facilitate the use of lift carts and utility carts for removing loads from support hooks and thereafter moving them into the premises. However, where carts are to be used, good procedures also need to be in place to discourage the temptation of over loading them in a bid to avoid repeat trips, or to reduce the time of the activity, as this introduces new risks.

The provision of a dedicated goods-in area as an alternate entrance to the storage area aside of the customer entrance.

Ensuring that the delivery route is, as far as possible, clear and free from obstacles and that the pathway floor surfaces are not slippery.

Providing drivers with guidance to proceed more carefully when moving through narrow doorways, in narrow corridors when traversing steps and, where the customer entrance is the only entry route, when negotiating shop furnishings.

Operators of businesses in rented residential building without dedicated parking areas, or assigned parking space, can also consider negotiating the allocation of a suitable dedicated parking space with their landlord/local council (as close to the entrance of the shop as possible, and of a size to accommodate a delivery vehicle with a hoist system, an access ramp, and/or a tail lift).

As only four drivers were observed it is not possible to draw any conclusions as to whether their behaviour was typical, and it is possible that bias may have been introduced through either the questions used during the semi-structures interviews or how the answers received were interpreted. Considering, however, that 16 craft shops out of an estimated 30 under the jurisdiction of the local authority visited were involved, the findings are likely to be representative for the sector in that region of England, and across the UK.

As with all retrospectively compiled data, some important/relevant incidents may not have been reported and the analysed accident reports may not be representative. Whilst the low number of incidents relevant to this study was corroborated by statements by the drivers, the fact that only four drivers were interviewed is not sufficient to establish whether under-reporting occurred or not. Furthermore, the information about the accidents and how they occurred may not have been precise and the possibility of bias in how the compilers queried those involved and interpreted the scenes cannot be ruled out.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Manual Handling in the delivery of retail meat carcases involves carrying weights of up to 85 kg, and environments that include obstacles en route and raised edges/flights of steps. However, a review of incident reports showed that delivery drivers were involved in a small proportion (3.7%) of the meat handling incidents reported on RIDDOR for the meat processing industry. For meat delivery activities, the results suggest an approach for risk assessment of deliveries to craft shops. The main conclusions are:
                        
                           •
                           The normal custom and practice in relation to the handling methods applied (shoulder handling and anterior handling) are essentially low energy-cost and sufficient methods for the tasks. However, shoulder handling is a less physically demanding technique for moving the same weight compared to anterior handling.

The risk of injury when carrying beef quarters is less, when a good shoulder handling technique is used, i.e., when the centre of mass of the load is located as close as possible to the centre of mass to the body and the body keeps an upright position similar to unloaded walking, compared to when it is not.

Four main factors that can increase the risk of injury and on which decisions about risk and good practice may be made are: composition of the orders; characteristics of the delivery vehicle/truck; the handling method mainly applied; and, the road/access conditions.

More generally, the results indicate that peripatetic delivery activities can be managed by paying attention to macro aspects, rather than traditional micro risk factors such as the load weight, instantaneous postures adopted, and position of the load relative to the body.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to express their gratitude to all those who helped make contact with premises that were visited, that assisted with facilitating the site visits and observation of the delivery works, the drivers observed, and especially those who during the visits gave their time and the benefit of their experience. We thank them for their valuable contribution and time. Advice received from Andrew Pinder, David Riley, Nicola Stacey and Mary Trainor of the HSL during drafting of the paper, is also gratefully acknowledged.

This publication and the work it describes were funded by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) as part of the Local Authority Science and Technology Programme. Its contents, including any opinions and/or conclusions expressed, are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect HSE policy.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

