@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#An ergonomics based design research method for the arrangement of helicopter flight instrument panels

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Integrated value of a display is better understood by users than the degree of importance and degree of frequency of use.


                        
                        
                           
                           UCIAM–User Centered Interface Arrangement Methodology is a new technique for user-interface arrangement.


                        
                        
                           
                           Locational Value of a Display, Sub-Areas of the Display Panel are new concepts to analyze paper prototypes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Functional Grouping of Displays is an intuitive concept for expert users.


                        
                        
                           
                           Sequence of use is not applicable in the context of display reading.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

User-centered design

Helicopter flight instrument panel

User-interface arrangement

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In this paper, we study the arrangement of displays in flight instrument panels of multi-purpose civil helicopters following a user-centered design method based on ergonomics principles. Our methodology can also be described as a user-interface arrangement methodology based on user opinions and preferences. This study can be outlined as gathering user-centered data using two different research methods and then analyzing and integrating the collected data to come up with an optimal instrument panel design. An interview with helicopter pilots formed the first step of our research. In that interview, pilots were asked to provide a quantitative evaluation of basic interface arrangement principles. In the second phase of the research, a paper prototyping study was conducted with same pilots. The final phase of the study entailed synthesizing the findings from interviews and observational studies to formulate an optimal flight instrument arrangement methodology. The primary results that we present in our paper are the methodology that we developed and three new interface arrangement concepts, namely relationship of inseparability, integrated value and locational value. An optimum instrument panel arrangement is also proposed by the researchers.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

User-interfaces constitute the conceptual space where information and force are interchanged between the user and the machine for the operation of a man-machine system. This interaction is vital for a safe, effective and comfortable operation of every man-machine system. The goal and the structure of a user-interface varies according to the type of the product or system. With technological advancements, user-interfaces become more complex with new functions and components. In general, air transport vehicles have more complex user-interfaces than most other modes of transport due to safety concerns and the complexity of their underlying technological infrastructure. As a complex machine, the helicopter is a good example for such a transport vehicle. Lovesey (1975) defines the helicopter pilot as an operator who works under most difficult circumstances because of the helicopter's high maneuverability, instability of its technological nature and resulting control difficulties and problems.

As rotary-wing aircrafts, helicopters have significant technological and usage advantages compared to fixed-wing aircraft. These advantages are the primary factors that led to their increased usage. Its vertical landing and takeoff capability and high maneuverability allows the helicopter to be used in a wide range of purposes such as search-and-rescue, firefighting, television broadcast, air-ambulance, film and documentary production and air-taxis. However, despite the wide use of helicopters, methods used in the design and arrangement of the flight instrument panels of rotary wing aircraft are old.

There are three main goals in this research:
                        
                           ▪
                           Goal 1: To investigate the role of basic principles of user-interface design of Sanders and McCormick (1993), in the context of flight instrument panel arrangements of civil helicopters.

Goal 2: To develop a new methodology to optimize display arrangements of flight instrument panels of civil helicopters, based on users' opinions and assessments

Goal 3: To identify new concepts which will play a role in the arrangement methodology developed.

Two different research methods constituted the structure of the research. In the first stage interviews were conducted individually with helicopter pilots. In this stage interface arrangement principles of Sanders and McCormick (1993) were investigated as well as pilots' personal experiences and opinions. These basic principles, which are generalized principles for all types of user-interfaces, are well established and accepted for decades in the field of ergonomics. The rationale behind the investigation of these principles is to explore their role in the arrangement of helicopter flight instrument panels as well as in the development of the new arrangement methodology. This part of the research provided verbal and quantitative data. A paper prototyping study constituted the second stage of the research. In this stage, the pilots that were previously interviewed were asked to generate their own instrument panel arrangements. The paper prototyping stage of the research provided visual and quantitative as well as verbal data. The data resulting from these two research processes was used to develop the new arrangement method, which is the primary result of the research. The arrangement method developed can be described as the synthesis of quantitative, qualitative, descriptive and visual data generated during the study.

This research was conducted in part to address the design and ergonomics research concerns of “ArıKopter” Project, the civil helicopter development and production project conducted by ROTAM (Rotorlu Hava Araçları Tasarım ve Mükemmeliyet Merkezi – Rotor Aircraft Research Center) in Istanbul Technical University. The research is based on traditional flight instrument panel systems because of the budgetary limitations of ArıKopter project. Glass-cockpits are subject for a future research. Therefore, the displays used in the research phases where obtained from the ROTAM project and the instrument panel of a Bell 407 helicopter was used because of its similarity in terms of shape and dimensions to the ArıKopter Project.

In general, user-interfaces can be divided in two general groups: traditional user-interfaces and graphical user-interfaces. Traditional user-interfaces are composed from separate displays and controls whereas graphical user-interfaces are computer-based systems. In graphical user-interfaces information is displayed to the user via computer monitors. This present study is based on and limited on traditional user-interfaces. An extensive body of literature can be found on graphical-user-interfaces especially in the field of computer science and human–computer interaction. Both types of user-interfaces are largely found in various types of consumer products and systems as well as in transportation vehicles and systems. Methods based on visual analysis play an important role in the design and arrangement of user-interfaces. Visual analysis is based on direct observation of user actions in the process of use of a certain product or system. Chapanis (1965) describes visual analysis methods as a data basis to refine existing products or systems. Chapanis (1965) categorized visual analysis methods into four main groups, which are concisely summarized below. These methods have advantages as well as disadvantages.
                           
                              ▪
                              User-opinions

The opinions and experiences users of a current product or system are the primary source of data about the usage of a product or system. However there is the disadvantage in which a person who uses the product for a long time may not identify its usability faults. Users may be blind to faults and errors and may be reluctant for new designs and solutions. Questions which will be directed to the user must be carefully selected.
                           
                              ▪
                              Activity-sampling techniques

There are three types of activity-sampling techniques in order to observe a product or system systematically: sampling of user activities, memo-motion study, unit-basis sampling. In sampling of user activities, the researcher observes and records the user activities in pre-defined time periods (10 s, 1 min, or 30 min etc.). The recorded data can be used to calculate percentage of duration of a certain step in comparison to the whole activity. McFarland and Moseley (1954) used this technique to improve dashboard design of intercity buses. In memo-motion study very short sampling intervals, shorter than 2 s, are used to record the user activities. In this case, the user activity is electronically recorded and that can be re analyzed. In unit-basis sampling, the research is focused mainly on a single type of activity that is a part of a task which consists of different activities.
                           
                              ▪
                              Process-analysis techniques

Also called functional analysis, process-analysis techniques depends on to observing and to recording each step of the work studied, and is widely used to improve and to arrange user-interfaces. There are several types of process-analysis techniques. Developed by Frank Gilbreth, flow charts are used to describe various standardized sub-steps of a certain work process. They represent the whole process of the usage of a certain product or system in the form of a diagram in which, various components of the process are represented by different geometrical forms as a coding approach. They are usually utilized to analyze different steps of a process that is investigated. The diagram is generally represented in the form of a line to represent time. Flow diagrams are similar to flow charts, but they include the space, where the interaction between the user and the machine occurs, as an additional component. The visual appearance of a flow diagram is very similar to the real picture of the interaction space where the interaction occurs.


                        Nemeth (2004) describes flow diagrams as a class of methods (FRD-functional requirements analysis, action-information analysis, decision-action analysis, FAST-functional analysis system technique) similar to flow charts in which the location of the work is included in this research. Channell (1947) used a flow diagram technique to analyze and improve the cockpit of a multi-engine military aircraft. Using this technique they divided the cockpit in seven sub-areas. Multiple process analysis technique investigate the simultaneous work process of multiple operators or components of a particular product or system. Here, data is represented in a process chart format for each operator in a single chart called multiple flow chart. Time values are also added for each action represented in the chart. A two-pilot helicopter can be a good example of problem which can be studied using this technique. Multiple flow charts were used by Chapanis (1965) to observe and study the landing process of a R5D aircraft. Time line analysis uses time line diagrams to evaluate or assess and predict the task performance of a user of system or product as well as of a user-interface. In a time line diagram each action is shown in rectangular shapes in different sizes according to its duration. The technique can be used to predict the workload levels of a solution under development, and to analyze multi-user systems. The time line analysis technique can be used as a flow analysis tool as well as a secondary technique for refinement of a task analysis. The review of the outcomes of time line diagram will allow reorganizing tasks in order to fit the time allocated for the task (Nemeth, 2004).


                        Link analysis techniques can be considered as a variation of flow diagram technique in which the links between the components of the diagram are expressed in statistical values. It is a quantitative method to examine and assess the relationships between the components of a man-machine system and can be used to optimize the arrangement of user-interface components. Here, the link is defined as any interaction between a user and a component or between two users or between two components. Links can be hand movements, body movements or eye-movements etc. or similar actions that constitute an interaction process.

The statistical value of a link can be its value of importance or value of frequency or sometimes importance and frequency individually. In contrast to flow charts and flow diagrams, link analysis techniques are most suitable for situations in which non standardized actions occur. An interaction matrix, schematic link charts, spatial-operational sequence diagram or an improved user-interface or product design are among the outputs of link analysis.


                        Operational Sequence Analysis (OSA) combines events, information, decisions and actions involved in the use of a product into a single diagram called operational sequence diagram to explore the functional relationships among a system's elements (Nemeth, 2004). The timeline is also included in the diagram. This technique can be utilized to develop a picture of the system under investigation. Chapanis (1996) considered OSA to be one the most powerful techniques for analyzing a system. OSA is a useful technique to generate a picture of the whole system being investigated.
                           
                              ▪
                              Micro-motion techniques

These methods are generally used to observe and analyze especially hand and finger movements using video recording technology in short periods of time. These are generally repetitive movements. The process is divided into its smallest time modules called Therbligs. Simo-Charts (SImultaneous MOtion-cycle Charts) are generated from video recording of the process. Simo-Charts provide a detailed picture actions generated by of both hands and/or feet involved during the interaction process of a user-interface. By using the Simo-Chart the researcher usually tries to eliminate useless motions, redistribute the workload among hands and feet or provide additional tools to simplify the operator's task (Chapanis, 1965). On the other hand, although micro-motion techniques are suitable to analyze and improve user-interfaces, they are more suitable to conduct research on the control part of user-interfaces.

Although visual analysis methods are widely used to observe, analyze and improve user-interfaces, they have some disadvantages:
                           
                              ▪
                              The observation can affect the behavior of the observed user;

It can be difficult to reach significant results;

It is important to predefine what will be observed;

Some observations have high costs;

It can be difficult to generalize the findings;

It can be difficult to evaluate changes.

Linear programming techniques, also called linear optimization, are also used in studying and improving user-interfaces where the research problem can be expressed as a mathematical equation or a mathematical model. In this technique the variables of the real problem constitute the variables of the mathematical equation or model, in order to reach the desired goal. The equation may be used to minimize or maximize or optimize a goal that can be quantified. Deininger (1958) study on the cockpit design of a C-131 aircraft, Palmiter and Elkerton (1987) research on automotive plant control panels and Pulat and Ayoub (1985) research on control panel improvements are good examples on linear programming for user-interfaces.

In the field of user-centered design, various techniques were widely used to analyze and improve user-interfaces of consumer products and systems. Usage scenarios, physical models, paper prototypes, interactive prototypes and computer models are modern user-centered design techniques for user-interface studies. Sanders (1992) utilized paper prototypes to study a military loader project. Sade et al. (1998) used Wizard of Oz as an interactive prototyping method to improve an aluminum can refunding-machine. Snyder (2003) gives the Dictaphone Project as an example to user-centered design study based on the paper prototyping technique.

In contrast to these approaches, Sanders and McCormick (1993) defined a two step approach in the design and organization of user-interfaces, under the title of “arrangement of components in a physical environment”. These steps are:
                           
                              ▪
                              
                                 General location of components, which refers to general organization of interface components according to common characteristics


                                 Specific arrangement of components in their general location, which refers to the specific location of interface components or, individual organization of component groups described above.

They also described four principles in the generation of the two steps described above:
                           
                              ▪
                              
                                 The degree of importance: the most important components must be located in the same group or in most convenient locations;


                                 The degree of frequency of use: the most frequently used components must be located in the same group or in most convenient locations;


                                 The principle of functional similarity: components which refer to common functions must be located in same groups;


                                 The principle of sequence of use: in some systems where operational sequences exist, these components must be located and organized with regard to these operational sequences.

As a general approach, the degree of importance and the degree of frequency of use are used in the specific arrangement of components in their general location step whereas the principles of functional similarity and sequence of use are used in the general location of components step. That approach, developed by Sanders and McCormick (1993), constituted the basis of this research and is widely used and applied in user-interface design applications for various types of products or systems.

In the field of aviation most of the human factors research is government and military based. Although there is a wide interest in glass cockpits and head-mounted display systems, the issue of instrument panel arrangement has not been considered in recent studies such as AGARD (1996) reports. Most commonly used and standardized arrangement methods date back to the Second World War II and are primarily developed for fixed-wing aircraft.

Early studies to design flight instrument panels and to arrange displays in aircraft cockpits began in the 1930s in Great Britain. In 1937, the Royal Air Force (RAF) conducted a research on flight instrument panel arrangements of military aircraft, which were later used during World War II, and published the results of this research. Supported with visual scanning research, this basic arrangement was refined and reached its final “T” shape. This “T” shape arrangement (Fig. 1
                        ) is still being used in contemporary fixed wing and rotary wing aircrafts (Hawkins, 2002). The need to read four flying parameters, namely attitude indicator, speed, altitude and heading, quickly and correctly resulted in the modification of this basic “T” arrangement. Gray and Flower (1943) developed a model for locating flight displays in an instrument panel. In their model all displays were grouped in a 1 m sq., square-shaped space and were located in accordance with the aircraft's left-right or up-down maneuvers. Other important research for the arrangement of flight instrument panels were conducted by McFarland (1946), Freund and Sadosky (1967), Kelley (1972), Barlett (1973), Rolfe (1976) and Wierwille (1981).


                        Wickens (1992) developed proximity compatibility principle (PCP) for display arrangements. He proposed that displays used in the same tasks must be located in near proximity to one another, and use the same information coding techniques. Andre (1992) proposed that flight task must be the primary consideration in the grouping of flight displays rather than the frequency of use. Palmer et al. (1995) assigned four different roles to the pilot, namely the team member, the commander, the individual operator and the occupant, and described the crew deck design principles for each of these roles. They also categorized guidelines related with combinations of crew issues and flight deck features and emphasized consistency in layout where similar functions should be located at the same positions. Senol et al. (2010) used multiple criteria decision making and card sorting to redesign the instrument panel of a UH-1H helicopter.

The overall shape of the flight instrument panel, which results from constraints of the flight cabin design of the aircraft, has also a great influence on the arrangement of displays. This topic is deeply studied and documented by Lehman et al. (1994), Palmer et al. (1995), Abbott (2001), Rune et al. (2008). Cockpit design methods proposed by Sexton (1988), Storey et al. (1994) and Palmer et al. (1995) are among the current approaches in the field. Additionally, display technology has an important effect over the panel arrangements. Reising and Munns (1999) categorized the technology-based display era in three major parts: mechanical era, electro-mechanical era and electro-optical era.

@&#METHOD@&#

The methodology of this research (Fig. 2
                     ) is organized in order to achieve the three main goals of this research, presented in the Introduction Section, and is structured around two research techniques: an interview with helicopter pilots and a paper prototyping study with the helicopter who answered the interview.

In the first phase of the research, interviews were conducted with helicopter pilots. As indicated in the Introduction Section of this paper, the basic principles of Sanders and McCormick (1993) for user-interface arrangement are well established and have been accepted in the field of ergonomics for many years. But they are generalized principles to be applied in various types of user-interfaces found in different products and systems. The main rationale for investigating these principles was to explore how they can play a role in the development of the new arrangement methodology in the context of flight instrument panels of civil helicopters. Therefore, these basic principles constituted an important component of interview questions. In the second stage, a paper prototyping study was conducted with same pilots who also contributed to the interview. We must emphasize that the later parts and stages of the methodology of this research were planned and designed during the progress of the research and the appearance of preliminary findings. The proposed interface arrangement method can be considered as the synthesis of the findings of these two research techniques.

Since the number of helicopter pilots in Turkey is relatively limited, the participants were found with an announcement for the study. To avoid relatively inexperienced participants, the minimum professional experience was limited to 5 years. The sample consisted of 15 helicopter pilots with an average professional experience of 17.7 years. Flight-hours were not asked in the interview. All of them were military trained male subjects. Eight of them were retired from military service and were working in the civil aviation industry while 7 pilots were active military pilots in the Turkish Army. All of these pilots had flight experience with a certain type of helicopter which is also currently in service in civil aviation.

Interviews were conducted with 15 male helicopter pilots. All interviews were done face-to-face and one-to-one. Each participant was given a printed version of the interview and was requested to answer the questions by filling in the printed interview form. All the interviews were also voice-recorded using a digital voice recording device. The interview consisted of 14 questions (See Table 1
                        ) covering the following types of data:
                           
                              ▪
                              Quantitative evaluation of the displays based on Sanders and McCormick (1993) four basic principles of user-interface arrangement, using a Likert scale,

General opinions, preferences, experiences and habits in the context of flying a helicopter.

All displays were letter coded in order to facilitate the interview and the other phases of the research. Question 11 was only asked to the first 5 pilots. Since pilots found the principle of sequence of use inapplicable to the problem, this question was removed for the rest of the interviews. The questions in the interview, as well as the letter codes of the displays, are summarized in Table 1.

The data from the interviews was analyzed using the following steps:
                           
                              ▪
                              For the principle of importance, arithmetic mean values and standard deviations for each display were calculated based on the numerical values provided by the pilots.

For the principle of frequency of use, arithmetic mean values and standard deviations for each display were calculated based on the numerical values provided by the pilots.

The arithmetic mean of the integrated value for each display, which is a new concept that was proposed by the researchers, was calculated for all pilots

Display groups were generated using pairing tables
                              

Important and common verbal opinions from answers given to questions 12, 13 and 14 were documented.

The data obtained from the interviews was used to generate instrument panel arrangements. The rationale behind this application is to produce data to explore the role of user-interface design principles of Sanders and McCormick (1993) in the context of this research by comparing the instrument panel layouts generated by the researchers with panel layouts generated by pilots. Using quantitative data to create instrument panel arrangements is a complex task. Therefore, we came up with several new concepts in this phase of the research in order to render the arrangements and to ask new questions. These concepts, which can also be considered as the early outcomes of the research, are:
                           
                              ▪
                              
                                 
                                    Sub-areas of the instrument panel
                                 : A full-scale 3D model of the instrument panel was produced from Styrofoam (Fig. 3
                                 ) to be used during the second phase of the research. The instrument panel was divided into sub-areas and each of these sub-areas was assigned a value. The sub-areas of the panel are also shown in Fig. 4
                                 . The Bell 407, from which the panel model has been generated, is a single pilot helicopter where the pilot is sitting at the right side of the panel. The sub-areas were generated according to the geometrical shape characteristics of the panel and also closeness and head-eye movement required to read a display located in each area. Therefore, the Area 1 is the closest one to the pilot's natural vision with minimum head-eye movement requirements and is assigned highest value 5. The Area 2 is the second closest one to the pilot's natural vision with a little more head-eye movements requirements and is assigned the second highest value 4 and so on.


                                 
                                    Display locating logic
                                 : The second concept which emerged during the study is the Display Locating Logic is also shown in Fig. 4. This idea was formulated during the interviews with pilots. Some pilots commonly used the term “reading a document” while describing the process of checking the critical values of several displays. According to this logic, proposed by the researcher, the pilot will prefer looking at the upper left corner (position number1) of the sub area 1 for the most important/frequently used display and position number 2 for the second most important frequently used display and so on. The arrows in Fig. 4 show the reading order of displays; Position 1 being the most important/frequently used and Position 26 the less important/frequently used.


                                 
                                    Integrated value of a display
                                 : During the interview, it was observed that, pilots confused the principles of importance and frequency of use. Most pilots expressed that a display that is important is also frequently used. Therefore, a new concept was proposed to quantify the value of a display. This concept was not asked in the interview but generated later in the analysis phase. The degree of importance and the degree of frequency of use of a display is synthesized into a single concept called integrated value of a display. Five design and engineering professionals were asked to provide their assignments of the relative weights for the value of importance and for the value of frequency of use. The mean values were used to calculate the integrated values for each display for each pilot as well as the combined values for all pilots. The concept of integrated value has been calculated as a weighted sum of the two concepts as follows:
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             Integrated
                                             
                                             value
                                             =
                                             importance
                                             ×
                                             relative
                                             
                                             weight
                                             +
                                             frequency
                                             
                                             of
                                             
                                             use
                                             ×
                                             relative
                                             
                                             weight
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              

Three panel arrangements were made by the researcher using the concepts described above. The panel arrangements, based on interview data, were generated using the steps in Table 2
                        . These arrangements will be discussed in Section 4 of this paper. These panel arrangements were compared with paper prototypes produced in the second phase of the study.

This phase of the research is structured on user-centered design approach. Ten of the pilots that took part in the interview contributed to the paper prototyping study. The full-scale Styrofoam model of a Bell 407 single-pilot civil helicopter instrument panel, with has no-displays attached on it, was presented to the pilots (Fig. 3). Each pilot was also given a full set of paper displays. All displays were full-scale, realistically drawn and colored and in AutoCAD software. Each pilot was required to produce his own “ideal” panel arrangement by attaching paper displays on the Styrofoam instrument panel using drawing pins. In order to help the pilots understand better the technique, they were each asked the following question in the beginning of the study: “if you were designing your own helicopter, how would you place these displays on this blank instrument panel?”. Critical considerations of this study are:
                           
                              ▪
                              Each pilot was given 30 min to complete his paper prototype.

Each pilot was told that he can make any changes in his arrangements during 30 min.

Each pilot was isolated from others so that others could not be influenced from his own arrangement.


                                 Each pilot was told that he can think aloud.
                              


                                 The researcher did not intervene the process until the end.
                              


                                 The whole process was video-recorded.
                              


                                 A photograph of each pilot's final arrangement was taken.
                              

Two of the 23 displays used in paper prototyping can be seen in Fig. 5
                         (Altimeter), Fig. 6
                         (GPS NavCom).

The paper prototypes generated by the helicopter pilots were analyzed following the procedure explained below:


                        
                           General review of the process and documentation:
                         In the first phase of the analysis, the prototyping process has been reviewed and pilots' important and descriptive statements during the process were documented.


                        
                           Locational values:
                         The locational values of each participant's display arrangements were calculated using the instrument panel sub-areas concept (Fig. 4). This operation was followed by the calculation of the arithmetic mean values of the locational values of all pilots' paper prototypes. The average locational values constituted one of the primary source of data for UCIAM (User-Centered Interface Arrangement Method).


                        
                           Coded drawing with interview data added:
                         A realistic drawing and a letter-coded drawing of the arrangement of each pilot was drawn for better understanding of the pilot's own layout. This drawing was followed up with a more detailed drawing in which, the interview data of each display is written on the display of each pilot's arrangement. This analysis was done for each pilot's paper prototype. For example, the following values were added to the arrangement of Pilot 01 (P01) and so on:
                           
                              ▪
                              
                                 P01's personal value for the degree of importance
                              


                                 Mean value of all pilots' for the degree of importance
                              


                                 P01's personal value for the degree of frequency of use
                              


                                 Mean value of all pilots' for the degree of frequency of use
                              


                                 Mean value of all pilots' for the degree of integrated value
                              


                        
                           Analysis of the coded drawings with interview data added
                        : Each pilot's coded drawing with interview data added was analyzed in terms of meaningful relationships between the interview data and the paper prototype's display arrangements. This analysis was rendered systematically using tables.


                        
                           Comparison of the pilot's locational values with the mean interview data:
                         In the last step of the analysis, each pilot's locational values of his paper prototype were compared in a chart with the degree of importance, degree of frequency of use and degree of integrated value obtained from his interview answers. This comparison was done in order to explore which of these values from the interview were closest to the locational value for each display in the paper prototype.

One of the main goals of this research, described in Section 1, was to develop a new methodology to optimize display arrangements of flight instrument panels of civil helicopters, based on users' opinions and assessments. Therefore, in this phase of the research, a new methodology to arrange displays in a user-interface based on the synthesis of the two research methods is formulated and proposed. This part of the study was developed and formulated after the preceding parts of the methodology had been completed as part of the dynamic methodology used in the entire study. The proposed interface arrangement method is shown in Fig. 7
                        . The rationale behind UCIAM was to reflect expert users' assessments and opinions as well their experiences directly into the design process of flight instrument panels and to emphasize the importance of the relationship between the location of the display and the general shape of the user-interface space. The shape itself is an important factor in the correct perception of any object. The concept of sub-area, which is a new concept proposed by the researchers, was evident in pilots' paper-prototypes, even though the blank flight-instrument panel (Fig. 3) that was given to them did not include any lines or traces that could be interpreted as a sub-area.

In this phase of the study the observational data from paper prototyping was the primary source of data, because of its direct visual character of its outcomes; and the interview is considered as the secondary source of data. The outcome of the paper prototyping reflects the users' opinions and experiences in a direct and very strong mode and has a clear similarity with the desired final goal of the research. In contrast, the outcome of the interview is more theoretical and has both quantitative and qualitative nature. It is considered as support data for the data obtained from the paper prototyping.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Fifteen helicopter pilots took part in the interview in which the interface arrangement principles of Sanders and McCormick (1993) were questioned and evaluated in order to explore their role in the context of this research.

In the interview, the degree of importance and the degree of frequency of use were questioned. Pilots were asked to evaluate these two principles using a 5 point-scale Likert system. The average values of pilots as well as the integrated values of all displays, which were calculated after the interview can be seen on Table 3
                           .

Pilots rated the Torque indicator [Z] as the most important display (4,9). They rated the Audio panel marker receiver as the least important display (2,0). The mean value of all displays for the degree of importance was (3,7).

The display with the highest rating for the degree of frequency of use was the Torque indicator (4.7). The display with the lowest rating for the degree of frequency of use was the Audio Panel and Marker Receiver [K] (1.7). The mean value of all displays for the degree of frequency of use was (3.2).

During the interview, most pilots had difficulties in distinguishing the principles of the degree of importance and the degree of frequency of use. This fact was later supported by the mean weights calculated in Table 3. Therefore the need of a new evaluation concept has been emerged during the study. The principles of the degree of importance and the degree of frequency of use were synthesized and integrated into a new concept called the integrated value of a display. Five design and engineering experts were consulted to provide their opinions of the partial weights of the degree of importance and the degree of frequency of use. Their average ratings for the weight of both concepts was 51/49 (51% for the value of importance and 49% for the value of frequency of use). The average integrated values of all displays can be seen in Table 3.

The organization of functional display groups and verbal statements and opinions of the pilots are two elements of the qualitative data obtained from the interview. Examples of common verbal opinions and statements of pilots are shown in Table 4
                           . These opinions and statements were archived and most common statements constituted one of the steps of UCIAM.
                        

The analysis and evaluation of answers given for the questions concerning functional display groups is a complex and space consuming process. Therefore only the analysis process of Functional Display Group # 1 is included in this paper. The generation of functional display groups using interview data was based on a three step process (Table 5
                           ). In the first step of the analysis, all pilots' answers for each display group were documented in separate tables. Table 6
                            shows the first step for the Functional display group number 1. In this stage, the interview answers of all pilots for the same functional display group are merged into single table. This step was followed by pairing tables where the display pair choices of pilots were documented and calculated.

The display preferences for the Functional Display Group #1, which is presented in Table 6, was later analyzed to find out how many times each display was paired with each other display. For example [A] was paired with [B] 12 times; [A]] was paired with [D] 11 times; [B] was paired with [H] 11 times and so on. This pairing was done for each functional display group, based on the display preferences produced by the participants to the interview. The pairing of each display with each other display was provided the authors a useful way to quantitatively identify the elements of functional display groups. The display groups based on functional similarity are shown in Table 7
                           . In this step [C] and [F] are not considered as a part of any display group.

The paper prototypes produced by the pilots, combined with verbal protocols during the paper prototyping process, can be considered the most direct source of data reflecting their opinions, preferences and professional experiences about helicopter flight instrument panel arrangement. Because of space limitations the process of only one paper prototype study will be presented and analyzed in detail. But some other visual samples of other pilots' prototypes are included in this section of the paper (Fig. 11). In this section, the paper prototype work and process of P03 (Fig. 8
                        ), which is randomly chosen by the authors, will be analyzed to give an explanatory example of the process.

In the first step of the analysis, the realistic drawing and the letter-coded drawing (Fig. 9
                           ) of the instrument panel arrangement were drawn using AutoCAD software. The letter-coded drawing was used to generate the more-detailed, interview data-added panel drawing (Fig. 10
                           ) in the following step of the analysis. A part of the general review of the process of P03 is as follows:
                              “P03 began his paper prototype process by placing the flight displays on the blank instrument panel. He generally supported his actions verbally by explaining his actions and with other opinions related with the study. The first display placed by P03 was the [B] Altimeter. After placing flight displays he began to attach attitude displays on the instrument panel. He also placed [K] Audio Panel Marker Receiver, [I] Transponder, [J] NavCom, [L] Automatic Direction Finder and [M] Distance Measuring Unit on the mid-horizontal panel stating that these displays should not distract his attention during the flight. He also stated that the [N] GPS should be in his visual field and attached it on the vertical front panel. He placed [S] Transmission Oil Pressure and Heat Indicator and [T] Engine Oil Pressure and temperature Indicator side-by-side creating a sub-functional-grouping.”
                           
                        

The general review was followed by the documentation of the pilot's important and descriptive statements and opinions such as:
                              
                                 ▪
                                 
                                    “[C] is usually placed in a separate position in order to avoid magnetic interference with other displays.”
                                 


                                    “Placing [N] GPS NavCom in front of the pilot is a desirable choice.”
                                 


                                    “Since we have to make head and eye movements it is better to put the communication devices on the horizontal-middle panel.”
                                 


                                    “During the take of the pilot should easily see and read [U] Gas Temperature Indicator, [V] Gas Producer Tachometer, [Y] Rotor/Engine Tachometer and [Z] Torque Indicator.”
                                 


                                    “Each pilot learns the position of each display and the arrangement of the displays in general. After learning this information he will not need to search any display; he will know their places.”
                                 

Five quantitative values obtained from the interview data for each display were added to the letter-coded drawing of P03's paper prototype arrangement (Fig. 10). The added data are P03's answers for the degree of importance, arithmetic mean value for the degree of importance, P03's answers for the degree of frequency of use, arithmetic mean value for the degree of frequency of use and integrated value of the display. The detailed schema containing interview data was analyzed in detail to find any meaningful relationships between the pilot's own arrangement and the interview data. In the analysis it is obvious that functional display grouping is an important factor in the pilot's own arrangement.

The relationship between the paper prototype data and interview data was also investigated by comparing the locational values of the pilot's paper prototype with the interview data. For example, in comparison of P03's work, we found out that the degree of importance is dominant in the 43% of all displays whereas the degree of frequency of use is dominant in 26% of all displays. Finally the concept of value of integrated value is dominant in the remaining 30% of all displays. Also, when we examined these dominances in the basis of functional display groups, we found that in the Functional Display Group 1 the degree of importance was dominant. In the Functional Display Group 2 both the degree of frequency of use and the concept of integrated value were equally dominant. Finally in the Functional Display Group 3 the concept of integrated value was dominant. Table 8
                            shows the general distribution of dominances of the three interface arrangement principles as well as their dominance distribution in the basis of functional display groups. Fig. 11
                            shows some visual examples of the other pilots' paper prototypes.

Based on interview data and the methodology described in Tables 2 and 3 instrument panel arrangements were made by the authors (Figs. 12, 13 and 14
                        
                        
                        ). The primary ergonomic consideration in using the locating logic for displays was the minimization of head and eye movements of the pilot. Among all 3 arrangements based on interview data, the most common similarity is the position [I] Transponder, [J] NavCom, [K] Audio Panel, Marker Receiver, [L] Automatic Direction Finder and [M] Distance Measuring Unit, which are all placed sub-areas 4 and 5. In contrast displays placed in sub-areas 1, 2 and 3 do not have any similarity in terms of arrangement. Three instrument panel arrangements, based only on the degree of importance, the degree of frequency of use and the degree of integrated value, were also produced by the researcher. These arrangements are documented and discussed in detail by Alppay (2011). During this step of the study the Compass [C] and the Clock [F] were specially located on the instrument panel. Although some pilots included [C] Compass in a functional display group, it was separately positioned on the mid-point of the top line of the instrument panel in order to avoid magnetic interference with other displays. The Clock [F], was mostly included in different functional display groups by different pilots. After locating all other functional display groups the Clock [F] has been located in the most convenient position among the blank areas. The display groups shown in Table 7 provided the primary structural elements of these panel arrangements. According to Sanders and McCormick (1993), the principle of functional similarity can be used in a more general level along with the principles of degree of importance and the degree of frequency of use. Therefore for each principle (degree of importance, degree of frequency of use and integrated value) a three-step approach has been applied in the arrangement of instrument panels based functional similarity. This approach can be summarized as:
                           
                              ▪
                              The Total Value of each display group was calculated;

Each display group on the blank instrument panel was located based on its total value;

Each display group was organized using the display locating logic and the value of each display.

The Total Value is the sum of all displays' degree of importance or degree of frequency of use or integrated value, in each functional display group. During application of functional display grouping and the degree of importance to the arrangement of the panel, it was noticed that the display group with the second highest total value was expressed by the pilots that it must be closest the pilot. Therefore its location was changed. The same situation reappeared in the application of the degree of frequency of use and the concept of integrated value along with functional display grouping. The same action was applied to all applications.

When we compare the results of the interview (panel arrangements based on interview data) with the paper prototypes of pilots we can easily say that the most significant similarity between the two is the functional display grouping of displays. On the other hand, although none of the three panel arrangements based on functional display groupings have a complete match with paper prototypes, the general arrangement is very similar.

Also, the panel arrangements in Figs. 12 and 14 are identical. The panel arrangement in Figure is based on functional grouping and the degree of importance of individual displays; Fig. 14 is based on functional grouping and the degree of integrated value of individual displays. This fact results from the similarity of the hierarchies of the values of degree of importance and the values of the degree of integrated values of displays, which is a coincidence in this study.

The User-Centered Interface Arrangement Method-UCIAM, which is schematically pictured in Fig. 7 and explained in Section 3.5, is one the outcomes of this research. This method is based on primarily on interview and paper prototyping data obtained from expert users (helicopter pilots in this study). Paper prototyping is considered the primary source of data and the interview as the secondary source of data. The mean locational values that consisted of most crucial parameter of this method are shown in Table 9
                        . The application of this method resulted with panel arrangement shown in Fig. 15
                        . Improvements of the initial arrangement which emerges in the initial phase of UCIAM are an important part of the method which synthesize the qualitative data with the qualitative data. Some of the improvements, which are an important step of UCIAM are shown below:
                           
                              ▪
                              It was noticed that [A] and [H], which are in the same functional display grouping, have the same locational value. Therefore their location has been determined according to the data in Table 8.

The locations of [Y] and [Z], which have the same locational value, were determined according to the common statements of pilots.

The positions [I], [J], [K], [M], which have the same locational value were determined using the mean degrees of frequency of use of these displays.

The geometrical shape of engine display group was designed as a square in order to minimize the head and eye movements of the pilot.

[S] and [T] are observed to be closely positioned in 9 out of 10 paper prototypes. This relationship, later defined as the relationship of inseparability, has been conserved by re arranging these displays.

In the panel arrangements based on interview data, the methodology focuses mainly on the total values (degree of importance, degree of frequency of use or degree of integrated value) of functional display groups and their individual organizations. The concept of locational value is not taken into account. In the panel arrangement resulting from UCIAM, the methodology focuses mainly on the locational values of individual displays. The display groups appear naturally during the implementation of UCIAM. The UCIAM approach differs from the interview data layout approach. UCIAM includes the concept of display inseparability, and it includes refinements to the layout based on verbal data from the experimental participants.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In relation to the three main goals, which are identified in Section 1, this research resulted in a number of new concepts and a new methodology for the arrangement of displays found in flight instrument panels of civil helicopters. Therefore this section of the paper is organized based on the conclusions and their relations to the main goals of the research.
                        
                           ▪
                           
                              
                                 Goal 1
                              : To investigate the role of basic principles of user-interface design of Sanders and McCormick (1993), in the context of flight instrument panel arrangements of civil helicopters.

These principles are well established in the field of ergonomics and are used widely in various user-interface applications. The investigation of their applicability in the context of this research resulted with the proposal of a new user-interface assessment concept named 
                        Integrated Value of a Display
                     . The principles of the degree of importance and the degree of frequency use are synthesized into this new concept, which can be regarded as a new concept of evaluation of a display or a user-interface element. Furthermore, the concept of integrated value must be clearly explained to the users during the initial phases of a research. Its nature and relationship with the functional structure of the product/system studied and human factors characteristics related with to system have to be clearly understood by the user for a consistent rating and evaluation. Also the definition of the concept of integrated value, and its relationship to the principles of degree of importance and degree of frequency of use, must be investigated with the users of the product or system. Another finding of this research is that the principle of sequence use cannot be applied into the flight instrument panel design. We must also emphasize that although the concept of integrated value of a display has not provided any quantitative advantage compared the principles of degree of importance and the degree of frequency of use, in the context of this research, it is proposed to be better understood by participants of the study. It is considered as an alternative concept to the other two principles of Sanders and McCormick (1993); that is why the concept of integrated value and the principles of degree of importance and frequency of use are presented in the whole study.
                        
                           ▪
                           
                              
                                 Goal 2
                              : To develop a new methodology to optimize display arrangements of flight instrument panels of civil helicopters, based on users' opinions and assessments


                     
                        UCIAM-User-Centered Interface Arrangement Method
                      is one of the major outcomes of this research in relation the Goal 2 defined above. This methodology is defined in detail in Section 3.5 of this paper and its outcome is pictured and discussed in Section 4.4 of this paper. UCIAM can be considered as an optimization of display layouts based on user preferences or assessments. However we must emphasize that this methodology as well as other new concepts which are the structural elements of UCIAM have to be investigated and developed in future studies and for different types of systems or products. The new concepts, which are the other outcomes of this research, such as Relationship of Inseparability, Locational Value, Sub-Areas of the Display Panel, Display Locating Logic and 
                        Integrated Value of a Display
                      are principal elements that constitute 
                        UCIAM
                     .
                        
                           ▪
                           
                              Goal 3: To identify new concepts which will play a role in the arrangement methodology developed.

During the paper prototype study it was observed that users preferred to position some displays within an alignment such as left-right or top-bottom to establish a geometrical relationship or in other words a sub-functional display grouping. This relationship was also expressed by the pilots during the research. As an outcome of this observation the 
                        Relationship of Inseparability
                      as a new principle of interface arrangement is proposed for the development of the UCIAM method as well as future studies. This principle, which is one of the outcomes of this research, can be questioned during the interview phase of future research. This principle is a crucial part of functional display grouping of displays.

One of the original challenges of this research was the comparison of interview data which is consists of both qualitative and quantitative data with paper prototypes which consisted of primarily visual data. The need to develop and establish a method to compare and evaluate these two different types of data required new approaches and therefore new concepts in order to evaluate both types of data. Three new concepts were proposed in this step of the study: the 
                        Locational Value, Sub-Areas of the Display Panel
                      and the 
                        Display Locating Logic.
                      The blank instrument panel was divided into sub-areas. These sub-areas are used to determine the locational value of each display in a paper prototype. Especially, the concept of sub-area, as concisely discussed in Section 3.4, has an important role in this research. During the paper prototyping study, most pilots placed their paper displays on blank the display panel in locations very similar to the sub-areas proposed by the researchers (Fig. 11). Sub-area limits were not included in the blank flight instrument panel and pilots were not told about the concept of sub-area.

Additionally, to make a rational comparison of both data, there must be a correlation between the interview data rating scale, locational value scale. Also, the definition of the sub-areas is another research problem. The distribution of sub-areas may differ according to the design of the instrument panel/user-interface area. Asking users how to divide a user-interface space into its sub-areas may constitute a possible topic for a future research. We must also emphasize that interface arrangement or organization is a design problem as well as a usability or human factors problem. In a system like helicopter cockpit, space limitations are very important for the instrument panel design and arrangement. Therefore considering only concepts like the degree of importance, the degree of frequency of use or the integrated value as the arrangement parameters will result in inefficient use of panel space. Pilots who contributed to the research also stated and emphasized the importance of efficient use and planning of the flight instrument panel space.

This research is formulated primarily for single-pilot helicopters. The instrument panel arrangement of a two-pilot helicopter using the methodologies utilized in this research will also be another challenging subject for a future research. However, the results and the findings of the research were not presented to the pilots. The helicopter flight deck layout developed in this present research will be investigated in a future study by the authors.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank, ITU ROTAM and especially all helicopter pilots who contributed to the research in both interview and paper prototyping stages. Their knowledge, experience and willingness for sharing them facilitated this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

