@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Exploring sub-optimal use of an electronic risk assessment tool for venous thromboembolism

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined use and views of an electronic risk assessment tool for VTE.


                        
                        
                           
                           We found the tool was used as intended only 36% of the time.


                        
                        
                           
                           Poor tool design was a key factor contributing to sub-optimal use.


                        
                        
                           
                           Sub-optimal use was also due to poor understanding and awareness of the tool.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Venous thromboembolism

VTE prophylaxis

Electronic risk assessment tool

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  International guidelines and consensus groups recommend using a risk assessment tool (RAT) to assess Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) risk prior to the prescription of prophylaxis. We set out to examine how an electronic RAT was being used (i.e. if by the right clinician, at the right time, for the right purpose) and to identify factors influencing utilization of the RAT. A sample of 112 risk assessments was audited and 12 prescribers were interviewed. The RAT was used as intended in only 40 (35.7%) cases (i.e. completed by a doctor within 24 h of admission, prior to the prescription of prophylaxis). We identified several reasons for sub-optimal use of the RAT, including beliefs about the need for a RAT, poor awareness of the tool, and poor RAT design. If a user-centred approach had been adopted, it is likely that a RAT would not have been implemented or that problematic design issues would have been identified.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Venous Thromboembolism (VTE – the formation of a blood clot in the deep vein of the leg or pelvis, and/or the clot travelling to the lungs) is reported to be the most common preventable cause of death in hospitals (Findlay et al., 2010; Michota, 2007). VTE results in approximately 5000 deaths per year in Australia (Access Economics, 2008) and in more deaths than AIDS, breast cancer, prostate cancer and traffic accidents combined in the USA and UK (John Hopkins Medicine, 2015). There is now overwhelming evidence indicating that mechanical and pharmacological prophylaxis are extremely effective in reducing VTE risk (Findlay et al., 2010; National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2010) but appropriate prophylaxis is not always prescribed and VTE remains a significant problem for hospitals (National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2010; Kakkar et al., 2004; Ahmad et al., 2002; Learhinan and Alderman, 2003; Cohen et al., 2008; De Zylva et al., 2012). Many interventions (e.g. dissemination of guidelines, education, feedback, computer-based decision support) have been trialed and implemented to improve appropriate use of VTE prophylaxis in hospitals, but these demonstrate varying levels of success (Michota, 2007; Lau and Haut, 2014; Tooher et al., 2005). Interventions shown to be effective are those that are mandatory (e.g. a hard stop in an electronic system where the user is unable to proceed with ordering tests or medications for a patient until VTE prophylaxis is prescribed) and integrate well into user workflow (Lau and Haut, 2014; Streiff et al., 2012). However, to date, no comparative analyses of different interventions have been published to assess their relative effectiveness in improving VTE prophylaxis prescribing. Thus, there is limited quantitative comparative evidence to guide the design or selection of an appropriate strategy.

International guidelines and consensus groups recommend using a risk assessment tool (RAT) to assess VTE risk prior to the prescription of prophylaxis (Cohen et al., 2005; The Australia & New Zealand Working Party on the Management & Prevention of Venous Thromboembolism, 2010; NSW Health, 2010a; National Health, 2011; Geerts et al., 2008). There is also evidence to suggest that use of a RAT, in combination with prescribing advice, can improve appropriate use of VTE prophylaxis and reduce VTE occurrence (Haut et al., 2012; Novis et al., 2010; Lau et al., 2015; Zeidan et al., 2013). In 2010, the New South Wales (NSW) government issued a policy directive stating that all patients admitted to any NSW public hospital must be assessed for risk of VTE (NSW Health, 2010b). Following dissemination of the directive, in 2011 the study site, a teaching hospital in NSW, designed and implemented an electronic RAT, and revised their VTE prophylaxis policy to specify that patients must be individually assessed for their risk of VTE using the electronic tool within 24 h of admission to hospital.

Despite the requirement for all patients to be risk assessed, previous audits at the study hospital have shown that the electronic VTE RAT is rarely utilised. For example, only 69 (4.4%) of the 1582 patients admitted to the hospital in August 2013 (excluding day-only admissions) were risk assessed using the RAT. In this study, we set out to determine why this might be the case. In particular, we aimed to determine how the RAT was being used (i.e. if by the right clinician, at the right time, for the right purpose) and to identify factors influencing completion of an electronic risk assessment. With limited knowledge of current user perceptions of VTE prevention and of the RAT, we undertook an exploratory study with no a priori hypotheses.

@&#METHODS@&#

This study was undertaken at a 320-bed teaching hospital in Sydney, NSW, Australia. Previous snap-shot audits at the site revealed that approximately 70% of patients receive appropriate VTE prophylaxis. Clinical information systems in place at the time of the study included an Electronic Medical Record (EMR) which allowed ordering of tests and imaging, an electronic prescribing system (MedChart®) and a results reporting system. These systems were not integrated but interfaced. The hospital has a multifaceted VTE prevention program in place, as shown in Table 1
                        .

In late 2011, the study hospital's VTE committee (see Table 1) designed and implemented an electronic RAT (Figs. 1–4
                        
                        
                        
                        ) to facilitate the assessment of a patient's VTE risk level prior to the prescription of VTE prophylaxis. The VTE committee articulated RAT requirements to the hospital's IT department and several iterations of the tool were reviewed and refined by the committee before a final version was adopted. As shown in Fig. 1, the tool comprises a series of drop-down menus and free-text boxes. Doctors select risk factors from each drop-down list (Fig. 2) and these appear in the text boxes beneath each drop-down (Fig. 3). Following completion, the RAT classifies patients as high-risk or low-risk (based on the risk factors that have been selected) and this risk level is communicated to doctors via an alert symbol on each patient's EMR. As shown in Fig. 4, users must hover their mouse over the alert symbol to determine their patient's risk level. The tool was intended to be used in combination with a prescribing protocol available within the electronic prescribing system.

The on-line tool is embedded within the hospital's EMR, adjacent to other patient assessments (e.g. Waterlow pressure injury assessment, falls risk assessment). Hospital policy stipulates that doctors are responsible for completing the VTE risk assessments within 24-h of patient admission, but does not specify who or where assessments should be performed. That is, the RAT could be completed by any doctor on a team (i.e. junior or senior) and from any location (e.g. while on a ward-round, in a doctor's office). Doctors must have knowledge of and voluntarily seek out the RAT. No reminders are presented and no alerts are triggered if an assessment is not performed.

Prior to hospital-wide implementation, a small pilot study was run where doctors working on one hospital ward were given an opportunity to use the tool for a period of four weeks. For the duration of the pilot study period, the VTE clinical nurse consultant provided one-on-one support and training to users and was available on the ward to assist doctors if they encountered any problems. After the trial, doctors were asked about the tool's usefulness and any problems they encountered. Feedback was generally positive and full implementation then proceeded.

To notify staff of tool implementation, posters were displayed throughout the hospital and one-on-one education was provided to the majority of current medical and nursing staff by the VTE clinical nurse consultant. This comprised a brief demonstration of how to locate and navigate through the tool, and distribution of a one-page step-by-step guide. Staff orientation was also amended to ensure all new staff would be informed of the RAT and policy.

This study comprised two stages: a review of risk assessments and interviews with prescribers.

To examine how the RAT was being used, a sample of risk assessments was audited. Patients who were risk assessed for VTE were sequentially identified via the EMR's ‘key performance indicator (KPI)’ module on a weekly basis. All patients who were risk-assessed using the RAT were visible in the KPI module and all were included in our sample. Two researchers (SR & PS) prospectively audited patients each week until at least 100 risk-assessed patients were included (3 months). In total, 112 risk assessments were audited (more than 100 because all risk-assessed patients were reviewed each week, and in the final week of data collection, 13 risk assessments were completed). 112 of 2401 (4.7%) patient admissions during this study period were risk assessed using the RAT. Electronic prescriptions and patient notes for all ‘risk-assessed’ patients were reviewed and the following data collected: patient information (age, sex, reason for admission, VTE risk factors), prophylaxis information (drug, dose, start date, prescriber, any contraindications) and risk assessment information (date of completion, clinician who completed risk assessment). Auditors also compared VTE risk factors documented by users in RATs to VTE risk factors evident in patient notes and noted whether these were concordant or non-concordant. To ensure that the two researchers were consistent in their identification of risk factors, several rounds of inter-rater reliability testing were conducted prior to commencement of formal data collection. During round 1, reviewers achieved 67% consensus and during round 2, following the clarification of definitions and categories, reviewers achieved 100% consistency.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

To explore doctors' views of the electronic tool, 12 prescribers participated in a one-on-one semi-structured interview about the risk assessment tool and VTE prevention in general (interview questions appear in Appendix). Semi-structured interview questions were developed with input from a human factors expert, clinical pharmacologist and VTE clinical nurse consultant, and were piloted with two doctors before being finalized.

Prescribers were opportunistically recruited (i.e. doctors working on the wards at the time of data collection were directly approached and invited to take part) while ensuring doctors working in both medical (n = 7) and surgical (n = 5) specialties were included. All participants had been working at the hospital for at least 3 months and all had experienced hospital orientation (where information about the tool and VTE policy had been provided). Prescribers who completed risk assessments using the RAT during the audit phase were not purposively selected for interviews. Eight of the 12 prescribers we interviewed had used the RAT. Each interview lasted approximately 10 min, was audio-recorded and content was transcribed verbatim. Two investigators (MB & NJ) independently reviewed transcripts to identify barriers to RAT adoption. No taxonomy or framework was used for data extraction and analysis. Instead, reviewers extracted barriers from transcripts with no a priori hypotheses. Reviewers met periodically to cross-check themes and any discrepancies in barriers identified were resolved through discussion. Recruitment of doctors continued until saturation of themes within both medical and surgical specialties was achieved.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Of the 112 risk assessments reviewed, in only 40 cases was the RAT used as intended. That is, the risk assessment was completed by a doctor within 24 h of admission, prior to the prescription of prophylaxis.

As shown in Table 2
                        , half of the risk assessments were completed within 24 h of admission, as recommended by hospital policy, with average time between admission and completion of the RAT found to be 3.6 days (median 1.5 days, range 0–33 days). Mean time between admission and prescription of prophylaxis was 1.7 days. In 33 cases (29.5%), the risk assessment was completed after the prescription of prophylaxis, not before. In only two of the 33 cases was the initial prescription changed following use of the tool.

Nurses completed 26.8% (n = 30) of the risk assessments with the remaining assessments performed by only eight doctors. These eight doctors worked across 16 (of 31) specialties during the study period. One doctor, working in geriatrics, was responsible for completing 45 (40.2%) of the electronic risk assessments.

In the majority (60.7%, n = 68) of risk assessments reviewed, the auditors disagreed with the VTE risk factors identified and documented by clinicians. These inconsistencies included, for example, patients being classed as immobile in the risk assessment when auditors found evidence of patients being fully mobile in patient records, or users failing to select ‘obesity’ as a risk factor in the risk assessment when patients were clearly obese.

Doctors were very consistent in their views of the electronic RAT. Several factors influencing completion of an electronic risk assessment were identified, as described below.

Almost all participants explained that they conducted VTE risk assessments ‘in their head’, rather than using a tool or resource. Conducting a formal risk assessment was not part of doctors' routine admission processes.
                              
                                 “You just think at the back of your mind what they are coming in for and if they are mobile and their age is so and so, you just think automatically.” (Participant 10)
                              
                           
                        

One doctor explained “If there were 10 things that I had to think about that I couldn't remember in terms of VTE risk than I would use a tool to help me, but because there's only a certain number I need to recall to ascertain if someone is high risk then I won't go the extra mile to use the tool”. (Participant 1)
                        

Doctors held the view that VTE prophylaxis was an integral part of care and that most patients were being prescribed appropriate prophylaxis.
                              “But in practice … we do go through it in our heads, just medically overall for each patient. We always consider DVT prophylaxis … I think most people already know what to do, to be honest”. (Participant 9)
                              
                           
                        

Some doctors explained that all their patients were prescribed VTE prophylaxis on admission, unless contraindicated, so no risk assessment was necessary.
                              “I mean, on the orthopedic ward because your DVT prophylaxis is a very integral part of your management so I think it's already at the forefront of a lot of our minds when we are working”. (Participant 6)
                              
                           
                        

When the electronic risk assessment tool was used, it was used after VTE prophylaxis had been prescribed, not before, often as a double check.
                              
                                 “For me it's usually done after I prescribe prophylaxis. Or it can be done, it's sometimes done, I've done it before, but it's not the first thing I do, it's more of a checklist I have to do while the patient's there … Usually we'll have the discussion about prophylaxis once the patient is admitted to the ward, while we are with the patient, rather than separately when you're at the computer by yourself which is what I consider more administrative”. (Participant 11)
                              
                           
                        

Several doctors explained that they did not assess their patients for risk of VTE because they believed it was the responsibility of other staff.
                              
                                 “A lot of my patients come through ICU and they would have already been risk assessed there so their therapy is often already prescribed and it's just continued when they come into the wards”. (Participant 1)
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 “Um, but then the thing is that most patients are usually first reviewed by a surgical registrar in the ED, by the time they come to us, for us to manage anyway. So then I'll just go on with what they've already been charted. If they haven't been charted for anything, I'd just assume that the surgical registrar didn't want anything charted for them”. (Participant 10)
                              
                           
                        

Another doctor said: “As far as I know it's done by the nursing staff” (Participant 8).

The majority of doctors interviewed were aware that the electronic RAT existed, but several had never used it. Some doctors remembered being told about the tool during hospital orientation but explained that they had learnt about many procedures and systems during orientation, making it difficult to retain the new knowledge.
                              
                                 “That was the day they taught us everything from Medchart (the e-prescribing system) to how to use Web Delacy (the EMR). Like especially when we'd come from using paper charts to using Medchart I think potentially the focus was lost in that sense it was not … yeah, it would've been better on its own … I do remember being shown how to use it during orientation but I don't even know where to find it” (Participant 8)
                              
                           
                        

Some doctors had misinterpreted the purpose of the risk assessment tool. For example, one doctor believed that the tool's principal function was to document information on discharge. “Yeah because we were told to do it with each discharge … I think the nurses said that it just needs to be done before they go home”. (Participant 10)
                        

Another doctor said “because we are already prescribing DVT prophylaxis and the tool I just thought was for hospital funding”. (Participant 9)
                        

Only one participant was aware that the hospital VTE policy mandated use of the electronic risk assessment tool.

Every participant thought that the electronic tool was difficult to find. A doctor said “(It's) hard to find and it sort of doesn't pop into you mind when you are doing all the things that you would do usually like ordering tests or putting things on Medchart”. (Participant 7)
                           

Some doctors felt that the main reason the tool was not being used was because of its location. “I think, firstly because you have to click through so many things to get to it. Like sometimes I sort-of want to do it, but then it takes so long that you just don't have time”. (Participant 9)
                           

Most doctors suggested that the tool be integrated into the e-prescribing system (MedChart) because this was when VTE prophylaxis was thought about.
                                 
                                    “I think it would be better utilised if it were attached to your prescribing tool, so if you had a link in MedChart and if you had a prompt, like you anti-allergy prompt in MedChart then it would force people to consider it formally”. (Participant 1)
                                 
                              
                           

Some doctors believed that the only way to get doctors to use the tool was to create a hard-stop in the system, so that doctors could not prescribe without acknowledging that they had considered VTE risk. “It's not a barrier to providing any other form of care. So it's not in your face, you're not reminded about it all the time”. (Participant 4)
                           

Most doctors reported that the RAT itself was easy to use but it became apparent that the tool's output was not useful in directing doctors to prescribe appropriate VTE prophylaxis. Following completion of a risk assessment, a patient's allocated risk level was not obvious to users. Most doctors struggled to recall an occasion where the tool had actually helped them.

A doctor said: “Well, it doesn't really come out with, I haven't seen it give me any advice … any tool is good, just for the people that you don't consider, then I have to fill out this form. And even though the particular form I don't find useful for assessing the patient, the fact that I have to turn my mind to it, it's doing its job”. (Participant 11)
                           

Another doctor said: “I find that no matter what, like even if the patient only has one or two risk factors, they're all high risk … And they should all be on DVT prophylaxis anyway, so I don't know how useful that tool is”. (Participant 9)
                           

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The VTE risk assessment tool was often not used as intended, that is, it was not being used at the right time and by the right clinician to guide the prescription of prophylaxis. We identified several reasons for this, including poor awareness of the tool and risk assessment process and poor RAT design. We discuss our findings in terms of the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR) (Damschroder et al., 2009). This framework proposes five major domains that influence implementation effectiveness: Intervention characteristics, outer setting, inner setting, characteristics of individuals, and the implementation process.

Several characteristics of the RAT clearly played a role in hindering successful implementation of the tool. The RAT was not perceived to provide prescribers with useful information to guide them in the prescription of appropriate VTE prophylaxis and thus possessed a low relative advantage (Damschroder et al., 2009; Proctor et al., 2011). Although the tool classifies patients as ‘high’ and ‘low’ risk, this output is not effectively communicated to users. It is important to note that previous risk assessment tools shown to be effective in increasing use of appropriate prophylaxis, all included the provision of prescription advice. That is, the tools recommended appropriate prophylaxis based on a patient's risk level (Haut et al., 2012; Lau et al., 2015), and some automatically generated pre-populated electronic prescriptions to facilitate ordering of prophylaxis (Novis et al., 2010; Zeidan et al., 2013). The RAT at our study site did not make a prophylaxis recommendation or link with the prescribing system to encourage ordering of appropriate prophylaxis.

We also found that a large proportion of risk assessments were completed incorrectly, suggesting that the tool is not straightforward to use. Doctors that used the tool often selected VTE risk factors from the drop down lists that did not correspond to risk factors evident in patient notes. Further research is needed to investigate whether these inconsistencies were due to users incorrectly selecting items above or below their intended selection (i.e. slips), to poorly worded or ordered items in the tool (e.g. terminology made it difficult for users to identify an appropriate item to select), or to doctors' limited understanding or knowledge of their patient's VTE risk factors.

We identified several outer and inner setting factors (Damschroder et al., 2009) that appeared to impact on optimal use of the tool. The implementation climate, specifically the degree of fit between the RAT and the existing workflow of users was identified to be a key barrier to optimal use. During interviews it became apparent that doctors rarely used the patient assessment component of the EMR. To access the RAT via this route, prescribers had to disrupt their workflow and it added time. Most doctors suggested embedding decision support within the electronic prescribing system, as this would align with current decision-making and work processes.

Doctors reported that risk assessments, when completed, were generally performed without the use of the RAT. Doctors explained that they systematically considered risk factors for each patient (without documenting risk) and subsequently prescribed VTE prophylaxis appropriate for their perceived patient's risk level. It was suggested that this was a relatively straightforward process, not complex enough to warrant the use of decision support. Some doctors viewed the RAT as beneficial only in the sense that it forced them to think about VTE. It follows on from this that providing doctors with a simple prompt (e.g. computerised alert) to remind them to consider VTE prophylaxis would be sufficient to ensure patients are prescribed appropriate prophylaxis. Previous research has demonstrated that computerised reminders can be effective in increasing the rate of prophylaxis prescribed (Beeler et al., 2014), especially when doctors are prompted about high risk patients (Kucher et al., 2005; Lecumberri et al., 2008; Fiumara et al., 2010).

The results from our study are in contrast to those obtained during the pilot study conducted at the site prior to full RAT implementation. This is most likely to be because during pilot testing, the tool was implemented in combination with ongoing support and assistance from the VTE clinical nurse consultant. When this one-on-one support was no longer available (or visible on the ward), user knowledge, understanding and uptake of the tool declined. The availability of ongoing resources has been identified to be another inner setting factor which influences implementation effectiveness (Damschroder et al., 2009).

One of most robust findings that emerged from our interview phase was that the implementation process (planning, engaging, executing and evaluating) (Damschroder et al., 2009) had contributed to sub-optimal use of the tool. Although the tool was available to clinicians, its intended role in guiding the prescription of prophylaxis was not well understood. Knowledge and beliefs about the intervention are individual characteristics that influence intervention effectiveness (Damschroder et al., 2009). Some doctors were not aware that the tool existed and several had never used it. This latter finding is consistent with the results of our audit – the electronic risk assessments in our sample were completed by a very small number of prescribers. Doctors were also not aware that hospital policy required them to complete an electronic RAT. Providing doctors with information on the hospital VTE policy and RAT during orientation was clearly not sufficient in ensuring that this knowledge was retained. Poor uptake of RATs by medical staff has been reported in the literature (Byrne et al., 1996; McCarthy and Silverman, 1998) and checklists embedded into EMRs have also been shown to be underutilised in other areas (i.e. antibiotic use) (Weiss et al., 2013). Importantly, VTE RATs shown to be effective have all been mandatory (e.g. users can not proceed with ordering medications or tests for a patient without completing an assessment) (Haut et al., 2012; Novis et al., 2010; Lau et al., 2015; Zeidan et al., 2013).

The design, workflow and implementation issues we identified may have become apparent to the organisation had greater input from users and key stakeholders (e.g. head of clinical specialties) been sought during the planning phase. It is now well recognised that consulting users during the development process of interventions leads to more effective and efficient interventions (Bastien, 2010). User involvement in system design can lead to increased system usage and satisfaction (Baroudi et al., 1986). If a user-centred approach had been adopted here, it is likely that the need for a VTE risk assessment reminder, rather than a RAT, would have been established, or that problematic design issues would have been identified. Engaging key stakeholders during implementation would also have most likely resulted in improved knowledge and uptake of the tool. The organisation now intends to establish a user group comprised of doctors working in both medical and surgical specialties. This group will work with the VTE committee to formulate decision support requirements for doctors, to design suitable interventions to meet these requirements, and to evaluate whether these needs are met.

Our study was limited in that it was undertaken at only one site. The RAT was designed and developed locally, limiting generalizability of specific findings. However, our evaluation provides general lessons for other organizations contemplating introduction of an intervention to improve VTE prophylaxis. Supplementing our interviews with some observational work would have allowed us to more fully explore how the tool was being used in practice.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Overall, our audit and interviews revealed that the stand-alone RAT was not being utilised as intended (i.e. to guide the prescription of prophylaxis within 24 h of admission). Our findings provide additional support for the notion that interventions effective in improving VTE prophylaxis are those that are mandatory and integrate well into user workflow (Lau and Haut, 2014; Streiff et al., 2012). The electronic RAT in this trial met neither of these criteria. It was only by evaluating the tool in practice that we were able to determine its impact on routine clinical work and to capture the views of experienced users. This study demonstrates that implementation of a system or tool does not necessarily result in uptake of the tool or optimal use of the tool. Evaluation of a tool following implementation is critical to determine how it is being integrated into practice and to identify any barriers to optimal use.

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest in the research.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was funded by NHMRC Program grants 568612 and 1054146.


                     
                        
                           1.
                           How big a problem is VTE in hospitalized patients? What proportion of patients do you think are at risk of VTE in hospital? Have you ever had a patient who experienced a VTE?

How often do you assess patients for risk of VTE? Are you more likely to risk assess some patients than others? Why?

How do you assess a patient's risk of VTE? Do you use a resource or tool?

Have you used the VTE risk assessment tool in Web Delacy? If yes, what do you think of it? Can you think of any ways the tool can be improved?

Do you think the VTE risk assessment tool is helping doctors prescribe appropriate VTE prophylaxis? Can you think of a case where it helped you?

We recently conducted an audit of use of the Web Delacy tool and found that not many doctors are using it. Why do you think that is?

@&#REFERENCES@&#

