@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluating the physical demands on firefighters using hand-carried stair descent devices to evacuate mobility-limited occupants from high-rise buildings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Evacuating people with motor disabilities from high-rise buildings produces significant physical loading of the evacuators.


                        
                        
                           
                           Electromyography, heart rate, and ratings of perceived exertion differentiated 3 hand-carried devices and a manual carry.


                        
                        
                           
                           Devices with handles that extend in the front and allow the lead evacuator to face forward reduce physical demands.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

EMS

Firefighter

Emergency evacuation

Stair descent devices

Evacuation of individuals with disabilities

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The physical demands on firefighting personnel were investigated when using different types of hand-carried stair descent devices designed for the emergency evacuation of high rise buildings as a function of staircase width and evacuation urgency. Twelve firefighters used three hand-carried stair descent devices during simulated urgent and non-urgent evacuations. The devices were evaluated under three staircase width conditions (0.91, 1.12, and 1.32 m). For comparison, an urgent manual carry was also performed on the 1.12 m wide stairs. Dependent measures included electromyographic (EMG) data, heart rates, Borg Scale ratings, task durations and descent velocities. Results indicated that the stair chair with extended front handles, which allows the front person to descend the stairs facing forward, reduced the time integrated back muscle EMG by half and showed a descent velocity that was 1.8 times faster than the other stair descent devices in the study. There were no differences across staircase widths.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Fire service personnel are often the first people called upon when evacuating large multi-story buildings during both emergency and non-emergency conditions, for example, extended power outages. During such evacuations, firefighters (FF) may need to transport building occupants with motor disabilities down several flights of stairs. Epidemiologic data from Emergency Medical Service (EMS) workers suggest that such tasks are often associated with injury development (Gershon et al., 1995; Hogya and Ellis, 1990; Karter and Molis, 2011; Maguire et al., 2005). Furber et al. (1997), in their study of 477 workers' compensation claims made by Australian ambulance workers, found that within private residences stairs were a strong factor contributing to injuries reported by ambulance officers. Our prior work, comparing simulated stair descents with a hand-carried stair chair, a backboard, and a stretcher, found that even with a lightweight mannequin (48 kg), a significant percentage of population would not have adequate back strength and would likely experience compression forces in excess of 3000 N (Lavender et al., 2000) when performing these evacuations tasks.

Stair transport tasks can be done by using one- or two-person manual carry techniques or, if available, by using one of several different types of stair descent devices. Hand-carried evacuation chairs are commonly used by fire department personnel and often found on emergency response vehicles. Alternatively, emergency stair descent devices may be owned by building occupants or building owners and used by fire service personnel during evacuations. While several stair descent devices or “evacuation chairs” are currently on the market for emergency evacuation of individuals with motor disabilities from high rise buildings, there is little empirical data indicating their impact on the physical demands placed on the firefighter who may be called upon to use these hand-carried chairs. The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Life Safety Code indicates that when descending stairs, an evacuation device should be easily operable by one person who is trained on its use, and that above average weight or strength should not be required for proper operation (NFPA 101-2009 Annex, A.7.2.12.2.3(2) (8)(a)). Moreover, subtle changes in equipment design can have substantial effects on the physical demands, especially when stair descent tasks include turns on landings (Lavender et al., 2007a,b; Fredericks et al., 2002). For example, Lavender et al. (2007a,b), found that changing handle locations on stair chairs significantly affected 90th percentile muscle recruitment levels as different chair handle configurations were carried through a landing. Fredericks et al. (2002) reported differences in spine compression estimated using the static strength prediction program across four types of hand-carried stair chairs. They found that designs that supported the lead person facing forwards when descending the stairs resulted in lower spine compression values for this lead individual.

Evacuation conditions including the staircase width and the urgency of the evacuation may also impact the physical demands on the firefighters, particularly if the stair descent involves landings where the direction of travel changes. Drury (1985) provided evidence that task performance measures, for example task duration or movement speed, are dependent upon the available space, at least up to the point where space no longer potentially restricts movement. Likewise, Karwowski and Alsabi (1991) reported a trend toward a lower acceptable weight of lift with more restricted lifting spaces. This implies that staircase dimensions could impact muscle recruitment levels as smaller versus larger landings are negotiated by evacuators. As for urgency, several studies have shown increases in biomechanical loading as movement speed increases (Marras, 2008). Under urgent evacuation conditions, one could expect more rapid motions, and perhaps more co-contraction of antagonistic muscles as the body is stabilized under the increased dynamic external loads.

The objective of this study was to compare biomechanical and physiological demands on firefighters as they used three existing hand-carried stair descent devices and a two-person manual carry without a chair.

Specifically, the following hypotheses were tested:
                        
                           1.
                           There are significant differences among existing hand-carried stair descent devices with regards to task performance measures and the physical demands placed on evacuators as measured via heart rate, electromyography, and subjective measures of perceived exertion.

The physical demands on the evacuator increase with narrower staircases.

The physical demands on the evacuator increase during urgent conditions.

The physical demands placed on the firefighters are dependent upon the combined effects of chair design, staircase width, and the level of evacuation urgency.

Additionally, the study assessed usability issues with each of the evaluated devices through video analysis and a structured interview process.

@&#METHODS@&#

Twelve male professional firefighters between the ages of 20 and 46 (mean = 32 years) were recruited to serve as the evacuators for this study. Mean height and weight were 1.83 m (1.76–1.96 m) and 88 kg (71–118 Kg). Their fire service experience ranged from 1.5 to 17 years (mean = 6.6 years). All participants signed institutional review board approved consent documents.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

A repeated measures randomized block experimental design was used in which participants experienced all combinations of the three tested hand-carried stair descent devices, three staircase widths, and two urgency conditions (urgent and non-urgent). The experiment was blocked on the three staircase widths which were selected based upon NFPA 101-2009 code describing staircase widths based on occupant load. Specifically, this study evaluated stair descent tasks performed under the following stair case widths: 0.91 m (building occupancy < 50), 1.12 m (building occupancy < 2000), and 1.32 m (approximates the 1.42 m required for >=2000 occupants). Within each staircase width, the sequence of stair descent devices was randomized. The sequence of “urgent” versus “non-urgent” conditions with the stair descent devices was counter-balanced across participants. For comparison purposes, an extra condition was included in which a manual underarm carry was performed on the 1.12 m wide staircase under an urgent condition. Pilot testing suggested that this carry was most physically demanding. Therefore, to minimize participant fatigue, the manual carry was only performed on the medium width stairs and as an urgent condition.

In each experimental condition, participants descended two flights of stairs and proceeded through two landings. As they performed this task, dependent measures were obtained that included task performance measures, muscle recruitment, spine kinematics, and physiologic demands. Task performance measures were comprised of overall task duration and stair descent velocity. Muscle recruitment was assessed using surface electromyographic (EMG) signals sampled bilaterally from the Erector Spinae, Latissimus Dorsi, Deltoid, and Biceps muscles. Spine kinematics were assessed using a Lumbar Motion Monitor (LMM) (Chattanooga Group, Chattanooga, TN, USA). Physiological demands were obtained by sampling the heart rate and ratings of perceived exertion (Borg Scale) at the completion of each condition. Usability assessments data were obtained from post-study interviews.

The three selected hand-carried devices (Fig. 1
                        ) represent different design approaches that have been developed to transport individuals who are injured or who have ambulatory disabilities down multiple flights of stairs. The “extended handle” stair chair (Stair Pro 6250, Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) was selected to represent a common stair chair design found on FF/EMS vehicles. This chair allowed the lead person to walk down the stairs facing forwards. The “basic” stair chair (Junkin, JSA-800-CS, Louisville, KY) was selected because this chair was narrower than the extended handle stair chair which would potentially be advantageous for use on narrow staircases. The third device was a fabric seat with sewn in handles (Comfort Carrier, Broadened Horizons-GimpGear, Maple Grove, MN). The relevant dimensions that affect how these three devices are used are provided in Fig. 2
                        .

The staircase was 1.32 m wide and the corresponding landings were 1.32 m deep. The width of the staircase and the depth of the landing were narrowed using tape lines and partitions placed on the landings to simulate the 0.91 and 1.12 staircase widths. The rise and run of each step was 17 cm and 28 cm, respectively.

EMG data were obtained using a Delsys (Boston, MA) wireless EMG system sampled at 1000 Hz. Heart rate data were sampled using a chest-band transmitter unit that displayed data on a wristwatch (Polar Electro, Inc., Lake Success, NY). The participants were polled as to their perceived level of effort at the completion of each stair descent using a 10-point Borg-type rating system (Borg, 1982). The chair occupant was a training mannequin having a mass of 73 kg.

Two video cameras captured each stair descent task. One of the investigators followed the participant down the stairs and through each landing while holding a video camera. The second video camera was positioned above the first landing to obtain overhead views as the landing was negotiated to provide data for the usability analysis.

After signing the informed consent document the volunteers were prepared for the study by placing surface EMG electrodes bilaterally over the: (1) Erector Spinae muscles at the L3 level approximately 5 cm from the midline; (2) the Latissiumus Dorsi muscles at the T7 level approximately 13–15 cm from the midline; (3) the belly of the Anterior Deltoid muscles; and (4) the belly of the Bicep muscles. A baseline sample of the EMG activity during quiet standing (resting EMG) was obtained. The heart rate monitor was strapped on the chest and a resting heart rate value was obtained.

A series of maximal voluntary isometric exertions were performed to elicit maximal EMG signal amplitudes for each muscle that could be used for normalizing the data obtained during the stair descent tasks. These tasks were performed in postures that approximated the postures observed during pilot testing that occurred during the more physically demanding portions of the stair descent tasks. The maximal exertion task for the Erector Spinae muscles required participants perform a back-style lift from a position in which their torsos were flexed approximately 30 degrees. The maximal exertions for each Latissimus Dorsi muscle were performed by having the participant pull backward and upward on a handle located at mid thigh level. Bicep maximal exertions were performed with the participant standing upright and the elbow flexed approximately 70 degrees. Anterior Deltoid maximal exertions were performed by having the standing participant pull upward on the dynamometers with the shoulder flexed approximately 30 degrees and the elbow fully extended.

Following the maximal exertions, the Lumbar Motion Monitor was placed on the participant and baseline data were obtained as the participant stood in an upright neutral posture. The participant, with the help of a member of the research team, carried the extended handle stair chair down the stairs with a nominal load (20.4 Kg) to become familiar with the simulated evacuation task and the data collection procedures including the Borg scale.

Data collection trials were initiated by one of the investigators who indicated whether the current trial was an “urgent” or “non-urgent” condition. The initial instructions to the firefighter participants indicated that during urgent conditions “the situation requires you leave the building as quickly as possible.” Under these conditions, a repeating recorded message played stating “this is an urgent condition” for the duration of the stair descent task. During the instructions for the non-urgent conditions the participants were told “you can take as much time as you need during this descent.”

During each trial the participant carried the mannequin from the “follower” position (head end) as this has previously been reported to be the more physically demanding position across a variety of stair chair devices (Fredericks et al., 2002). The participant was assisted by a consistent member of the investigative team who assumed the leader position (foot end). This team descended two flights of stairs and moved through two landings. After the second landing the team started down a third flight of stairs but were stopped after the participant stepped on the second step at which point the data collection was completed and the team returned to the landing they had just passed where they set down the mannequin. A time marker was used to differentiate in the data stream when the participant was on the stairs and on the landings. This same time marker was used to obtain the descent duration data. At the completion of each descent the participant's heart rate was obtained and the participant was asked to provide a rating of perceived exertion. A nearby elevator brought the participant and the chair (with occupant) back to the initial starting level. Descent tasks were separated by at least five minutes to minimize fatigue development.

Following the stair descent tasks, each participant participated in a structured interview where open-ended questions were asked that aimed at identifying usability issues with devices as well as identifying features of each device that facilitated or hindered completion of the task. These interviews typically lasted 10–15 min during which the participants were shown photographs of the devices to facilitate comments specific to each device.

For each participant, raw EMG signals were processed using a MATLAB program that employed high and low pass filters of 25 and 450 Hz, respectively. Data were rectified and smoothed with a moving average window of 150ms (Hanning filter). The processed EMG data from each muscle were normalized to their maximum values obtained during maximum isometric contractions. Timing marker data were used to extract data during flight and landing. Given that the carrying task on the stairs is largely a static exertion by the back and the arm muscles, the normalized EMG data were averaged over the sample obtained from each flight of stairs. These averaged data from the two flights were then averaged to obtain the mean activation level while descending the stairs. These mean values were expected to give more robust estimates of the muscle recruitment levels and the resulting potential for localized muscle fatigue over the course of this part of the stair descent task than an estimate of the peak value. In addition, this mean value was multiplied by the average stair flight duration across the two flights to yield an integrated EMG value (mean activity* stair flight duration). This was done for the data from both the urgent and non-urgent conditions. During the non-urgent conditions the task was performed in a continuous manner but at a slower pace than that observed during the urgent conditions. Due to task symmetry during the flight phase, values obtained for each of these quantities were averaged across the muscle pairs for each subject. For the landing data, the 90th percentile EMG values calculated for each of the two landings were averaged. The largest averaged 90th percentile landing response for each bilateral muscle pair was analyzed. The rationale for using the 90th percentile on the landing was that we anticipated there would be short peaks in the EMG activity as the evacuation team transitions on to or off of the landing, or as they as they make the 180 degree turn that would be washed out if the mean value was used. Heart rate data were scaled relative to anticipated maximal heart rate (220 – age) and converted to a percentage.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The total duration of the flight-landing-flight-landing evacuation task was not affected by staircase width. Across all stair width conditions the extended handle stair descent device led to the shortest evacuation durations, although the difference was reduced under the narrowest stair width condition (p = 0.028). Fig. 3
                        a shows the descent duration data for the 1.12 m staircase width during the urgent condition as this included the manual carry condition which resulted in descent durations in between those observed for the basic stair chair and those observed for the fabric seat. Another way of viewing these data is through the calculated descent speed (Fig. 3b), which is based on the distance traveled along the stairs and the distance traveled on the landings (Peacock et al., 2012), during the urgent conditions for the same stair width. Consistent with the duration data, the egress velocity with the extended handle stair chair was significantly faster. Post-hoc testing identified the fabric seat as being slightly, but significantly, faster than the basic stair chair.

The overall physiologic demands, as assessed by the heart rate measure at the completion of the stair descent task, were not affected by staircase width but were affected by the evacuation device. Task completion heart rates were significantly less with the extended handle stair chair. When compared with the manual carry, all of the stair descent devices reduced the physiologic demands during the urgent descents on the 1.12 m staircase (Fig. 4
                        ). Ratings of perceived exertion followed a similar trend in which the extended handle stair chair had a significantly lower rating than the fabric seat or basic stair chair which were equivalent (Fig. 5
                        ). All had significantly lower ratings than the manual carry condition.

Analysis of the mean activation levels while on the stairs showed that the evacuation devices significantly affected the Erector Spinae and Bicep activations (Table 1
                        ). These same muscles also showed significant interactions between the evacuation device and the urgency condition as did the Deltoid muscles. Under non-urgent conditions the mean Erector Spinae activations were lowest when the extended handle and the basic stair chairs were used (Fig. 6
                        a). However, under urgent conditions only the basic stair chair showed lower Erector Spinae activation levels. The fabric seat and the extended handle stair chair were not statistically different from each other or from the Erector Spinae response during the manual carry on the 1.12 m wide stairs. When the Erector Spinae response was multiplied by the stair task durations (integrated activation levels), a different picture emerged (Fig. 6b). Here the extended handle stair chair resulted in significantly lower integrated activation levels of the Erector Spinae when compared with the other evacuation devices used in both the non-urgent and the urgent conditions. Under the urgent conditions, integrated activation levels also show that the basic stair chair is significantly better than the fabric seat, and all devices were better than the manual carry.

For the landings, the analysis focused on the muscle within each bilateral pair that had the higher 90th percentile activation level. Overall, the devices affected the recruitment of the Erector Spinae and the Bicep muscles (Table 1). These same muscles showed significant device by urgency interactions. As shown in Fig. 7
                        a, the Erector Spinae activations in the landing were lowest for the extended handle stair chair under the non-urgent conditions and for the extended handle and basic stair chairs under the urgent conditions. Relative to the fabric seat and the manual carry during the urgent decent on 1.12 m wide staircase, Bicep activations were comparatively higher for these same chairs (Fig. 7b), in part due to the need to lift the chairs higher on the landing. Landing width, while having an effect on the Deltoid muscles, did not show any differential across the evacuation devices as evidenced by the non-significant device by width and device by urgency by width interactions.

Trunk motions were primarily in the sagittal plane during these hand-carried stair descent tasks. Peak forward flexion was greater on the stairs than on the landings and showed the same trend across devices. Fig. 8
                         shows that the peak trunk flexion on the stairs when using the extended handle stair chair was approximately 7 degrees less than when using the basic stair chair and 11 degrees less than when using fabric seat. All devices resulted in significantly less forward trunk flexion than that observed during the manual carries (43 degrees).

Following the stair descent tasks the participants were interviewed and asked to identify features or characteristics of each device that they liked and disliked. The results of these interviews are summarized in Table 2
                        . For the basic stair chair, the narrowness was viewed by some as positive in that it would work well in tighter spaces, while others suggested there was less side-to-side stability. For the extended handled stair chair, the width was noted as being a positive factor in that the handles were approximately shoulder width apart which allowed a more natural stance. Moreover, it was recognized that the evacuation was quicker with this device, largely because it afford a forward facing posture by the lead evacuator. It should be recognized that the width of this device was potentially perceived as a problem in tight spaces. The handiness of the fabric seat was recognized along with the feature that the handle locations allowed the follower to keep their arms straight on the stairs. On the negative side, the handles were uncomfortable and there was the recognition that it would be difficult to put this under a person prior to the egress and that once the egress was initiated it would be very difficult to stop and rest as this would require setting the occupant on the floor. Also included in this usability analysis was the manual carry. On the plus side, the participants recognized that no equipment was necessary to perform the evacuation. However, they believed it was hard to hold the individual and this would be even more of a problem for heavier evacuees. In addition, they reported it was difficult to see the stairs and, like the fabric seat, it would be difficult to stop and rest during a long descent.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The devices selected for this study were based on specific design features, for example width, construction style, storage space requirements, and handle configuration, that could potentially affect the handling, speed of egress, and physical demands on the evacuators. The integrated EMG data from the stairs, the heart rate, the perceived effort, the trunk posture and the evacuation performance data all support the use of an extended handle stair where the lead evacuator faced forwards while descending the stairs. These differential findings between the extended handle stair chair and the basic stair chair are consistent with Fredericks et al. (2002), who compared spine compression values obtained with the University of Michigan's Three Dimensional Static Strength Prediction Program (3DSSPP™). The extended handle stair chairs tested in the Fredericks et al. (2002) study, while not significantly different from each other, resulted in lower spine compression values from the 3DSSPP for the follower position than those modeled for their version of the basic stair chair. The extended handle stair chair with the lower compression force in the Fredericks study also had longer handles for the follower, therein reducing the flexion moment on the spine, which in turn would decrease the spine compression predicted by the model.

Only the extended handle stair chair had a stair descent speed, which included the distance traversed on the landing, that was within the range of building occupant evacuation speeds reported by Peacock et al. (2012). Evacuations with the other or the manual carry would represent a bottleneck in the evacuation process and slow overall building egress in an emergency situation. The descent duration is also related to the development of fatigue in the evacuators. Slower descents require longer exertions on the part of the evacuators, and as noted in the usability analysis, slower descents with devices like the fabric seat where it would be difficult to stop and rest, represent a significant fatigue concern for the evacuators.

The hand-device interface is another important aspect of these hand-carried devices. The fabric strap handles with the fabric seat were reported to be uncomfortable (Table 2). The localized contact stress was noted in our pilot testing and as a result we strongly encouraged the evacuators to select appropriately sized gloves from three types of rescue gloves we made available to them. Even with the gloves the participants reported discomfort. So in addition to the potential fatigue limiting the descent, the hand discomfort could be an additional limiting factor. Pheasant (1996) describes more comfortable handle designs as having a circular cross section so as to eliminate the “hot spots” where there would be added tissue compression on the edges. Moreover, the fabric handle, because it is not rigid laterally compresses the fingers that are used in a hook grip with a force proportional to the weight of the evacuee, therein suggesting the discomfort would be more severe with heavier evacuees.

Other handle issues emerged for the basic stair chair in that the rear handles were considered too short and lacked a locked position when in use. On the extended handle stair chair, the handles did lock, but were reportedly too high on the chair and therefore required elbow flexion on the landings. Interestingly, the handle heights on the back of the basic and extended handle stair chairs were the same, both 0.76 m, but the way the leader held the two chairs was different (elbows flexed with the basic chair and elbows extended with the extended handle stair chair) due to body leg interference with the basic chair or lack of it with the extended handle chair. This difference in the arm posture of the leader led to the rear wheels contacting the landing with the extended handle chair but not with the basic stair chair. While noted as a negative comment in the post session interview, perhaps this rear wheel contact could be used to reduce the biomechanical loads on the evacuator in the follower position while on the landing.

All of the hand carried devices tested in this study were considered by the participants to be superior to the manual carry. The greater spine flexion on the stairs, the highest levels of Erector Spinae recruitment, the challenges of holding the evacuee, and the poor stair visibility support the belief that this carry should only be used in extreme cases where no assistive equipment is available and the conditions require urgent action on the part of the rescue personnel. It should be recognized that there are a variety of manual carry techniques that are possible. Some training materials demonstrate a manual carry with a participant on each side of the evacuee (FEMA, 2002), however, this technique could only be used in the widest staircase condition as it essentially requires stairs that can accommodate approximately three body widths. Moreover, during an emergency evacuation it would interfere with any upward traffic flow, for example, additional fire service personnel on their way to upper floors. Single-person manual carries in which the evacuee is on the back of the evacuator or over the shoulder (what used to be termed the “fireman's carry”) were not considered here given the potential inability for some evacuees to assist with the on the back method or the potential for excessive load on internal structures with the fireman's carry (FEMA, 2002), and the probability that an evacuee would be overweight or obese (CDC, 2012), therein representing a considerable biomechanical load for a single evacuator.

There are several limitations of this study that should be noted. First, we used a rescue mannequin rather than a live participant. From the evacuator's perspective, this may have made the tasks easier in that there was no physical or emotional occupant response that could change the dynamics of the evacuation. More importantly, however, we cannot provide any information as to occupant preferences and concerns with the tested devices. We did not evaluate the device ingress given the flexibility of the rescue mannequin is not the same as that of a live person and would result in data that was not representative of the real situation. Future work needs to address these components as clearly these devices are designed for people as opposed to rescue mannequins.

A second limitation is that the descent only included two flights of stairs and two landings. Had there been a longer descent it is possible there would have been notable differences in the ratings of perceived exertion and the heart rate measures between the fabric seat and the basic stair chair. But given the number of observations obtained from each individual we were concerned about cumulative participant fatigue and did not want to cause localized fatigue in the muscles sampled as this alters the EMG signal (Basmajian and Luca, 1985). Rest breaks and sequence randomization across participants was used to control the effects of fatigue across the session. Likewise, the use of a heavier occupant was not considered for the same reasons. All participants, who were professional firefighters, indicated that our 73 kg occupant was light by today's standards. Pilot testing with occupant weights up to 136 kg suggested we would obtain similar results across the evaluated devices, however this pilot also indicated that participant fatigue would be a significant issue given the number of stair descents performed.

An additional limitation is that we had no other pedestrian traffic on the stairs as done by Adams and Galea (2010) that would restrict movement while on the stairs or the landing as described by Sheilds et al. (2009) during the World Trade Center evacuation. We considered using a mannequin on the stairs for this purpose during pilot testing and found that this obstacle, had little impact on the actual descent process, once the line of descent was selected, given the one person width of the evacuation team. Had there been slower moving pedestrians also descending the stairs, this would have increased the durations and not provided good indicators of potential egress velocities with the tested devices.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We found there are significant differences among existing types of hand-carried stair descent devices with regards to evacuation times and the physical demands placed on evacuators during evacuations involving stair descents. Based on these findings we would strongly recommend the use of hand-carried stair descent devices that enable the lead evacuator to face forward when descending the stairs and can be set down without setting the occupant directly on the floor should the evacuators need to rest during long descents. Staircase width did not affect the physical demand or performance measures sampled in this study. However, if total building occupant egress was considered, all of these hand-carried devices would significantly limit evacuation rates given the relatively slow stair descents with these devices relative to ambulatory building occupants and the limited ability for passing on narrower stairs.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#


                  Federal Emergency Management Agency – Assistance to Firefighters Grant Program Grant # EMW-2009-FP-01944.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

