@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A practical approach to glare assessment for train cabs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Glare is key design consideration for train cabs.


                        
                        
                           
                           There are no established standardised approaches for assessing glare within a rail context.


                        
                        
                           
                           We propose a new approach for assessing the impact of glare using subjective ratings.


                        
                        
                           
                           Initial findings indicate that this approach may be of wider use.


                        
                        
                           
                           Further validation of the described approach is needed.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Rail

Cab design

Control layout

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The assessment of glare is a key consideration in the design of a railway driver's cab. However, unlike assessment of other factors, such as forward visibility, there are no standardised approaches for performing assessments of glare. This paper describes an approach for assessing the impact of glare in a full size mock-up of a railway cab. While it is unrealistic to evaluate every possible lighting condition that may potentially occur in the vehicle cab in service, a pragmatic and practical approach is taken to provide a good level of indicative information about the cab design's likely glare performance. This involves assessing internal light sources, such as internal lights and illuminated controls, and simulating external light sources (e.g. the sun, other trains' headlights) by illuminating the cab mock up windscreen, side and door windows with a single light source manually located in a sequence of discrete positions and orientations and assessing the resulting glare impacts. The paper describes a structured process for assessing and recording the impact of glare and recommending mitigations.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Regardless of the mode of transport, be it trains, planes or automobiles, the link between cab or cockpit design and driver performance is clear. A well designed train cab provides reach to all controls, good visibility of well organised controls and instruments, and a suitable view of the external environment.

Well designed cabs have an established positive impact on safety, reliability and efficiency. On a physical level, cabs that provide suitable driving postures reduce the likelihood of a range of driver discomfort and musculoskeletal injuries. On a cognitive level, the layout of the cab has a clear link to performance.

To negate the need for modifications after the train is put into service; an iterative design process should be employed to optimise the design. In addition to reducing the need for rework, identifying potential issues early in the design cycle greatly reduces the overall cost of design. Designs typically start as CAD models and are evaluated through 2D projections and 3D digital models (e.g. Summerskill et al., 2008). As the design develops, simple, low-resolution models are normally built to allow the design to be explored in true 3D. Given the costs associated with the design of a train, full-size mock ups are also usually built. These non-functional models have representative controls and finishes allowing the cab to be assessed before committing to the full production version of the train.

Throughout the design process, some aspects of the cab are easier to assess and demonstrate than others. Reach envelopes and mannequins based on anthropometric data (e.g. Adultdata, 1998) can be used to assess the suitability of the design for the target user group. 2D projections can be used demonstrate reach and visibility of controls. Likewise, in terms of external visibility, standards exist (GM/RT2161 Requirements for driving cabs of railway vehicles, 1995) that describe largely unambiguous test criteria for assessing forward visibility. As such, with each of these aspects of the design, it is relatively simple to devise and test against test criteria to demonstrate the suitability of the design.

When attention is turned to assessing glare, however, the means of assessment is less clear. While it is a widely acknowledged concern (RSSB, 2009; Fullerton, 2009; Thompson et al., 2013), there are no prescribed methods for its assessment.

Glare is described in ISO 9241-6 as:
                           “Condition of vision in which there is discomfort or a reduction in the ability to see details or objects, caused by an unsuitable distribution of range of luminance, or to extreme contrast”.
                        
                     

Glaring sources can reduce our ability to see other objects (‘disability’ glare), or merely cause annoyance (‘discomfort’ glare; Vos, 2003). Glare hinders visibility by reducing the total amount of visible light seen. When the eye is exposed to glare, the pupils constrict and limit the amount of natural light transmitted to the retina, and therefore, limit the image that the eye perceives. Glare can also reduce the contrast of the rest of the visual scene by the scattering of the bright light within the eye (Bullough et al., 2002).

There is a large volume of published research material on the subjects of the theory and mechanisms of glare from point light sources under controlled laboratory or field test conditions. It is clear that susceptibility to glare is influenced most by the ambient lighting conditions (day/night), the size and intensity of the light source, the duration of exposure, and the age of the observer (RSSB, 2009). In naturalistic settings, glare from oncoming car headlamps has been the source examined most closely (Fullerton and Peli, 2009; Mace et al., 2001). As identified in a report by the RSSB (2009), there is no published material that may be considered directly relevant to UK train headlamps. However, generic research data on glare illuminance and the susceptibility to glare according to the age of the observer may be applicable.

According to Fullerton and Peli (2009) light scatter inside and out of the eye (i.e., in the windshield) causes a veiling glare which reduces retinal contrast across the visual scene and thus reduces visibility. Different drivers will experience glare in different ways (Ortiz et al., 2013). Changes in the ocular media, brought about by age, eye surgery, cataract or the use of contact lenses and spectacles can all worsen the ‘veiling luminance’ upon the retina responsible for disability glare. Likewise, according to the RSSB (2009) the level of glare is dependent upon the optical characteristics of the light source and the optical properties of the atmosphere and windscreen between them.

Within a train cab, two types of glare need to be considered; direct glare and reflective glare. A range of light sources can cause direct glare; e.g. the sun, headlights from other trains, internal lights, illuminated controls, and screens. The impact of glare on the driver's performance is influenced by the size, intensity and position of the light source.

Reflective glare is caused by light bouncing off a surface (e.g. a driver's shirt, a display screen, a window, etc). In addition to the above factors related to the light source, the colour and surface finish of the reflective surface influence the impact of reflective glare (RSSB, 2012). The angle of the reflective surface also impacts the intensity and presence of glare. As illustrated in Fig. 1
                        , the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection. As such, controlling the angle of surfaces in the cab can reduce glare. To maximise readability, controls should be located as close as possible to perpendicular to the driver's eye line.

The approach described in this paper was developed to support the design of the Intercity Express Programme (IEP) Driver's Cab. The project involves the design and manufacture of 122 new trains for the UK's East Coast and Great Western mainlines, increasing capacity and reducing journey times. The first trains are planned to go into service in 2017.

The current design was developed through an iterative process of assessing the developing design's compliance with relevant standards and specifications. Part of the assessment work undertaken involved stakeholder and end user assessments of the proposed design based on paper drawings, low-fidelity mock-ups, and ergonomic rigs (see Jenkins et al., in press) for a description. This process resulted in the design and build of a full size mock up of sections of the passenger saloons and the driver's cab (see Fig. 2
                         and Fig. 3
                        ).

There are a number of factors that influence glare. The intensity of the light source, its location, the ambient light conditions, and the atmospheric conditions all impact the level of glare, as does the characteristics of the driver's eye. As a result, the number of potential glare conditions in a naturalistic setting means it is impractical to simulate and assess each in turn. However, a pragmatic and practical approach was taken to provide a good level of indicative information about the cab design's likely glare performance.

The described process divides the glare assessment into two stages; the first assesses the glare caused by internal lighting and the second assesses glare caused by external light sources. The wide range of external light sources was simulated by illuminating the cab mock up windscreen, side and door windows with a single light source manually located in a sequence of discrete positions and orientations and assessing the resulting glare impacts.

The discussed approach relies upon assessing each of a number of conditions in turn, and assessing the level of glare using subjective ratings. More objective measures of glare have been developed. Murray (1999) have made use of the knowledge that discomfort glare is accompanied by a strong flinch in the extra-ocular (facial) muscles surrounding the eye (i.e., the orbicularis occuli, which is the principal muscle responsible for closing the eye). As a result, the presence and intensity of glare can be assessed with electromyographic (EMG) techniques. The data from the work of Murray (1999) and Murray et al. (2002) indicate that the EMG-based technique can be reliably used to evaluate discomfort glare under laboratory conditions. However, the development of a field instrument does not appear to have been progressed. Moreover, in this instance, subjective ratings were considered to offer a far more pragmatic approach.

An alternative to objective measures is to subjectively rate the level of glare. Originally developed by de Boer (1967a,b), a nine-point scale is most widely used in the field of automotive and public lighting (Lighting Research Centre, 2011) with odd-numbered values having verbal equivalences (refer to Fig. 4
                        ):

The de Boer scale is known to suffer from deficiencies in some of its critical psychometric properties (Gellaty and Weintraub, 1990), for example the scale encourages 'range effects' with test subjects, whereby the extreme responses are rarely selected. However, proposed alternatives (Akashi et al., 1996; Osterhaus and Bailey, 1992) typically shorten the scale, rather than proposing different methodologies. Given the widespread adoption of the de Boer scale, it was considered to be an appropriate technique for this case. Furthermore, given the expected variance of light intensity – ranging from a light shone directly into the driver's eyes, to a low level reflection, a nine-point scale was considered to offer a suitable resolution o detail.

The glare assessment was conducted by a human factors specialist (referred to as the “assessor” for the purposes of this paper) using the driver's cab mock-up. The assessor had good eye health, with no requirement for visual correction. Two other people were present during the assessment, namely a professional photographer to take photographs and a light operator to accurately position the light source according to instructions by the assessor.

The first stage of the process was to identify an appropriate assessment process. This included identifying a suitable assessment eye-point. The eye-point was determined as the centre point of the reference cube (as defined in GM/RT2161), that is, 1500 mm from the cab floor (see Fig. 5
                     
                     ). In this case, based on anthropometric assessments (see Fig. 5), the variability between the eye points of the 5th percentile female and the 95th percentile male did not warrant two separate assessments.

The cab seat was set to ensure that the assessor's eye-point remained in a consistent location. To ensure consistency and test repeatability, the assessor sat back in the chair maintaining contact with the seat back with head and neck in a neutral position, facing forwards, and with the eye-point at 1500 mm from the cab floor (reference position).

Following the first glare assessment, a number of changes were made to the cab to reduce the impact of internal and external glare. These included:
                        
                           •
                           Recessing and relocating the interior lights to reduce internal glare

Raising the cowling around the top of the control panel

Recessing the top row of controls in the centre of the console

The addition of a patterned film to the right side window

In order to assess the efficacy of these changes, and ensure that no second-order impacts had been inadvertently introduced, the same test approach used in the initial study was repeated. A different assessor was used for this assessment, primarily due to the unavailability of the first assessor, but also to introduce a second opinion on the cab glare performance. The second assessor seating position was adjusted to replicate the eye point of the first assessment (the centre of the reference cube).

The cab was initially assessed for sources of glare from internal lights. The primary sources included a strip light and three spot lights (see Fig. 7
                        ). This process involved assessing each control in turn from the assessment position and recording any instances of glare. All controls/indicators that were illuminated were also assessed.

The cab was assessed by sitting in the cab seat at the reference position (that is, eye line at 1500 mm from the cab floor) and assessing each of the illuminated controls in turn.

For each assessment position (21 illuminated control sets), the level of glare was evaluated by the assessor and recorded photographically via a fixed camera mounted at 1500 mm (the reference eye-point) directly behind the assessor. All instances of glare detection were recorded along with a description of their source and severity. All photographs were taken with identical camera settings (see Table 1
                        ) to ensure all instances of glare were captured as accurately as possible. The use of the camera was purely to document the experiment, it is important to note that the assessment and recommendations of the study were based solely on the interpretation of the glare by a human eye. Some degree of optical flare from the camera lens was unavoidable when capturing direct glare that was not detected by the human eye.

In situations where glare appeared to be the result of reflections from the assessor's clothing or hi-vis vest (worn by the assessor throughout the assessment to simulate in situ apparel), the impact of donning darker clothing was assessed and the results were recorded photographically.

In the second assessment, following the design changes, the cab windows were blacked out using dark fabric tapped to the external surfaces of the cab to control for the impact of ambient lighting.

Following the assessment of the internal light sources, the internal lights (strip light and three internal spot lights) were switched off to simulate normal driving conditions.

A light source was selected to simulate a wide range of external light sources, namely an Arrilite 2000 Plus 2 kW tungsten light, fitted with Arrimax reflector (see Figs. 3 and 9
                        
                        ). The 2 kW was selected as it provided a suitable compromise between maximising the light intensity (approximating sunlight) and minimising the discomfort for the person conducting the assessment.

A grid system was developed to assess a range of light source locations. For the windscreen, a 5×5 grid was considered to be an appropriate mesh size through physical testing. A 4×4 grid was explored but found to lack a suitable level of detail. Likewise, a 6×6 grid was found not to offer a superfluous level of detail.

The equidistant 5×5 grid was constructed on the cab windscreen (see Fig. 10
                        ). This was done by measuring the windscreen and dividing this equally in to 25 grid points which were marked on the inner screen with small putty indicators.

The selected Arrilite light source was mounted on a Hague CamCrane K16DV (see Fig. 11
                        ) to allow it to be repositioned to each of the grid points in Fig. 10 when viewed from the identified eye point. This was achieved by manually positioning the light in accordance with verbal instructions from the assessor who conducted the glare assessment in the driver's cab. As the lamp was repositioned on an arm, with a fixed base, the distance of the light from the assessor varied depending on the location (between 5 and 7 m). This was evaluated prior to the assessment and there was no perceivable difference in the intensity between locations.

The same lighting rig was repositioned to assess the glare from the side windows and door windows (see Fig. 12
                        ). For each window the light was position to the centre of the window.


                        Table 2
                         summarises the task sequence used during the glare assessment of external light sources.

As with the assessment of the internal light sources, for each assessment position, the level of glare was evaluated by the assessor and recorded photographically via a fixed camera. At each light source position where glare was found, the driver's sun blind was deployed and the impact on the observed glare issues was assessed. If the sun blind mitigated glare in any of the light source locations, the point to which the blind needs to be lowered to achieve this was recorded. Similarly, if glare was observed in affected areas, temporary card extensions were used to investigate whether simple practical additions to the desk cowling or monitor surrounds could resolve or reduce the issue. These thick pieces of card were fixed to the existing cowling to assess a number of different cowling extensions locations and options and allow an effective trade off to be made between reducing the impact of specific instances of glare while maximising fwd visibility. Where positive results were observed with the applied extension pieces this was measured and photographically recorded using a roaming camera (see Table 1 for camera settings).

As with the assessment of the internal light sources, in situations where glare appeared to be the result of reflections from the “driver's” clothing or hi-vis vest, the impact of donning darker clothing was assessed and the results were recorded photographically.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In total, 30 lighting conditions were assessed, these included:
                           
                              •
                              Internal lights

25 light positions through the front windscreen (one for each grid-point)

One for each of the two side windows

One through each of the two side door windows

For each condition, all sources of glare were recorded along with a rating of intensity and potential mitigations. Given the detail of the results span 26 pages this has not been included in this paper; however, examples of the results are presented in Table 3
                        .

Based on the results of the first glare assessment, a number of design recommendations were proposed and adopted. These included:
                           
                              •
                              Recessing and relocating the interior lights to reduce internal glare (see Figs. 7 and 8)

Raising the cowling around the top of the control panel (see Figs. 2 and 6)

Recessing the top row of controls in the centre of the console (see Figs. 2 and 6)

The addition of a patterned film to the right side window (see Fig. 6)

The second study was used to verify that these design changes were effective and had not introduced any new consequences. The second study followed the same protocol as the first study. The sole difference was that the internal glare assessment was conducted with the cab windows blacked out.

Given the subjective nature of the assessment process, and the use of different assessor, care must be taken in interpreting the assessment results to draw comparisons between the two studies. However, despite the use of a different assessor (with normal uncorrected vision as in the first study), there is broad concordance between the findings of the two assessments, with regards to the visual discomfort produced by direct glare from the internal and external light sources. The validity of the discomfort scores is subject to influence by (1) the subjective nature of glare assessment and (2) the use of a different assessor for this study. However, it is considered that the comparison between the studies' findings has taken these issues into account by applying a threshold of ±2 De Boer scale points to the difference between assessors' discomfort scores in order to judge whether differences in score for a given glare source were valid (to account for ‘noise’ in the data caused by inter-rater reliability).

As indicated in Table 4
                           , the assessment of the modified cab reveals that the impact of glare originating from the internal lighting has been notably reduced. In the second assessment there was only one instance of internal glare and the severity of this was reduced to the lowest level. While blacking out the windows in the second study is a clear confounding variable, this would be expected to increase the level of glare discomfort rather than reduce it.

As indicated in Table 5
                           , the scores allocated in the two assessments are largely consistent. To reduce the impact of noise from the data, only differences of two or more points (between assessments) have been considered. These two point variations have been highlighted in green in Table 5.

By plotting the positions on the windscreen where improvements of two or more points were observed (see Fig. 13
                           ), it is evident that these improvements occur largely around the area of the cowling.

The impact of the design changes implemented between the two assessments on reflective glare can be estimated by comparing the subjective ratings from the first assessment and the second assessment. As before, care should be taken in interpreting these results to draw comparisons between the results from the two assessments. However, a general trend seems to exist towards an improvement in the second assessment.


                           Table 6
                            provides a summary of the two individual results tables by comparing the number of instances of unacceptable glare (scoring 1–4 on the De Boer scale). The total number of unacceptable glare scores has dropped from 78 to 38. More specifically, relatively high levels of improvement can be observed around the modified recessed area and the increased cowling (coupling and door buttons), supporting rationale for the changes that have been made in these areas.

Increasing the cowling around the top of the control console appears to have had a small positive impact on the perception of direct glare as a result of external light sources.

The changes to the cowling along with the other changes to the cab (recessing the top row of controls, and applying a film to the side windows) were also found to have a positive impact on reflectance glare, with a drop in the total number on incidences observed.

The addition of the patterned film to the right hand window had a very small but positive impact on the ratings where compared to the left window (no film applied).

@&#SUMMARY@&#

The approach described in this paper was developed as a practical and pragmatic approach to reducing the impact of glare from both external and internal light sources. The focus of the study was on developing mitigations that had a high probability of having a positive impact on the design. The study was not designed in the first instance to be a rigorous scientific study. As such, there are a number of clear limitations that are highlighted in the section below. From a practical perspective, however, the initial findings of this study are a positive indication that the approach may be suitable for wider adoption. Further study, through a more formal experimental, is recommended however to address the limitations of the study discussed below.

The purpose of the glare assessment was to evaluate the proposed design of driver's cab and identify potential issues relating to the presence of glare from internal and external sources. The impact of practical mitigation measures were considered, and introduced into the design. A follow up study indicates that these mitigations had a positive impact on the design.

When used to assess the mock up described in the case study, the discussed approach was found to be extremely valuable. It verified that the design was largely suitable and identified a number of practical modifications to improve its performance. As these changes were identified relatively early in the design process, they could be implemented at minimal design cost and negligible manufacturing costs. While it could be argued that each of these recommendations could have been made based on best practice, without the findings of the study, the exact extent of each of the interventions would not have been possible without the study. For example, the exact locations and distance of the cowling extensions and the position of the patterned film could not have been accurately predicted without some form of physical assessment.

The following limitations of the described study should be considered:
                           
                              •
                              The study discussed in this paper was conducted in an artificial simulated environment. While an attempt was made to maximise the fidelity of the cab by using production versions of the controls and indicators within the cab, there are a number of physical limitations of the approach. Most notably, the use of an artificial light source to simulate all external sources of glare (e.g. train headlights, sun light etc).

From a task perspective, the assessors were not conducting the primary driving task at the time of the assessment.

The assessor conducting the first study, prior to the modifications, was different to the assessor conducting the assessment after the modifications (primarily due to unavailability of the first assessor at the time of the second assessment).

Continued exposure to the light during the course of each of the assessments would have resulted in increased activation of the cones in the eyes of the assessor, and therefore increased the acuity and sensitivity (i.e. transient adaptation). Thus, working through each point of the windscreen systematically is likely to have impacted on the experience of glare and visual discomfort experienced by the assessors. For the purposes of the current study, this variable was considered to be tolerable as the relationship between rankings at different locations was less important than the overall rating at any given point. If relative scores between assessment locations were a critical factor in the results a different experimental design would be required to control for this variable

Further research is recommended to quantify more precisely the inter driver differences in forward scatter in the eye and the driver specific threshold for discomfort glare. Detrimental changes in visual performance can also be caused by increased scatter in the eye and these effects can be measured even in the absence of 'discomfort glare'.

Ultimately, the purpose of this approach is not intended to replace the need for naturalistic assessments of early production versions of the train. Given the limitations described above these assessments remains an essential part of the design process. Rather the purpose of this approach is to identify potential issues much earlier in the design process, allowing them to be mitigated before the first production run.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The described approach was found to be an efficient and effective means of optimising the cab design to minimise the impact of glare – yielding practical recommendations for improvement.

As discussed in the introduction, the described approach is heavily reliant on subjective opinion of the assessors. The captured photographs provide a clear evidence log; however, the instances of glare captured by the camera and the human eye did not always correlate directly. Should an increased level of confidence in the findings be required, the study could be extended by repeating the assessment with a wider range of assessors (covering a greater age range and including those with spectacles and contact lenses). Likewise, more objective measures of glare discomfort could be captured through the use of ECG measurements (as described by Murray, 1999).

Ultimately though, as perception of glare is highly subjective, a subjective assessment seems fitting. Furthermore, in a practical setting, efficiencies thoroughness trade off must be made, given the limitations of conducting the assessment in a mock up, rather than a production cab, the approach described in this paper is proposed as a suitable balance for this efficiency thoroughness trade off.

Ultimately, the full effectiveness of the approach can not be assessed until the train is evaluated in a naturalistic setting with an early production version; however, the structured approach described in this paper is expected to identify all gross occurrences of glare allowing them to be mitigated at a much lower cost.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

