@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluating camouflage design using eye movement data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We compared existing camouflage designs using two common war field backgrounds.


                        
                        
                           
                           Camouflage effectiveness was evaluated using hit rate, detection time, and eye movement data.


                        
                        
                           
                           Detectability and discriminability were better measured with eye movement data.


                        
                        
                           
                           Eye movement data were shown to significantly enhance the analysis of camouflage design.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Camouflage

Eye movement

Visual search

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study investigates the characteristics of eye movements during a camouflaged target search task. Camouflaged targets were randomly presented on two natural landscapes. The performance of each camouflage design was assessed by target detection hit rate, detection time, number of fixations on display, first saccade amplitude to target, number of fixations on target, fixation duration on target, and subjective ratings of search task difficulty. The results showed that the camouflage patterns could significantly affect the eye-movement behavior, especially first saccade amplitude and fixation duration, and the findings could be used to increase the sensitivity of the camouflage assessment. We hypothesized that the assessment could be made with regard to the differences in detectability and discriminability of the camouflage patterns. These could explain less efficient search behavior in eye movements. Overall, data obtained from eye movements can be used to significantly enhance the interpretation of the effects of different camouflage design.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Camouflage is an important part of the modern military. Camouflage is used to disrupt the contour of a target by merging it with the background, making it harder to detect or hit. Military camouflage must be used against different backgrounds and in different natural environments, including jungles, woodlands, and deserts (Hogervorst et al., 2010). Two visible trends dominate camouflage design today. One is universal design, and the other is specialized design, or using separate designs for desert environments. Clearly, a universal pattern will not perform better than a specialized pattern (Hogervorst et al., 2010). Traditionally, designs were inspired by natural environments and based on biological or psychological principles such as blending and disruption. More recently, the multiple disciplines of image stimuli processing, computer vision, statistics, human visual perception, and ergonomics have been integrated into the design considerations of camouflage (Scott-Samuel et al., 2011; Troscianko et al., 2009; Copeland and Trivedi, 2001; Toet et al., 1998).

The most challenging aspect of camouflage assessment of different camouflage patterns and battlefields is that it is hard to measure the effective acuity of the camouflage. Traditionally, subjective assessments, such as questionnaires, were used for testing, but such approaches lack the support of experimental data. Other subjective assessment methods have also been developed. Photo-simulation, for example, presents a set of image slides of camouflaged targets against preferred backgrounds for participants to identify the performance of the designs visually and subjectively (Doll et al., 1993; Boyce and Pollatsek, 1992). Using simulations has the advantage of measuring performance under controlled conditions by bringing battlefield images to the participant, rather than bringing the participant to the battlefield. In fact, the research of the NATO Workshop SCI-012 noted that man-in-the-loop assessment was still the only robust and effective way to evaluate camouflage detectability (Toet, 2000; Doll and Home, 1999). Much of the previous visual search research attempted to use response time (RT) and error rate to evaluate camouflage effects on the human visual system. It was found that error rates or hit rates in the target-present (TP) data and in the target-absent (TA) data sometimes did not have sufficient sensitivity to reflect the performance of the human vision system (Neider et al., 2010; Neider and Zelinsky, 2006; Wolfe et al., 2002). In this paper, we focus on the fact that detailed information on human visual responses is needed for measuring camouflage performance.

One way to measure human visual responses is to use an eye tracker. The eye tracker has been applied in several fields to measure and record human eye movement information so that researchers can know where participants are looking at any given time and trace the eye movement from one position to another. The use of eye trackers in experiments was first pioneered in reading research over 40 years ago (Rayner, 1998). Technological advances have allowed the design of innovative eye movement experiments in which the visual tracker system is changed contingent on experimental demands, such as computational support in designing stimulus displacement conditions and organizing other bottom-up input in eye tracker systems (McConkie and Currie, 1996). General theories of language processing (Findlay, 2004; Liversedge and Findlay, 2000), attention (Kimble et al., 2010), and spatial ability (Alexander, 2006) were developed using eye tracker systems for critical examination of the cognitive processes underlying reading.

Although many studies of eye movement have focused on reading, relatively few studies have focused on visual searches (Rayner, 1998). For example, Boersema et al. (1989) presented tasks using pictorial stimuli for tracking eye movements. Najemnik and Geisler (2005) used an eye tracker to design experiments to determine optimal eye movement strategies. Zelinsky (1996) recorded eye saccades to assess the selectivity of search movements. In the military field, Hauland (2003) investigated situational awareness in air-traffic-control training, and that research was helpful in evaluating the design of cockpit controls to reduce pilot error (Casner, 2009; Hanson, 2004). Eye trackers have also been used to investigate threatening stimuli in veterans of war (Kimble et al., 2010). From the above studies, it was found that the nature of a search task affects the behavior of eye movement, and that every statement about visual search or eye movements must be qualified by the characteristics of the search experiment. The most important findings were that these measurements included not only traditional psychophysical factors, such as response times and error rates, but also more detailed data, such as eye-movement trajectories. Analyzing the search strategy or procedure is helpful because visual information that shares certain characteristics with target items often attracts a disproportionately large number of fixations or saccades (Di Stasi et al., 2011; Duchowski, 2003; Rao et al., 2002).

Several eye movement variables have been used in past visual search investigations. Goldberg and Kotval (1999) employed the following: (1) Number of Fixations: The number of fixations is related to the number of components that the user is required to process. When searching for a single target, a large number of fixations indicates that the participant sampled many other objects prior to selecting the target, as in cases where something hindered attention or distracted the participant from isolating the target. For example, in the study by Goldberg and Kotval, a poor interface, intentionally designed to mislead the subject, produced significantly more fixations than a good design. In short, a higher overall number of fixations indicates a less efficient search. (2) Fixation Duration: Also in a study by Goldberg and Kotval (1999), a longer fixation implied the participant was spending more time interpreting or relating the component representations in the interface to internalized representations. A longer duration of fixation can indicate difficulty in extracting information, but it can also mean that the object is more engaging in some way (Scialfa and Joffe, 1998; Just and Carpenter, 1976). (3) Saccade Amplitude: In a study of computer display interface design, Goldberg found that larger saccadic amplitudes and fewer interim fixations indicated that users scanned to desired targets more effectively. Another useful indicator is the first saccade amplitude to region of interest. A larger saccade amplitude indicates that the user's attention is drawn from a distance to the target (Goldberg et al., 2002) or an anticipatory response is initiated with a saccade (Cirilli et al., 2011). Besides these factors, other factors have also been discussed in the literature. Maximum and average fixation times are context-independent measures, but the duration of single fixations on targets is dependent on the layout of the stimulus target. Thus, the number of fixations per region of interest has also been used. For example, a high number of fixations on a particular region indicates that it is more noticeable, or more important, to the viewer than other regions (Poole et al., 2004). Blink rate can be used as an index of cognitive workload. A higher blink rate may indicate fatigue (Yagi et al., 2009; Bruneau et al., 2002). Although much research has focused on attractive targets, little research has studied the detection of unattractive targets by the visual system. In the field of military camouflage design, traditional psychophysical factors such as detection time and hit rates are used to assess the performance of camouflage. Past research on target attraction showed that when distracters are similar to targets (Neider and Zelinsky, 2006), it is insufficient to analyze only increases in fixation time, and one should not ignore other characteristics that influence the result. Fixations, saccades, or other information on eye movement can allow researchers to identify such characteristics (Havermann et al., 2012; Unema et al., 2005; Phillips, 1981; Noyes, 1980). In this study, we applied a camouflage target detection experiment to assess different kinds of camouflage on different battlefields, using an eye tracker. In this paper, all the results are analyzed, and those factors that provide better assessment of camouflage performance are identified.

@&#METHODS@&#

Fifteen male student participants from the National Defense University took part in the study. Participants ranged in age from 19 to 23 years old. All participants had more than one year of military training and education. All participants had normal or corrected to normal vision (e.g., normal performance on the Landolt C vision test). None of the participants suffered vision-related illnesses or color-blindness.

Eye movements were sampled using an Eyelink II eye tracking system (SR Research, Osgoode, Ontario, Canada). This system uses a head-mounted camera to track the pupil image and corneal reflection, with a sampling rate of 500 Hz and spatial accuracy of 0.5° or higher. Three cameras mounted on the Eyelink II headband allowed simultaneous tracking of eye and head positions, such that gazing positions were computed with head motion unrestrained. A personal computer (Intel Core i5-750 2.66 GHz), connected to a remote Ethernet link, was used to respond to the displayed stimulus and to trigger the eye tracker in each trial.

Stimuli were shown on a 24.1-inch LED (EIZO color edge 243W) industrial color correction monitor with a resolution of 1920 × 1200 pixels. The participant placed his head in a chin-rest to minimize head movements and viewed a screen placed 55 cm from the corneal surface, with dim background lighting. The display screen provided an optical image subtending 54° horizontally and 33.75° vertically.

The Experiment Builder (SR Research, Osgoode, Ontario, Canada) was used to design the experiment procedure, and eye movement data captured by the EyeLink II, mouse clicks, and keystrokes were recorded upon confirmation of stimuli on the computer screen. Fig. 1
                         illustrates the setup of the experiment. In addition, DataViewer (a professional eye movement analysis program) was used to arrange the data, mark the environment, and collect various index data for the built-in visualization module. DataViewer displayed the number of times the stimulus was detected, as well as the fixation points, saccade amplitude, and blinks.

In this study, six camouflage patterns used by the military were evaluated. The six camouflage patterns are shown in Fig. 2
                        . The camouflage included designs with micro-patterns that were synthesized using different techniques. We ran two different backgrounds to evaluate the 6 different camouflage designs. The background was two environments of interest: a rocky mountain and a grassy field, as shown in Fig. 3
                        . Images in these figures were taken at about 75 m. The distance between the participant and the monitor was 55 cm, making the camouflaged human-shaped target height 1.25 cm (47 pixels) on the display screen (1920 × 1200 pixels). Each camouflaged human-shaped target was placed in each of the four quadrants at a viewing angle of 15–25° from the center, as shown in Fig. 3, resulting in a total of 24 task images. Although all target patterns are shown in the figure to show the reader what each target pattern looks like when placed on the background, some are difficult to find. Also note that only one target was shown in each experimental task. The average distance and direction of the target from the initial fixation point was similar for each target combination.

In this study, two types of dependent variables were collected: the eye-movement variables and the performance variables. The dependent factors included hit rates, detection time, the number of fixations, blinks, first saccade amplitude to interest area (IA), fixation duration in IA, and fixation number in IA, where IA was a rectangle of 20 pixels (horizontal) × 55 pixels (vertical) over the human-shaped target, as shown Fig. 4
                        . That figure also shows the search pattern for one target from one of the participants over the two backgrounds. The participants also rated the level of difficulty of each task. “Hit rate” was defined as the percentage of times that the camouflaged targets were correctly identified. The task difficulty ratings were assessed on a seven-point rating scale at the end of each session (Pomplun et al., 2001). For difficulty of target detection ratings, “1” represented the easiest task and “7” the most difficult task.

Before the experiment, all participants were introduced to the procedure of the experiment and were informed that they could stop at any time. The participant was presented with a sample image (a black and white human shape in camouflage on a white background) for familiarization. Eye fixation was calibrated manually at the beginning of the experiment using thirteen fixation points presented randomly at different locations on the monitor, and only calibration values with a mean error <0.5° were accepted. The accuracy of the calibration was checked between each trial, and the participants were asked to fixate on a fixation dot at the center of the display to perform a correction for drifts and slips of the eye-tracker. Participants were allowed to rest briefly between trials. The stimuli were presented by the experimenter when the participant had stably fixated on a fixation dot at the center of the display. The fixation dot disappeared at the onset of the experiment stimuli within 1000 msec. For each camouflage pattern, four trials of the search task, each with a randomly appearing target, were tested, resulting in a total of 24 stimuli for each background. The order of presentation was randomized to prevent sequence effects.

The experiment had no time limit. If the participant could not find the target, he could press a key on the keyboard to quit the search. Participants were told that every task had a target, and that they were to find the camouflaged human shape and click the computer mouse to confirm it as quickly and as accurately as possible. As soon as the participant detected the location of the target, he would click the mouse button. A question then appeared on the display screen. The question asked the participant to rate the level of difficulty of the task. A five-minute rest was provided in the middle of the experiment to minimize the effects of possible visual fatigue.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

To analyze the fixations of the participants, the spatial coordinates of the fixations were stored by the tracker system in a special file format and converted to readable ASCII text. Minitab was used to analyze the data. For data analysis, this study used a randomized block design wherein the participants were treated as a block, and one-way ANOVA was performed on the camouflage patterns. Post hoc analysis was performed using the Tukey test. The two backgrounds were analyzed separately.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The variables of greatest interest were the hit rates and detection time of the different targets. Mean hit rates and detection times in the experiment are shown in Tables 1 and 2
                        
                         for the grassy background and rocky background, respectively. Higher effectiveness of the camouflage corresponded to a lower hit rate and a higher detection time. Camouflage pattern DW performed relatively well (mean hit rate lower than 77% and detection time of over 37,000 msec) on the grassy background (Table 1). Camouflage patterns TC, AT, and MC had relatively lower hit rates (lower than 70%) and relatively higher detection times (over 40,000 msec) on the rocky background (Table 2). One-way ANOVA showed that hit rates differed significantly among the different camouflage patterns on the grassy background (F (5, 340) = 14.54, p < 0.001) and on the rocky background (F (5, 340) = 27.66, p < 0.001). Camouflage pattern also had a significant effect on detection time on the grassy background (F (5, 340) = 42.40, p < 0.001) and on the rocky background (F (5, 340) = 20.18, p < 0.001). Post hoc analysis (Tukey test) showed that pattern DW had a lower hit rate and higher detection time than the rest of the patterns, as shown in Table 1 for the grassy background. Fig. 5
                        (a) and (b) present the hit rate and detection time versus all the patterns on the grassy background. Fig. 6
                        (a) and (b) present the hit rate and detection time on the rocky background. It can be seen respectively in Fig. 5(a) and (b) that patterns MC, ER, AT, SC, and TC had similar levels of hit rate and detection time on the grassy background. On the rocky background, post hoc results showed that patterns TC, AT, and MC were in the same group of detection time, unlike the group of SC, DW, and ER. The result in hit rate shows somewhat similar grouping.

Effective camouflage is characterized by high difficulty. Mean difficulty is shown in Tables 1 and 2 for the two backgrounds. One-way ANOVA revealed a significant effect on difficulty on the grassy background (F (5, 340) = 142.22, p < 0.001) and on the rocky background (F (5, 340) = 82.49, p < 0.001). Tables 1 and 2 also show the post hoc analysis of the means for the two backgrounds respectively. Pattern DW had the highest difficulty (over 5) on the grassy background. Patterns TC, AT, and MC had higher difficulty (over 5) than the rest on the rocky background. Fig. 5(c) and 6(c) show the difficulty level versus all the patterns for the grassy and rocky backgrounds, respectively.

Mean number of fixations is shown in Tables 1 and 2 for the two backgrounds. A higher overall number of fixations indicates a less efficient search. We found that DW had a relatively high number of fixations (over 100 fixations) on the grassy background, and TC, MC, and AT had relatively higher numbers of fixations (also over 100 fixations) on the rocky background. One-way ANOVA revealed a significant effect on number of fixations on the grassy background (F (5, 340 = 40.28, p < 0.001) and on the rocky background (F (5, 340) = 23.00, p < 0.001). Post hoc comparisons showed that pattern DW was in a different group from the rest of the patterns on the grassy background, corresponding well to the results in hit rates and detection time. On the rocky background, number of fixations was divided into two groups, with TC, AT, and MC as one group and the others as the second group, similar to the results found in detection time.

A higher number of blinks may indicate fatigue in the task, and it may also present the workload of detecting the camouflage. Mean numbers of blinks are shown in Tables 1 and 2 The DW camouflage pattern caused a high number of blinks (over 4 blinks) on the grassy background, and TC, MC, and AT caused higher numbers of blinks (over 5 blinks) on the rocky background. One-way ANOVA yielded a significant effect on number of blinks on the grassy background (F (5, 340) = 10.19, p < 0.001) and on the rocky background (F (5, 340) = 13.48, p < 0.001).

When there was a fixation within the interest area, the saccade amplitude into the interest area was collected. Mean first saccade amplitude is shown in Tables 1 and 2 One-way ANOVA yielded a significant effect on first saccade amplitude to IA on the grassy background (F (5, 340) = 15.60, p < 0.001) and on the rocky background (F (5, 340) = 19.86, p < 0.001). Post hoc analyses showed that on the grassy background, first saccade amplitude to IA could be divided into several groups, ranging from low amplitude (4.857°) for the DW pattern to high amplitude (12.826°) for the TC pattern. On the rocky background, saccade amplitude ranged from 4.016° for the AT pattern to 7.879° for the ER pattern. The data show that if the saccade amplitude fell to lower than 5°, the hit rate and detection time decreased.

This measure is related to the ease or difficulty associated with processing a candidate target within IA so that it can be confirmed to be the target. Note that not every search trial resulted in a fixation in the interest area. Only if the participant suspected there was a candidate target would a fixation in IA result. The actual numbers of fixations in IA were different on the grassy and rocky backgrounds (thus different degrees of freedom in F-tests). Mean fixation duration in IA was calculated for the actual number of fixations occurring in IA and is shown in Fig. 5 (g) and 6 (g). ANOVA showed a significant effect on fixation duration in IA on the grassy background (F (5, 340) = 12.70, p < 0.001) and on the rocky background (F (5, 340) = 11.24, p < 0.001). On the grassy background, the fixation duration in IA for DW was longer (over 2300 msec), and the average fixation duration in IA was over 1500 msec. On a rocky background, the fixation durations in IA for TC, AT, and MC were over 2100 msec, and the average duration was over 1600 msec. On average, it took more than 1500 msec for the participant to discriminate the target from the background.

Fixations on target were divided by the total number of fixations. A higher ratio indicated lower discrimination efficiency. ANOVA revealed a significant effect on number of fixations in the interest area on the grassy background (F (5, 340) = 13.13, p < 0.001) and on the rocky background (F (5, 340) = 17.85, p < 0.001). Fig. 5 (h) and 6 (h) show the mean number of fixations in the region of interest on the grass and rocky backgrounds. On the grassy background, the number of fixations for DW (over 1.1) was higher than for the others. On the rocky background, that number was higher for TC (over 1.7), and those for MC and AT (over 1.1) were higher than those of other camouflage patterns. This is consistent with the notion that good camouflage requires more fixations to discriminate it from the background.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, target search performance and eye movement in camouflage environments were both analyzed. It was found that some differences in camouflage could not be detected if only the performance measures (hit rate and detection time) were used to evaluate camouflage effectiveness. The case of the grassy background is discussed first here. From the results of hit rate and detection time on the grassy background, as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), only the DW camouflage pattern appeared to have good performance, and the other patterns had no significant differences, according to post hoc analysis. However, evaluation of subjective difficulty revealed different groups of difficulty, indicating that the participants could differentiate between these patterns, but this could not be discovered from only the hit rate and detection time. If the eye movement variables were considered, it could be seen that the different patterns could be differentiated at a more detailed level; i.e., the eye movement variables tended to have better sensitivity in detecting the differences associated with different camouflage patterns. For example, first saccade amplitude to IA (Fig. 5(f)) showed a continuous increase with the patterns, and this was more closely correlated to the subjective decreasing difficulty level (Fig. 5(c)).

The results of the camouflage patterns on the rocky background are shown in Fig. 6. In the case of the rocky background, the performance measures (hit rate and detection time) seemed more useful in differentiating between these camouflage patterns than in the case of the grassy background. Combining the hit rate, detection, and difficulty measures revealed about two to three groups of camouflage patterns (as shown in Table 2). The effectiveness of the different camouflage patterns can be analyzed with performance-based measures alone. However, eye-movement data can still aid in analyzing and selecting these camouflage patterns in more detail. In general, the number of fixations and blinks differentiated the two groups, but eye movement data related to IA (first saccade amplitude to IA, fixation duration in IA, and number of fixations in IA) differentiated the three groups (Table 2), indicating that the IA-related eye movement variables were more sensitive. Again, first saccade amplitude to IA appeared to be a useful variable for detecting the differences between different camouflage pattern designs.

In light of this finding on first saccade amplitude to IA, further analysis was performed to look for the existence of a pattern of first saccade amplitude that can be used to tell whether a hit will occur. It was interesting to find that the larger the first saccade amplitude, the higher the probability of a hit. Table 3
                      presents the statistics between a hit and a miss for the first saccade amplitude to IA. On both backgrounds, the first saccade amplitude could declare a hit very accurately, since the 95% confidence intervals did not overlap. For example, on the rocky background, the mean first saccade amplitude to IA for a miss was 1.8432, with a 95% confidence interval between 1.1552 and 2.5313. The mean for hit was 6.2327, with an interval between 5.7117 and 6.7538. There was a threshold (a value between 2.5313 and 5.7117) for declaration of a hit by looking at this particular variable. This information may be useful for developing a computer vision system or computer-aiding algorithm to help an observer know where to search. The number of optical characteristics used to calculate and search a target image is usually very large for efficient computing. One possibility is to let a computer do the first screening and to allow the human operator to conduct the final search. In this regard, the data from this study may be further explored to speed up the detection process.

Past research found that the characteristics of the stimulus in parafoveal vision influenced whether or not a saccade needed to be made to identify it (Dandekar et al., 2012; Jacobs, 1987, 1986). A larger saccade amplitude indicates the detectability of the target in parafovea vision (Goldberg and Wichansky, 2003; Findlay, 1997). In the camouflage experiment, when a target was significantly different from the background, the detectability of the target in the visual field was high. There would be a large first saccade into the area of interest. Within the area of interest, the target would be discriminated against the participant memory to identify whether it was indeed a specified target. This would increase the fixation duration within the area of interest. Thus, if the first saccade amplitude to IA was high, it indicated a high detectability of the target, and if the fixation duration in IA was high, it indicated a low discriminability of the target, making the two eye movement variables useful measures for analyzing the design of the camouflage background patterns in relation to the specified target. With better camouflage pattern design, one would expect a low first saccade amplitude to IA (low detectability) and high fixation duration in IA (low discriminability). The current performance measures, such as hit rate or detection time, show only the ultimate result of a search task. The two eye movement data presented here, however, show whether a miss was caused by low detectability or by low discriminability, thus providing a direction for improving camouflage design. To be practically useful, the next question is what design characteristics affect detectability. Some past studies have indicated that luminance is related to saccade amplitude (Findlay, 1995, 1997; Horwitz and Albright, 2003; Palmer and Rosa, 2006). If adjusting the luminance affects the saccade amplitude, it seems possible that the detectability will be thus changed. Based on this, using changes in luminance may provide a direction for designers to improve the design to lower detectability. However, further studies are needed to verify the relationship between luminance and detectability without the effect of discriminability.

The analysis can also be applied to detecting finer differences between the different camouflage design patterns. For example, according the post hoc analysis of the rocky background (Table 2), the first saccade amplitude of the TC pattern was close to that of AT (4.162 vs. 4.016), while its fixation duration was larger than that of AT (2786ms vs. 2218ms). Based on the possible indication behind the two useful eye movement variables identified in the results and the above explanation, it appears that both TC and AT had similar detectability, but TC had lower discriminability. The designer can then trace back to investigate what design components may contribute to the lower discriminability of the TC pattern. With similar comparisons, the AT pattern had a fixation duration in IA close to that of MC, but the first saccade amplitude to IA was smaller than that of MC, indicating that AT had lower detectability but similar discriminability as compared with MC. In fact, AT had a higher detection time than MC (52,578ms vs. 41,135ms), and this difference may be attributed to the harder detectability, rather than to its discriminability, because the fixation duration in IA was about the same (2,218ms vs. 2,164ms). In fact, the fixation duration in IA was around the order of 2,000ms, but the detection time was at least 40,000ms, indicating better camouflage performance (TC, AT, and MC performed better than the others based on detection time). If the camouflage pattern makes the target difficult to detect in the first place, the detection time will increase significantly. It seems that the secret to successful camouflage is to prevent the eye from moving into the area of interest of the target by making it harder to detect. Thus, it is very important to design the camouflage such that it does not allow the parafoveal vision to detect it (Chang et al., 2012). Once an interest area is selected, the discriminability design comes into play. If camouflage can confuse the participants, they will take more time to discriminate the details of the area of interest until nothing is found, and they will then move their eyes to search elsewhere. It is therefore suggested that in camouflage design, the first goal should be to decrease detectability, which is mostly associated with contrast design (Cai et al., 2012; Lindqvist et al., 2007), especially for backgrounds of predicted battlefields lacking much difference in contrast, such as full grass or desert. The second goal is then to prevent discrimination, which is related to the background objects, as complicated objects with more visual information may distract focus. Further studies should look into the associations between the eye movement variables and the design features of the camouflage.

The results of this study show that camouflage evaluation can be performed with more insight into the visual search behavior with the aid of eye movement data. Using the aid of eye movement data in addition to the conventional performance-based data can allow camouflage effectiveness to be better differentiated when the camouflage is only slightly worse or slightly better than others; that is, the sensitivity of the analysis can be increased. In this study, it was found that subjective difficulty ratings had higher sensitivity than performance-based measures. With the aid of eye movement data, it would then be possible to look into the reasons behind the subjective task difficulty experienced by the participant. In addition, whether the superior or inferior performance of the camouflage is due to the low detectability or low discriminability can be analyzed with eye movement data. This is particularly helpful for camouflage pattern designers to further improve the design.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

By comparing several different camouflage design patterns against two different backgrounds, performance-based camouflage effectiveness data were collected and eye movement-based measures were compared. This study found that eye movement data could significantly enhance the sensitivity of the comparisons between the different designs in the evaluation of camouflage performance, in addition to the performance-based measures such as the hit-rate and detection time. In particular, two variables, first saccade amplitude to the area of interest and fixation duration in the area of interest, have been identified to be helpful in explaining the finer differences between the different design patterns. These two measures have been linked to the detectability and discriminability of the camouflage pattern design. From the analysis of the performance of the camouflage patterns, it was found that detectability may play a more important role than discriminability. Another finding is that the first saccade amplitude can be used to detect a hit with high predictability, providing a potential to aid in the human search procedure during the evaluation. The use of these concepts for the evaluation of camouflage and its implications for improving camouflage design are discussed in the study. Further studies are suggested to look into the link between the eye movement variables and the change in the background contrast and structural features that may affect camouflage effectiveness.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

