@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation on an ergonomic design of functional clothing for wheelchair users

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           An ergonomic design work of wheelchair users' functional clothing was carried out.


                        
                        
                           
                           An evaluating system deriving from rehabilitation medicine and sports tournament was used.


                        
                        
                           
                           The newly designed functional clothing could facilitate daily living activities related with clothing for the wheelchair users.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Wheelchair users

Functional clothing

Ergonomic design

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Researchers have pointed out that people with physical disabilities find it difficult to obtain suitable clothing. In this study a set of wheelchair user oriented functional clothing was designed. Attention was paid to the wheelchair users' daily living activities related with clothing. An evaluating system combined with sports tournament and rehabilitation medicine was introduced to assess the new designed clothing. Six wheelchair users (3 males and 3 females) were invited to wear the clothing. A set of normal functional clothing was employed as a comparison (Control). The time required to complete three different daily living activities, i.e. dressing and undressing, going to toilet and bathing were recorded. Results showed that with the new clothing wheelchair users' competence of managing toilet was increased by 52.9%. The time needed for toilet was reduced by 45.7%. Their capability of managing dressing and undressing was improved by 24.6%. The study indicated that the newly designed clothing could facilitate wheelchair users' daily living activities related with clothing.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

People with physical disabilities either due to chronic sickness or aging or some other reasons have to spend a large part of time in a seated posture or confined to wheelchairs (Ng et al., 2011). Due to their physical difference with the non-disabled, the physical access issue and the lack of available transport, their participation in daily activity and communication is usually obstructed (Chang et al., 2009; Reid et al., 2001). Even the daily living activities, such as dressing and undressing, are difficult for the disabled and are required to seek the help of others (Kumar, 1997). For those stroke survivors who use wheelchairs, dressing and bathing are the most common self-care problems for them (Reid et al., 2001).

Some researchers have pointed out that people with physical disabilities find it difficult for them to obtain suitable clothing (Thoren, 1997; Chang et al., 2009). Their clothing needs individual adaption. The reason, as is accounted for by Thoren (1997), is that most of the disabled do not fit into the current size system, i.e. their body dimensions differ from those represented in the size system. For the disabled people, anatomical changes will occur, such as their spines curve forward (Ng et al., 2011) and their body heights decrease (Civitci, 2004), either due to the long-time seated posture or aging (a big proportion of disabled people, especially the wheelchair users are the elderly). Also previous studies have compared the anthropometric characteristics of the disabled with the able-bodied and have found the difference between these two groups (Goswami et al., 1987; Lucero-Duarte et al., 2012; Das and Kozey, 1999).

For the disabled people appropriately dressed individuals had bigger chance at job acquisition than those inappropriately dressed persons (Christman and Branson, 1990). Another study has indicated that the redesign of wheelchair users' clothing can help reduce the physical strain and work load of their personal helpers (Nevala et al., 2003). Therefore, it is meaningful and beneficial to design disabled people oriented clothing to meet their physical demand, as well as psychological demand.

In this study, a set of new functional clothing for the wheelchair users were designed. Much attention was paid to their daily living activities, i.e. dressing and undressing, going to toilet and bathing. An evaluating system deriving from rehabilitation medicine and sports tournament was introduced to assess the new functional clothing. It was hypothesized that the newly designed clothing could facilitate the wheelchair users' daily living activities.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

Clothing designs should be user oriented to meet the end users' consuming need. It should provide protection and comfort and should offer values such as self-esteem, respectability, status and confidence, etc. (Rosenblad-Wallin, 1985). Hence, questionnaires were distributed to 58 interviewees, including men and women, to know about their needs and preferences on the clothing. They all had an experience of using the wheelchairs. The results of the questionnaire survey were summarized as follows. First, pants with easy dressing and undressing function were required. Second, the location of the joints should be given more design consideration for easy limb movement. Third, soft and water absorbent fabrics with the property of keeping warm were preferred.

Based on the results of the interview, a set of new functional clothing for the wheelchair users was designed (Fig. 1
                        ) and attention was paid to the above three requirements. Liners and extra layers were added at the body regions of the head, the lower back and the knee, since these areas need higher insulation to keep warm. The upper clothes had a hood to keep the head warm. At the inner side of the elbow darts were designed and the outside were pleats. This design feature could give the elbow more flexibility to move. Soft and water absorbent knitted fabrics were used for the clothing. Thick polyester woven fabrics were used for the extra layers at the elbow.

In order to facilitate the wheelchair users to go to toilet, a special design of the crotch was made (Fig. 2
                        ). Zippers were used to connect the front part of the belly and the back part of the buttocks to make a whole pants. This special design could either be installed or detached to facilitate toileting and cleaning. If a toilet pot was placed under the wheelchair with a special cushion that could be opened into two halves, just open the zippers of the pants, the users could go to toilet without their personal helpers lifting them from the wheelchair.

In sports tournament the degree of difficulty was commonly used for assessing how difficult sports programmes could be completed. One sports programme comprised of several movements and each movement was given a value of difficulty. Then the degree of difficulty of one sports programme was calculated. In the study, the degree of difficulty was introduced for accessing the activities of daily living (ADL). It was calculated according to formula (1):
                              
                                 (1)
                                 
                                    
                                       D
                                       =
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                ε
                                                i
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             ∑
                                             
                                                (
                                                
                                                   ε
                                                   i
                                                
                                                )
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           Where, D is the degree of difficulty; ε
                           
                              i
                            is the value of the difficulty of one movement; 
                              
                                 ∑
                                 
                                    (
                                    
                                       ε
                                       i
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                            is the value of the difficulty of one activity which includes several movements. It is the sum of the values of all the movements. In the study, the value of difficulty of one movement related with the clothing was obtained by asking the wheelchair users to give values for each movement. The 58 interviewees were invited again for this purpose.

The level of competence of wheelchair users coping with ADL could be calculated as follows:
                              
                                 (2)
                                 
                                    
                                       L
                                       =
                                       
                                          D
                                          1
                                       
                                       ×
                                       k
                                       +
                                       
                                          D
                                          2
                                       
                                       ×
                                       k
                                       +
                                       …
                                       +
                                       
                                          D
                                          n
                                       
                                       ×
                                       k
                                    
                                 
                              
                           Where, L is the value of the competence of coping with the ADL; D
                           
                              i
                            is the degree of difficulty of one movement; k equals 1 if the wheelchair users can complete the movement by themselves, otherwise it equals 0.

In rehabilitation medicine the competence of the activities of daily living is used for the evaluation of the recovery of the patients. The most commonly used index for evaluating the competence of ADL is Barthel index (BI) and the modified Barthel index (MBI) (Mahoney and Barthel, 1965; Shah et al., 1989). In this study, 5 levels were used for evaluating the competence of the wheelchair users in handling the ADL (Fig. 3
                           ).

From Level 1 to Level 5 the wheelchair users had an increasing difficulty in coping with the ADL. Each level was given a value to quantify the competence of coping with the ADL by using the same method as the MBI (Table 1
                           ). In the table, three daily activities were quantified: dressing and undressing, bathing and going to toilet.

Six wheelchair users were recruited for the subject wear trials (Goldman, 2005). The purpose of the study was briefed to them. Consensus of participating in the study was obtained from the wheelchair users themselves and their carers. Their basic information was listed in Table 2
                        .

Each subject had to try on two sets of clothing. One was the newly designed functional clothing. The other was a set of normal functional clothing that was available on the market (Control). The crotch in the control garment could not be detached. It was integral to the trousers. The experiment was randomized to diminish the effect of order. It was carried out in room temperature of 20 °C and 65% RH (Fig. 4
                        ). The subjects came to the laboratory with their carers. All the subjects were moved to the same wheelchair that was prepared by the researchers of the study. This wheelchair had a special seat which could be opened to halves to form a hole. If a toilet pot was placed under the seat the wheelchair users could sit in the wheelchair without being lifted upward for toileting. The subjective sensations including the thermal sensation and the tactile sensation were evaluated by subjective ratings. For instance, for the skin wetness sensation a rating scale was used (−2 = dry, −1 = slightly dry, 0 = neither wet nor dry, 1 = slightly wet and 2 = wet). The time of their movements related with ADL was also recorded.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The degrees of difficulty of the movements of the ADL rated by the wheelchair users were listed in Table 3
                        . It could be seen from the table that putting on and taking off the crotch were the most difficult movements in the three ADL items. Particularly when going to toilet, these two movements became even more difficult. The highest degrees of difficulties were observed at this activity, 0.529 and 0.471, respectively. Hence, the special design of the crotch could be useful at this situation.


                        Table 4
                         shows the detailed information when wearing the new designed functional clothing and the normal functional clothing. Comparing with the normal clothing, it could be seen that the newly designed clothing facilitated the activity of going to toilet. The total time required for taking off and putting on the crotch when going to toilet in the normal clothing was 35 s. However, it was only 19 s when the newly designed clothing was worn, reduced by 45.7%. Furthermore, when wearing the newly designed functional clothing, the wheelchair users could manage to take off and put on the crotch all by themselves without the help of their personal helpers.

The six subjects were all in good health condition and their upper limbs could still function properly. With the special design of the crotch, they could open the zippers on it and go to toilet all by themselves. This could give the wheelchair users more independence of coping with the daily activity. However, with the normal functional clothing their buttocks had to be lifted with the help of their personal helpers. This required great effort not only for the wheelchair users themselves but also for their personal helpers, particularly resulting in great work load to the latter. From this point of view, the newly designed functional clothing could be beneficial to reduce the work load of the wheelchair users' personal helpers. The increased independence of the patients and the reduced work strain of the help givers could promote the relationship between these two groups (Nevala et al., 2003).

According to the data in Table 4 and using Equation (2), the levels of competence of wheelchair users coping with ADL in the newly designed functional clothing and the normal clothing could be calculated (Fig. 5
                        ).

As shown in Fig. 5, when the wheelchair users were in the normal functional clothing, their competence of managing the dressing and undressing was 75.4%. The corresponding MBI was 5 (Table 1). The activity of bathing was not carried out with the subject test, but the movements related with the clothing were the same as those of the dressing and undressing item. Hence, the competence of the wheelchair users of managing this activity was assumed to be equal with that of the dressing and undressing item. The competence of managing the toilet in the normal functional clothing was only 47.1%, corresponding to the MBI of 3. However, when the new designed functional clothing was worn, the competences of the wheelchair users of managing the three ADL items were all 100%. In other words, the wheelchair users could manage these three activities by themselves. Their ability of participation in the daily living activities was improved in a great extent.


                        Fig. 6
                         shows the subjective evaluations of the newly designed functional clothing and the normal functional clothing. As could be seen in the figure, the new designed functional clothing was rated higher on thermal sensation than the normal functional clothing. Since the wheelchair users were in a long time seated posture, their activity level was low and the produced body heat was low. From this perspective, warmer sensation was a positive aspect.

The new clothing was looser, more air permeable and more comfortable in tactile sensory. These qualities could meet the wheelchair users' requirements on softer and more comfortable clothing. Skin wetness sensation of the newly designed functional clothing was higher than that of the normal functional clothing. The reason could be that the new functional clothing was thicker to keep the body warm and as a result sweat evaporation might be harder. This might lead to the health problem of skin ulceration or infection, which is a common problem for the long time seated and bedridden people. Since water absorbent and air permeable fabric was employed in designing the new functional clothing, the problem of wet skin could be alleviated.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A set of functional clothing for the wheelchair users was designed. The newly designed clothing was given much consideration to the wheelchair users' daily living activities. An evaluating system deriving from the rehabilitation medicine and the sports tournament was described and used for assessing the new functional clothing.

Taking off and putting on the crotch were rated as the most difficult movements by the wheelchair uses. However, with the new functional clothing wheelchair users' competence of managing toilet was promoted by 52.9%. Their competence of managing dressing and undressing was improved by 24.6%. The time required for toilet was reduced by 45.7%. Subject wear trials indicated that the new functional clothing was warmer and more comfortable to wear than the normal functional clothing for the wheelchair users. Skin wetness sensation was higher, which might lead to health problems of skin ulceration or infection. In a word, the new functional clothing could facilitate wheelchair users daily living activities related with clothing.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors are grateful to the subjects' participation in the study. This work was financially supported by Shanghai Pujiang Program, National Natural Science Foundation (51106022), and MOC Project of Culture and Art Sciences (12DG36).

Questionnaire on functional clothing design for wheelchair users

This questionnaire is prepared to carry out a study on functional clothing design for wheelchair users. Please fill the following forms. Thank you for your participation.
                        
                           1.
                           How old are you?
                                 
                                    (•)
                                    Below 18

18–40

41–65

Over 65

How often do you use a wheelchair?
                                 
                                    (•)
                                    Sometimes

For a short period for rehabilitation

Quite often

How long have you used a wheelchair?
                                 
                                    (•)
                                    Less than 1 year

1–5 years

6–10 years

More than 10 years

Can you use the wheelchair independently?
                                 
                                    (•)
                                    Yes

No

According to the clothing you wear in daily life, please choose the following items with a “√” that best fits your situation.

According to the clothing you wear in daily life, please choose the following items with a “√” that best fits your situation.

Please choose three most important properties from the following clothing properties for the following clothing positions.
                                 
                                    a.
                                    Soft and comfortable

Water absorbent and air permeable

Easy cleaning and quick drying

Abrasion resistant

Able to keep warm

Bacterial resistant

wrinkle resistant

Neck and shoulder ______; Other ______ (Please list other choice).

Waist and belly ______; Other ______ (Please list other choice).

Elbow ______; Other ______ (Please list other choice).

Buttocks ______; Other ______ (Please list other choice).

Lower limbs ______; Other ______ (Please list other choice).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

