@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of two cooling systems under a firefighter coverall

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Two cooling systems were tested under a firefighter suit, exercising in the heat.


                        
                        
                           
                           The systems featured cooled pads or a cold water perfusion system.


                        
                        
                           
                           The cool pads initially improved thermal sensation, the perfused system continually.


                        
                        
                           
                           Neither system reduced core temperature, heart rate, perceived exertion or comfort.


                        
                        
                           
                           The tested cooling systems did not meet the cooling expectations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cooling

Fire fighting garments

Heat stress

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Firemen often suffer from heat strain. This study investigated two chest cooling systems for use under a firefighting suit. In nine male subjects, a vest with water soaked cooling pads and a vest with water perfused tubes were compared to a control condition. Subjects performed 30 min walking and 10 min recovery in hot conditions, while physiological and perceptual parameters were measured. No differences were observed in heart rate and rectal temperature, but scapular skin temperature and fluid loss were lower using the perfused vest. Thermal sensation was cooler for the perfused vest than for the other conditions, while the cool pad vest felt initially cooler than control. However, comfort and RPE scores were similar. We conclude that the cooling effect of both tested systems, mainly providing a (temporally) cooler thermal sensation, was limited and did not meet the expectations.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Firemen are often exposed to extreme heat. In combination with heavy physical exercise and protective equipment, this may lead to heat strain (Barr et al., 2010; Cheung et al., 2010). The concomitant reduction in cognitive and physical capacity compromises operational capability, endurance and safety (Galloway and Maughan, 1997; Hancock and Vasmatzidis, 2003; Hunter et al., 2002; MacDougall et al., 1974; Nielsen et al., 2001; Nybo, 2007). External cooling mechanisms could attenuate heat strain and counteract these adverse consequences.

Most research has been performed on rapid cooling of the firefighter after his work or during short breaks (e.g. Barr et al., 2011; Carter et al., 1999; House et al., 1997; Selkirk et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2009). However, only a few studies investigated direct active cooling during work (e.g. House et al., 2013), which may be the most effective way of reducing heat strain. For firemen this implies the use of a portable cooling system worn under the personal protective clothing. Available cooling systems generally use cooling by air, liquid or phase change materials (PCM).

In exercising athletes (Teunissen et al., 2013) as well as in pilots (Reffeltrath, 2006) and military forces (Barwood et al., 2009b), air cooling by blown ambient air has been shown to reduce heat strain, increase performance and improve comfort. However, firemen often work in contaminated environments, while sufficient air filtering is difficult. An attempt to feed the exhaust gases from the breathing apparatus back into the suit to enhance evaporative cooling, was not effective (Williams et al., 2011). Possibly, the air layer between clothing and skin is rapidly saturated, limiting the effect of (ambient) air cooling. Cooled air systems may be more effective, but are usually rather complex and heavy.

A PCM cooling vest contains a solid substance which absorbs heat while changing to a liquid state. Ice vests are a well-known example. In practice, PCM is often the most usable cooling technique because of its simple mechanism and unpowered nature. Its use under protective clothing can decrease heat strain (Bennett et al., 1995; Cadarette et al., 2002; Chou et al., 2008; House et al., 2003) and increase time to exhaustion (Kenny et al., 2011). Nevertheless, not all studies found positive effects (Carter et al., 2007). It is possible that a PCM vest impairs sweat evaporation from the body and does not provide a positive contribution to the heat balance (Gao et al., 2011).

From the perspective of maximum heat removal, liquid cooling by tubed garments is probably the most effective cooling technique. In general, a tubed vest filled with circulating cold water or glycol provides direct conductive cooling, extracting up to 170 W under optimal conditions (Frim et al., 1996). However, the system requires a pump, heat exchanger, and power supply. It is possible that the significant bulk, weight, and power dependence of these systems restrict its mobility and offset its benefits (McLellan et al., 2013).

It is still a challenge to develop optimal cooling systems for use during operational tasks. Previous studies on this topic have mostly focused on physiological measures and performance. Perceptual measures like thermal sensation and thermal comfort have been described less frequently, but may affect the initial selection of exercise intensity (Schlader et al., 2011b) and control thermoregulatory behavior (Schlader et al., 2011a). Perception is not always in line with performance. Daanen et al. (2013) recently showed that people feel fatigued after sleep deprivation but this has no impact on performance. In contrast, work in the heat showed a decrement in performance while people assessed that they can do the job easily. A discrepancy between perception and performance may lead to overestimation or underestimation of the risks and thus to injury. Therefore, the inclusion of perceptual measures is important for gaining knowledge on the interaction of perceptual, physiological and performance measures, as well as for the successful implementation of a cooling system.

The current study investigated two chest cooling systems for use under fire protective garments. The first newly developed cooling vest uses pads which have been soaked in cold water, providing conductive cooling without the need for ice, pump or power. This resulted in a very light-weight mobile vest, which may slightly limit evaporative efficiency (Gao et al., 2011). The second cooling vest is a more traditional tubed liquid cooling system with cold perfusing water, using ice bottles in a small backpack for heat exchange. The compact configuration limits the weight and power requirements, but the aforementioned disadvantages regarding vasoconstriction and evaporative impairment still remain. Both systems were worn under a firefighting coverall and compared to a control condition during 30 min treadmill walking and 10 min recovery in hot conditions. Both physiological and perceptual parameters were investigated.

@&#METHODS@&#

Nine healthy male subjects volunteered to participate in this study. Subjects had an age of 31 ± 11 years, height of 185 ± 8 cm and body mass of 85 ± 8 kg. Each subject was fully informed of the purposes, protocol, experimental procedures and any associated risks and benefits before giving their written consent to participate in all testing procedures. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of TNO (Soesterberg, The Netherlands).

In this study, two sets of cooling garment systems were tested on human subjects and compared to a control condition without cooling garment. Therefore, subjects participated in three identical experimental sessions, involving 30 min rest, 30 min treadmill walking and 10 min recovery in hot conditions (30 °C, 50% relative humidity). The cool vests were worn during the walking and recovery bouts.

In all conditions, the under layer consisted of 100% cotton underwear (underpants and T-shirt) and the outer layer was a European style firefighter's coverall (Prof Tech Ommen, 91 series, sizes L and XL, upper material Secufabs®, liner Goretex® PTFE, CE 950493). The three conditions were defined by the different middle layers:
                           
                              1
                              Control condition: no middle layer

Cool pad condition (TTRI system - made by Taiwan Textile Research Institute)

Water perfusion condition (made by Shenzhen AD Technology Co. Ltd., China)

To exclude any order effects, the experimental sessions were allocated in a maximally balanced order.

The cool pad system consisted of a light-weight vest (polyester mesh in side and body area, and PU-laminated polyester fabric in pocket area) and four nonwoven pads (350 × 115 × 7 mm in size) filled with superabsorbent polymer (acrylic resin), weighing about one kilogram in total with soaked pads. The pads were soaked in water till saturation and kept in a refrigerator (4 °C) for at least 24 h. Just before the start of the walking test, the pads were taken out of the refrigerator and inserted into the vest pockets: two at the back side and two at the front side (Fig. 1
                           ).

The water perfusion system consisted of a tubed vest, connected to a backpack with two frozen bottles in a sealed inner bag that was filled with cold tap water to the line, and a pump (Fig. 2
                           ). In total, the system weighed about four kilograms. Half an hour before the start of exercise, the frozen bottles (500 ml) were put in the inner bag to precool the water. Just before the start of the walking test, the vest and backpack were put on, connected, and the pump was activated. After the test, the bottles were taken out, the water was pulled off, and the tubes were emptied.

Before the measurement session, participants inserted a rectal probe themselves and were weighed in underpants to determine nude body mass. In addition, shoes + socks, T-shirt + heart rate strap, and coverall were weighed separately. Then the heart rate and skin temperature sensors were attached and subjects put on the under- and outer layer garment, before entering the climatic chamber.

The protocol in the climatic chamber started with 30 min of habituation to the hot conditions and firefighter suit. During this period subjects sat quietly on a chair. At the end of the habituation period in condition 2 and 3, the cooling vest was prepared, weighed and put on before subjects proceeded to the treadmill. On the treadmill subjects walked for 30 min at a speed of 6 km/h. Due to his physical fitness, one subject performed all exercise sessions at a speed of 5 km/h. Finally, subjects got 10 min of (passive) recovery before ending the measurement. The entire experimental protocol in the climatic chamber took about 70 min. Drinking was not allowed. Outside the climatic chamber, all garment and nude body mass was weighed separately again.

The measurement protocol was executed in a climatic chamber (Weiss Enet, Tiel, The Netherlands) set at 30 °C and 50% RH. Exercise was performed on a treadmill (LE 300 CE, Viasys Healthcare, San Diego, USA), set at 6 km/h. Heart rate was measured using a Polar sport tester (Polar Electro, Finland) at 5 s intervals.

Rectal temperature was measured using a rectal thermistor (Yellow Springs Instruments 400 series, Yellow Springs, OH, USA) and resistance meter (Velleman DVM 851, Gavere, Belgium). The rectal probe was inserted to a depth of 10 cm beyond the anal sphincter and the end was fixed to the lower back with tape. Samples were taken each 5 min. Skin temperature was measured at four locations (neck, right scapula, left hand and right shin) with a sample frequency of 0.1 Hz using iButtons (DS1922L, Maxim Integrated Products Inc, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). A weighted average of the four iButtons resulted in the mean skin temperature, as described by ISO9886 (2004).

Thermal sensation and humidity sensation were measured on a 9-point scale (TS from −4 = very cold to +4 = very hot; HS from −4 = extremely dry to +4 = extremely wet), while thermal comfort was established using a 5-point scale (from 0 = comfortable to 5 = extremely uncomfortable). Rating of perceived exertion was asked every 5 min during the exercise bout on a 20-point scale (Borg, 1982).

Nude body mass and mass of the separate garment items was determined on a weighing scale (Sartorius F300S, Göttingen, Germany) with resolution of one gram, directly before and after the experimental protocol. From these weighings, fluid loss and sweating efficiency could be determined.

Discrete values at each fifth minute of the experimental session were used for analysis of rectal temperature, skin temperature, thermal sensation, thermal comfort, humidity sensation and rating of perceived exertion. Regarding heart rate, an average value from 30 s before to 30 s after each fifth minute was calculated to diminish any noise influence.

Statistical analysis was performed using Statistica (version 10, StatSoft Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA) statistical software. GLM-models (ANOVA), with the independent parameters condition (control, cool pad, perfused), time (5 min values) and subject (random factor), were used to evaluate effects across the intervention period of 30–70 min. Dependent variables were heart rate, rectal temperature, skin temperature, thermal sensation, thermal comfort, humidity sensation and rating of perceived exertion.

For the analyses including three conditions, Tukey post-hoc calculations were applied. Statistical significance was set at the 5% level for each analysis. Values are reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD).

@&#RESULTS@&#

During the intervention period, heart rate gradually increased to a value between 110 and 120 beats per min (bpm), but was not significantly different between conditions (p = 0.34; Fig. 3
                     ). There was no significant interaction with time (p = 0.63) either, indicating a similar pattern of change for the different conditions.

Rectal temperature (Fig. 4
                     A) increased about 0.7 °C during the exercise period. There was neither a significant difference between conditions (p = 0.70) nor a significant interaction with time (p = 0.75). On the contrary, mean skin temperature (Fig. 4B) clearly showed both a main effect of condition (p < 0.001) and an interaction with time (p < 0.001). Post hoc analysis indicated that the mean skin temperature was significantly lower in the perfused condition than in the cool pad and control conditions at all measurement points (p < 0.001). This was mainly due to the iButton measurement at the scapula, which was located under the perfused suit. Temperatures at this location were up to 5 °C lower than in the other conditions.

The thermal sensation ratings (Fig. 5
                     A) also showed a main effect of condition (p < 0.001) and a significant interaction between condition and time (p = 0.001). Post hoc analysis revealed that the water perfused vest resulted in lower (cooler) ratings than the control condition across the whole intervention period except for 65 min. It was also considered cooler than the cool pad system during the first 10 min (at 35 and 40 min) and at the last measurement point (70 min). The cool pad vest resulted in lower (cooler) ratings than the control condition during the first 15 min of the intervention.

Neither thermal comfort (Fig. 5B; p = 0.58), nor humidity sensation (p = 0.71) or rating of perceived exertion (p = 0.42) did show any differences between conditions. Interaction effects with time were not apparent either for these parameters.

In Fig. 6
                     , the pre- and post-trial weight differences have been depicted for nude body mass and for the different garment items. Nude body mass loss was less in the water perfused vest condition (p = 0.005) than in the other conditions. However, the weight gain of the T-shirt (+ heart rate strap) was also significantly less in this condition (p < 0.001), resulting in a similar fluid evaporation for all conditions.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study evaluated the effectiveness of two cooling systems under a firefighter coverall, one using a vest with cold liquid soaked pads and the other using a liquid perfused vest. Physiological and perceptual parameters were compared to a control condition. The results show that both cooling systems directly provided a cooler thermal sensation than the control condition. For the cool pad system, this effect disappeared after about 15 min exercise. The water perfused system, which continuously reduced the mean skin temperature, had a larger effect on thermal sensation and maintained its effect throughout the trial. However, none of the systems provided a higher thermal comfort or lower thermal strain regarding heart rate and core temperature.

It is remarkable that the lower thermal sensation for the cooling systems is not translated into better comfort. It has been shown before that comfort is not only related to what people feel, but also what they appreciate (Helander and Zhang, 1997), while thermal sensation is predominantly related to skin temperature (Kato et al., 2001; Li, 2005). In our study the lowest mean skin temperature is indeed associated with the lowest thermal sensation. It may be that thermal comfort has a closer link to core temperature (Kato et al., 2001) and to performance (Teunissen et al., 2013) than thermal sensation. Further, the (dis)comfort of wearing additional garment with additional weight might also play a role.

The mean skin temperature was lower for the perfused vest only. This was mainly due to the scapula iButton, which was positioned exactly under the perfused vest. There was no iButton directly under the cool pads. If this would have been the case, a lower mean skin temperature might have been shown for this conditions as well. The local skin temperatures at the neck, hand and shin were hardly affected by both cooling interventions.

Regarding the cool pad, the subjects indicated that they liked the initial cooling, but that later in the experiment they could not feel the cooling any more. This agrees with the thermal sensation scores. Further, in some cases the pads were deformed in the pockets. A previous study using frozen gel packs instead of cold water pads successfully reduced heat strain in firefighters (Bennett et al., 1995), so it might be concluded that the cooling power of the cold water pads was too low and/or too short-lived. This is probably due to the temperature gradient and covering area being too small (Gao et al., 2010). In our study the covered area of the pads was about 0.16 m2. Next to coverage area, the cooling medium is important: while perfusing water may serve as a heat sink, the pads gradually heat up and become less effective over time.

The perfused vest did not show beneficial core temperature and heart rate effects either. However, carrying extra weight significantly increases metabolic rate (Grabowski et al., 2005), inducing a rise in heat production and possibly heart rate as well. Therefore it can be speculated that there has been a slight cooling effect that outweighed the extra physiological strain caused by carrying the cooling system. The lack of a reduction in heart rate and core temperature has been shown before in studies using ice vests and PCM vests with melting points above 10 °C (Banta and Braun, 1992; Gao et al., 2011; House et al., 2013), indicating that affecting core temperature requires substantial cooling power. Further, total body circulating liquid cooling has been reported to be more effective than torso only (Cadarette et al., 2002), as applied in this study.

The water perfused vest was related to about 40–60 g less sweat loss. Sweat loss is mainly driven by core temperature and to a lesser extent by skin temperature. The visible reduction in core temperature during the recovery period with the perfused vest, may have caused the reduction in sweat loss and the reduced weight gain of the T-shirt. However, fluid evaporation was similar for all conditions (around 300 g). Cooling vests have been shown to reduce evaporative power in athletes (Barwood et al., 2009a; Lopez et al., 2008), but in this case evaporation was probably equally limited across conditions by the firefighter coverall.

For future development of liquid-based cooling vests, it has to be noticed that using water in the space between skin and personal protective equipment may lead to increased risk for steam formation during firefighting and thus for skin burns. It has to be established if this is the case for the system under investigation.

We conclude that wearing the water perfused vest consistently improves thermal sensation, lowers skin temperature when covered by the vest, and reduces fluid loss while exercising in the heat. However, it has no effect on core temperature, heart rate, thermal comfort, rating of perceived exertion and humidity sensation. Wearing a vest with water soaked pads only provides a cooler thermal sensation during the initial phases of wearing, but to a smaller extent than the water perfused system. In that respect, the water perfused vest is preferable to the cool pad vest. However, the cooling capacity of both vests appeared poor and it remains questionable whether an improved thermal sensation and/or skin temperature alone provides significant benefits for worker safety and performance.

The project was supported by Taiwan Textile Research Institute in Taiwan, who was sponsored by the Department of Industrial Technology (DoIT), Ministry of Economic Affairs in Taiwan, to conduct this work.

The experiments conducted in this study comply with the current laws of the Netherlands.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

