@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of indoor slippers on plantar pressure and lower limb EMG activity in older women

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Walking with slippers can increase foot contact area at foot landing.


                        
                        
                           
                           Wearing slippers can redistribute pressure over the plantar of the foot.


                        
                        
                           
                           The EMG differences between the slippers and barefoot were not significant.


                        
                        
                           
                           Soft slippers with a more compliant footbed result in a higher perception of comfort.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Slippers

Plantar pressure

Electromyography

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Open-toe mule slippers are popular footwear worn at home especially by older women. However, their biomechanical effects are still poorly understood. The objective of this study is to therefore evaluate the physical properties of two typical types of open-toe mule slippers and the changes in plantar pressure and lower limb muscle activity of older women when wearing these slippers. Five walking trials have been carried out by ten healthy women. The results indicate that compared to barefoot, wearing slippers results in significant increases in the contact area of the mid-foot regions which lead to plantar pressure redistribution from metatarsal heads 2–3 and the lateral heel to the midfoot regions. However, there is no significant difference in the selected muscle activity across all conditions. The findings enhance our understanding of slipper features associated with changes in biomechanical measures thereby providing the basis of slipper designs for better foot protection and comfort.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Footwear is intended to provide comfort for wearers and offer the first line of protection to the feet. The design features and fit not only contribute to changes in the plantar pressure and dynamic balance during walking, but also influence the development of children's feet. Improper footwear has been linked to foot pain and deformity, and even risk of falls in older people (Helfand, 2003; Janisse, 1995; Menant et al., 2008). Past studies on shoe features have indicated that midsole material hardness, height of the heel collar and outer sole slip resistance are important variables that affect the balance control and postural stability during outdoor walking (Hornbrook et al., 1991; Perry et al., 2007). It is also suggested that wearing footwear that is light in weight and offers minimal support such as flip flops or sandals affects the arch development in children (Carl and Barrett, 2008; Chard et al., 2013; Choi et al., 2013). There is a lower prevalence of flat-feet and a higher rate of normal arches among habitually unshod children compared to habitually shod children (Sachithanandam and Joseph, 1995). Nevertheless, prolonged use of less supportive footwear such as thong style flip-flops that are typically constructed from a rubber template and loosely secured to the feet has been linked to heel pain and other conditions, such as overuse injuries of the tibialis anterior and toes in young adults (Chard et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013). Due to their flexible thin sole and lack of support, flip-flops also cause an altered gait and unusual stresses as compared to walking in barefoot and/or traditional closed-toe footwear (Shroyer et al., 2010).

Due to age-related deterioration of somatosensory feedback and problems with cutaneous mechanoreceptors in the sole of the feet of the elderly, postural stability tends to be affected by the hardness of the footwear sole materials as more rigid soles suggest greater postural stability. While thick and soft soles tend to better accommodate foot posture in older people, they may impair stability by reducing foot position awareness and mechanical stability, thus leading to a high risk of imbalance and falls (Menz et al., 2006; Menant et al., 2008; Qu, 2015). Inappropriate footwear can therefore cause discomfort, foot pain, tissue injury and ulceration due to high plantar pressure, which in turn, may cause gait and balance disturbances, which are predispositions of falls in older people (Mickle et al., 2010). On the other hand, footwear for the elderly must be appropriate for the location and activity being undertaken, which would assist the force transfer of the foot during the gait cycle and during stance and even accommodating foot deformities to reduce pain and discomfort (Helfand, 2003). To enhance comfort, footwear worn indoors tends to be softer and less supportive than those worn outdoors. Despite the fact that footwear can provide support for the lower extremity muscles and foot protection from injuries (Menant et al., 2008; Murley et al., 2009; Perry et al., 2007), many older people may prefer walking barefoot or in socks for comfort at the risk of a ten-fold increase in falling (Koepsell et al., 2004; Menant et al., 2008; Mickle et al., 2010). However, up to now, there has been a scarcity of scientific work which can offer solutions to older people for comfortable and safe footwear that can be worn at home. Biomechanical studies on indoor footwear of different design features compared to barefoot walking are very scarce.

As compared with thong style footwear, open-toe slip-on mule slippers (i.e. one strap across the distal-dorsal foot) are a popular type of household footwear because of their convenience and comfort, which is especially true for older women. They are primarily flat in shape and made of leather, foam rubber, textiles, plastic or leather and are loosely secured to the feet. However, their lack of fixation and rigidity fail to control heel motion and maintain postural stability. Further evaluation of footwear characteristics for older people has also indicated that due to age-related loss of muscle strength and alteration of muscle activity, inappropriate footwear which leads to increased muscle activity patterns elicits greater metabolic cost, and potentially increases the risks of fatigue and fall (Candow and Chilibeck, 2005; Hortobágyi et al., 2011; Marques et al., 2013; Mickle et al., 2010). To the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of investigation on the effects of indoor slippers on plantar pressure and lower limb muscle activity in older people. Previous studies on flip flops or sandals (Price et al., 2013, 2014) have mainly focused on gait modification and the joint range of motion in young adults. These studies have discussed lower limb muscle activity, but the influence of footwear features and material properties on muscle activity and plantar pressure has not been investigated. An understanding of the impact of footwear on plantar pressure and the lower limb muscle activity is very important in terms of the consideration of material and design of indoor slippers for older people. Hence, the purpose of this study is to evaluate the effects of two typical types of open-toe slip-on mule slippers with different material properties on plantar pressure and the lower limb muscle activity of older women when they are walking as compared to a barefoot condition.

We hypothesize that the design features of slippers and their material properties are associated with changes in plantar pressure patterns and level of muscle activity as compared to the barefoot condition during walking. Walking in slippers made of either soft or hard footbed material would yield different values of plantar pressure and muscle activity as compared with the barefoot condition. Soft footbed material with higher compressibility would allow better pressure-attenuating capability but also require higher muscle activity to maintain postural stability as compared to more rigid footbed materials.

@&#METHODS@&#

A total of ten healthy females between 60 and 67 years of age (mean: 62.85; SD: 2.81) are recruited for this study. Their body mass index (BMI) ranges from 20.41 to 28.62 kg/m2 (mean: 23.40; SD: 2.67). Their foot lengths range from 212 mm to 241 mm. A physiotherapist performed foot and gait assessments to check the feet for good foot sensitivity and normal gait. Participants with a history of major foot deformity or pain as well as neurological problems in the lower limbs were excluded. All of the participants were asked to provide written informed consent before the study.

Three experimental conditions were used, including barefoot and the donning of two types of slippers. The selected slippers are those that are commonly worn by local older women at home (Fig. 1
                        ). Both types of slippers are open-toe and secured to the feet with a strap across the dorsal forefoot. Material physical property testing was carried out on the footbed of each slipper. Their key dimensions and physical properties with specified test standards are listed in Table 1
                        .

In this study, the participants wear two types of indoor slippers with different physical characteristics in the wear trials. The participants were asked to walk at a speed that they felt was comfortable along a linoleum-covered concrete walkway that was 8-meters in length. The walking speed was measured by using an automatic timing gate that uses infrared (Brower Timing Systems, Utah, USA; 0.01 s precision) and standardized between the walking trials of each subject. The order of the three experimental conditions (barefoot, and wearing Soft and Hard Slippers) was counterbalanced to minimize potential order effects. The self-selected speed was predetermined by asking subjects to walk at their natural pace over a distance of 12 m and the duration for each trial was determined with two timing gates placed at 2 m and 10 m. The self-selected speed was calculated by dividing the distance walked (8 m) by the time to cover this distance (s). A total of 10 trials were used for the calculation of the self-selected speed of each participant. The mean walking speed was 3.35 km/h (SD: 1.5), which ranged from 2.64 to 4.39 km/h. The walking trials that exceeded 5% of the predetermined self-selected speed were rejected to minimize the effect of different walking speeds on plantar pressure (Burnfield et al., 2004). For each test condition, the participants were given a five-minute acclimatization period to walk along the pathway to adapt to the surroundings and footwear conditions, and instructed to complete 5 valid walking trials. The plantar pressure and surface electromyography (sEMG) data were simultaneously collected and the data for each subject were collected on the same day. After finishing the trial for each footwear condition, a visual analogue scale (VAS) questionnaire on their perceived comfort was immediately administered. Then the participants were given a five-minute rest with the slippers off to reduce potential muscle fatigue effects (Cram et al., 1998).

The plantar pressure was measured with an in-shoe Pedar® system (Novel GmbH, Munich, Germany) at a sampling rate of 50 Hz. This system comprises a matrix of 99 capacitance-based sensors in 2-mm thick flexible pressure-sensing insoles. A proper size of the pressure-sensing insoles was used to accommodate the different foot sizes of the participants. The barefoot condition was simulated by securing pressure-sensing insoles onto the bottom of the feet of the subject, and then they put on standard cotton socks that are 1.4-mm in thickness to secure the insoles (Bacarin et al., 2009; Burnfield et al., 2004). For the conditions in which the slippers were worn, pressure-sensing insoles were placed between the feet and slippers. The Novel Multimask software (Novel GmbH, Munich, Germany) was used to divide the plantar foot into 9 anatomical regions: the hallux, lesser toes, 1st metatarsal head (Mth1), 2nd to 3rd metatarsal heads (Mth23), 4th to 5th metatarsal heads (Mth45), medial and lateral arches, and medial and lateral heels. For each region, the data on the peak pressure (PP), pressure-time integral (PTI) and contact area were collected by the Novel program for data analysis. To exclude the effect of acceleration and deceleration during walking, the first and last two steps of each walking trial were eliminated (Arts and Bus, 2011; Bonanno et al., 2011). The average recording was used for each condition for analysis purposes.

The EMG data were collected with a video-synchronized 10-channel EMG system at a sampling rate of 2048 samples per second with 5% accuracy (Thought Technology, Ltd., Montreal, Canada). The EMG signals were passed through a zero lag 4th order Butterworth low-pass filter with a band-pass filtered at 20–500 Hz and full-wave rectified (Konrad, 2005). The root mean square was used to rectify the raw EMG signals, which were calculated for a 400-ms window. In accordance with the Surface ElectroMyoGraphy for the Non-Invasive Assessment of Muscles (SENIAM) recommendations and previous studies on footwear characteristics, the muscle activity of the following 6 muscles was recorded for only the dominant leg: rectus femoris (RF), vastus laterlis (VL), vastus medialis (VM), tibialis anterior (TA), medial gastrocnemius (MG) and lateral gastrocnemius (LG), each of which has a significant role in walking (Choi et al., 2013; Hui et al., 2007; Hermens et al., 2000; Price et al., 2013; Tsuji et al., 2012). All of the subjects are right leg dominant. This was individually determined by asking each person to kick a ball; the leg which they used is the dominant leg (Niu et al., 2011; Wikstrom et al., 2006). Electrode preparation and placement were carried out in accordance with the guidelines from the SENIAM project (Hermens et al., 2000). Bipolar Ag/AgCl surface electrode pairs with an electrode diameter of 10 mm and inter-electrode spacing of 22 mm were placed on the skin surface at the two ends that overlaid the corresponding muscle bellies, which were parallel to the muscle fibers to maximize sensitivity and selectivity, and secured with hypoallergenic tape to prevent electrode movement. The skin surface was cleaned with alcohol and shaven. Before the wear trial, each subject was instructed to perform maximum voluntary contractions (MVCs) for each muscle (Kendell et al., 2012) with a recorded time of eight seconds and repeated three times (Murley et al., 2009). After that, the walking trials under the different experimental conditions were carried out. As with the plantar pressure analysis, the EMG data of these steps was averaged to ensure reliable and relevant results for analysis. The required steps can be first determined by the time duration of the corresponding steps from the video of the EMG system and time processing system of the Pedar. The heel strike and flat foot events were then solely determined from pressure distributed at the heel and the entire plantar respectively by using the Pedar system. The gait cycle was divided into two phases: foot landing and foot take-off. Foot landing refers to the time when the heel comes into contact with the ground until the whole foot has completely landed onto the ground and flat (from heel strike to flat-foot), whilst foot take-off is defined as the time when the limb prepares to enter propulsion until it reaches the terminal swing (from flat foot to heel strike). The resultant maximum amplitudes which were expressed as a percentage were averaged under each condition and normalized to the MVCs of each subject. The average of five successful trials was then used for data analysis.

The questionnaire comprised six items with regard to perceived comfort of different footwear conditions, including softness (hard vs. soft), ease of slip (easy vs. difficult), weight (heavy vs. light), ease of walking (difficult vs. easy), comfort (least comfortable vs. most comfortable), and overall perception (bad (negative) vs. good (positive)). The participants were provided with clear explanation on the use of the VAS to rate these six items by placing a mark on a 100-mm horizontal line, in which the extreme left (0 mm) was labeled as negative performance and the extreme right (100 mm) as positive performance. Each participant had to rate different criteria after finishing 5 trials within the same condition. The final rating of each criterion was the average of the ratings of the ten participants.

All of the data were reported as a mean (SD). The data were analyzed by using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) Version 17.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). One-way repeated measure analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to assess the effects of different footwear conditions on pressure and muscle activity. Bonferroni-adjusted post hoc tests were subsequently performed to compare the measurements between each of the conditions. Furthermore, paired sample t-testing was used to determine the differences in the rating of the perceived comfort for each condition. The alpha level was set at the conventional level of 0.05. The effect size (Cohen's d) of the data was calculated to examine if they were clinically meaningful. According to the interpretation of the Cohen's effect size (d), 0.2 ≤ d < 0.5 is considered to be a ‘small’ effect size, 0.5 ≤ d < 0.8 represents a ‘medium’ effect size and ≥0.8 is a ‘large’ effect size.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The mean values (SD) of the PP, PTI and contact area are presented in Table 2
                        . Significant differences are found (p < 0.05) in the toes, Mth23, mid-foot regions and lateral heel for PP and PTI among the three experimental conditions. The results of the Bonferroni pair-wise comparison show that the use of slippers leads to reduced PP and PTI at Mth23 and the lateral heel (p < 0.05) but increased PP and PTI at the toes, medial and lateral mid-foot regions (p < 0.05) as compared with the barefoot condition. When the slippers are worn, the contact area is increased in the toes, Mth23, Mth45 and mid-foot regions in comparison to the barefoot condition, which is significant with post hoc testing (p < 0.05). There is no significant difference found between the two types of slippers in terms of the PP and PTI, and of which, the only significant difference observed between them is that the Hard slipper shows a larger contact area under Mth1 than the Soft Slipper (p < 0.05).


                        Fig. 2
                         shows the results of the normalized mean values of the maximum muscle activity for different muscles in the barefoot condition and when the two types of slippers are worn. Changes in the muscle activity between the three experimental conditions did not reach statistical significance. Nevertheless, compared to the barefoot condition, wearing slippers slightly reduces the maximum muscle activity of the VL, RF, VM and MG during landing but increases the activity of the TA. During take-off, when the slippers are worn, there is increased activity of the VL, RF, VM, TA and MG.

The paired sample t-tests indicated that there are significant differences (p < 0.05) in softness, weight, comfort and overall perception between the Soft and Hard Slippers (Fig. 3
                        ). In general, most of the subjects (80%) prefer the Soft Slipper, which is softer, lighter and more comfortable than the Hard Slipper. The overall perception of the Soft Slipper (score = 8.7) is that it is better than the Hard Slipper (score = 5.5).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Inappropriate footwear has been identified to contribute up to 45% of falls (Gabell et al., 1985), whilst walking barefoot or in socks also increases the risk of falls. Up to now, there has been a paucity of scientific work which provides information on slipper safety for older people. In terms of traditional closed-toe footwear and insole interventions with adequate fixation but for outdoor activities, there is much room for improvement, especially in terms of footwear worn at home. The purpose of this study is to therefore examine the impact of indoor slippers with different physical properties on the distribution of plantar pressure and muscle activity in older women during walking. Our findings are in line with our hypothesis that in comparison to the barefoot condition, there are considerable changes in plantar pressure distribution when slippers are worn, which may be associated with the increased contact area of the foot-slipper interface. However, there is no significant difference in the EMG patterns across the three experimental conditions in landing and take-off. No significant differences were found between the Soft and Hard footbed materials on the redistribution of plantar pressure and activity reduction of the thigh muscle studied.

Footwear has a protective role as they absorb ground impacts. Compared to barefoot walking, the donning of slippers results in a significant increase in the PP, PTI and contact area at the medial mid-foot. Since the contact area of the foot-slipper interface is increased, pressure loading at the hallux, metatarsal heads and heel can be reduced and redistributed to the mid-foot region so as to relieve tissue loading. In considering the footbed material, even though the Soft Slipper which has a softer sole material and higher compressibility may have a higher reduction in PP under the metatarsal heads and medial heel as opposed to the Hard Slipper, the reduction of the plantar pressure throughout all of the underfoot regions between the two types of slippers is not significant. On the other hand, the slip-on design of both types of slippers increases both the PP and PTI at the toes by around two-folds as compared to the barefoot condition. Similar to the thong style flip flops, the dorsal strap across the forefoot fails to secure the slippers to the feet due to lack of fixation at the heel counter so that the wearers tend to claw their toes for grip during walking (Chard et al., 2013; Price et al., 2014). Between the two types of slippers, the Hard Slipper creates higher PP and PTI at the lesser toe regions in comparison to the Soft Slipper. Since the former (212.4 g) is substantially heavier than the latter (61.6 g), the wearers might have increased the gripping of their lesser toes to sustain the slippers onto their feet.

Even though no statistical difference is found in the EMG result, the current study shows that wearing slippers tends to produce a minor reduction in the maximum muscle activity of the VL, RF and VM during foot landing. This result is consistent with that of Stockton and Dyson (1998), who found that footwear can reduce the lower limb muscle activity of the VL, RF and VM as compared to the barefoot condition during running. Although there is no significant difference between the two types of slippers, the Hard Slipper which is heavier in weight and has a rigid footbed contributes to larger reductions in the thigh muscle activities (VF, RF and VM) during foot landing as opposed to the Soft Slipper. This appears to be the result of the harder footbed material which allows better mechanical support when the foot starts to impact the ground. This finding is consistent with earlier works on traditional footwear and insole intervention which reported that rigid insoles can improve muscular contributions for ankle joint stability (Losa Iglesias et al., 2012; Qu, 2015). However, the attempt of the wearers in this study to grip the slippers by using the toe flexor muscles and prevent slip-off due to the absence of a heel counter during the heel strike resulted in higher muscle activity of the TA. Interestingly, an increase in the maximum muscle activity of the LG was observed only with the Hard Slipper which has less resistance to longitudinal bending of the forefoot or the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint during landing. It is speculated that the subjects experienced an increasing range of motion of the MTP joint due to the low longitudinal bending stiffness of the Hard Slipper which in turn affected the activity and force-producing capabilities of the gastrocnemius muscle (Roy and Stefanyshyn, 2006; Kawakami et al., 1998).

There is no statistical effect found across the three experimental conditions during foot take-off. Wearing slippers only contributes to a subtle increase of the thigh and leg muscle activities (except for the LG), which may be associated with the instability when the slippers are worn since the fore part of the feet requires muscle activity for control (Price et al., 2013). The unrestrictive nature of the slippers requires more dorsiflexion in the swing phase to sustain the slippers onto the feet as a heel counter is absent (Price et al., 2014). Heavy and rigid footbed material with low bending stiffness (Hard Slipper) may also be associated with the increased thigh and leg muscle activities during foot take-off, because greater muscle activity is required to secure the foot inside the slipper and prevent the foot from slipping out, as compared with the Soft Slipper. Only the maximum muscle activity of the LG decreases with slipper wearing. Previous studies have shown that changing the foot position influences the degree of activity of the MG and LG (Riemann et al., 2011). Heel raises with external rotation cause the force to shift medially and contribute to greater MG activation, while internal rotation leads to lateral shifts in the force and results in greater LG activation. It is likely that when the subjects were wearing the slippers, they experienced external rotation during heel raises when pushing off, and therefore there is higher activity observed of the MG as opposed to the LG.

To the best of the knowledge of the authors, there are no comparable data published in terms of mule slippers. The present findings are in line with previous related research that have examined Fitflops (a type of toning shoe) and reported no significant differences between muscle activity when walking in the Fitflops compared to a barefoot condition (Burgess and Swinton, 2012). It is postulated that slipper features do not provide a large enough stimulus to induce changes in the muscle patterns in the older population who have lower proprioceptive ability (Fujiwara et al., 2007). The EMG findings provide a better understanding of the association between the slippers (their features and footbed properties) and the lower limb muscle activity patterns of older people. Studies on footwear for the elderly have indicated the importance of appropriate footwear for enhancing foot protection in which rigid soles are suggested to improve postural stability. However, slippers worn by older people that are inadequately designed with excessively soft soles, lack of fixation and flexible heel counter not only fail to control heel motions, but also increase muscle efforts and impair stability. Even though the statistical analysis did not reveal any significant differences (p > 0.05) between the Hard and Soft Slippers or the Slippers and the barefoot condition, the results of the current study demonstrate the changes in the patterns of thigh muscle activity in response to slippers with different weight and footbed hardness. Through this study, it can be found that wearing slippers may lower thigh muscle activity at foot landing. On the other hand, wearing slippers especially those with heavy mass may add burden to the thigh muscle during take-off which will lead to an increase in muscle activity. Hence, the EMG study here will be useful for future studies of interest in this area to design and develop slippers with the selection of the most desirable fabrication materials for better foot protection and comfort of older people. The patterns of change in muscle activity at different phases could be worthy of exploration and discussion so as to gain a better understanding of the mechanism of wearing slippers in association with walking.

Shoe comfort is influenced by shoe design characteristics, such as sole hardness, bending stiffness and weight (Miller et al., 2000). In general, the subjects prefer soft and light over hard and heavy materials. Also, they prefer comfortable footwear that does not easily slip off and allows them to walk with ease.

This preliminary study has some primary limitations, including the stiffness of the footbed, “toe clawing” caused by the foot strap, and weight of the shoe which may have greatly influenced the gait biomechanics. A dorsal strap design across the forefoot may also alter the pressure load at the toes and reduce slipping of the slippers off the feet during foot take-off. A future study could use carefully designed slippers to test for the effects of changing the weight and stiffness in a 2 × 2 factorial design protocol. In addition, the number of subjects is relatively small and therefore might have limited the generalizability of the results. Nonetheless, the study provides preliminary evidence that wearing slippers at home can reduce plantar pressure and muscle activation during foot landing, thereby providing the basis for future studies to develop and design indoor slippers for older adults. Moreover, the participants in the current study are of Asian origin between 60 and 67 years of age, and thus the results may only be valid for this group of Asian older women. Future research should consider a wider age range and include older men as part of the sample population. It is also noted that the results of this study may not be representative of all walking circumstances. Postural transitions with more complex movements of the feet and activities such as sit-to-walk and changes in walking directions can be included in future investigations.

In conclusion, the results from this study indicate that older adults tend to produce different plantar pressure distributions when walking in slippers and in their bare feet. Wearing slippers result in redistribution in pressure loading and changes in the contact area. Nevertheless, the corresponding differences in pressure loading between the soft and hard slippers are not significant. Wearing slippers only contributes to a subtle increase of the individual thigh and leg muscle activity, and the differences are all non-significant across the three experimental conditions. These findings can therefore enhance our understanding of slipper features that are associated with changes in plantar pressure and muscle activity in older women, and provide the basis for indoor slipper designs which would allow for better foot protection and comfort, and reduce tissue injury and muscle activity in older people.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

We would like to thank the Research Committee Internal Grant (PolyU G-YBD1) and Departmental General Research Grant of Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University for funding this research project (PolyU G-UA1X).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

