@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Safety challenges of medical equipment in nurse anaesthetist training in Haiti

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Performance obstacles of nurse anaesthetists in training in Haiti are described.


                        
                        
                           
                           Various environment-related problems hinder safety of use of medical equipment.


                        
                        
                           
                           Coping strategies are a key characteristic of practice in low-resource settings.


                        
                        
                           
                           Using a systems approach is relevant in technology transfer.


                        
                        
                           
                           Human Factors research in low-resource settings requires adjusted methods.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Human factors and ergonomics

Medical equipment

Low-income countries

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Safety challenges related to the use of medical equipment were investigated during the training of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti, using a systems approach to Human Factors and Ergonomics (HFE). The Observable Performance Obstacles tool, based on the Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) model, was used in combination with exploratory observations during 13 surgical procedures, to identify performance obstacles created by the systemic interrelationships of medical equipment. The identification of performance obstacles is an effective way to study the accumulation of latent factors and risk hazards, and understand its implications in practice and behaviour of healthcare practitioners. In total, 123 performance obstacles were identified, of which the majority was related to environmental and organizational aspects. These findings show how the performance of nurse anaesthetists and their relation to medical equipment is continuously affected by more than user-related aspects. The contribution of systemic performance obstacles and coping strategies to enrich system design interventions and improve healthcare system is highlighted. In addition, methodological challenges of HFE research in low-resource settings related to professional culture and habits, and the potential of community ergonomics as a problem-managing approach are described.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The value of using Human Factors and Ergonomics (HFE) to study medical environments is well described in literature (Carayon, 2007). The HFE discipline is an expanding field in healthcare and has contributed significantly to a holistic understanding of user-medical device relationships and interventions, related to medical infrastructure and services. HFE is divided into subdomains that focus on different scales of the interface between people and other elements of the healthcare system. Macroergonomics is the subdomain focused on the overall work system at an organization scale (Carayon et al., 2013). The aim of macroergonomics models of healthcare quality is to integrate the entire system of an organization, guiding its integral analysis and redesign. The Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) model, complemented in this study, defines healthcare services composed of a work structure and care processes (Carayon et al., 2014). The work structure is a system of interrelated elements that influence each other and that are complementary for the safe functioning of the entire system (Rasmussen, 1997; Vincent et al., 2004). The arrangement of system elements can be either hierarchical or functional, but generally includes the following elements: Organization; Environment (physical and external); Tasks; Individual/Team; and Tools/Technology (Carayon, 2007; Rasmussen, 1997). These elements are involved in dynamic and non-linear care processes and their combination results in determined outcomes for patients and the healthcare institution.

Sensitization and understanding of these system elements and their relationship is of particular importance to obtain a safety culture and manage the quality of healthcare provision (Vincent et al., 2004). A safety culture - or context - in healthcare promotes the continuous reduction and prevention of risks and medical incidents that result in patient harm and can have profound impact on the outcome of healthcare (Mitchell, 2008; Group of WHO Patient Safety, 2009). Medical incidents result from a sequence of associated failures in different system elements and care processes, and often lead practitioners or technicians to error (Reason, Jun. 2000; Vincent, 2004; Mahajan, Jul. 2010). Therefore, many efforts are made to understand and breakdown the systemic reasons behind medical incidents (Spath, 2011).

The identification of performance obstacles is an effective way to study the accumulation of latent factors and risk hazards and to understand its implications in practice and in the behaviour of healthcare practitioners (Carayon et al., 2014). Similar to what Tucker and Edmondson (2003) call a “problem”, performance obstacles are factors related to the work structure of healthcare practitioners that disturb the execution of particular activities or tasks (affecting to a certain degree time, comfort or result), leading to a deviation from the safety standards (Carayon et al., 2014). Investigating performance obstacles is a proactive way to look at healthcare safety since it allows getting a rich understanding of the accumulating causes, not only of accidents but also of decreased quality of working life of healthcare practitioners (Gurses and Carayon, 2007; Holden et al., 2012). These performance obstacles are associated with either system limitations or incompatibilities (e.g. infrastructure, staff, and management) or with problem-solving mechanisms triggered by the impediment of treating patients and complying with the standards in the first place. Problem-solving mechanisms are named coping strategies in HFE literature and can include safety violations and workarounds (Carayon et al., 2014).

Healthcare provision is not homogeneous worldwide. Low-income countries are generally characterized by an uneven distribution of quality of healthcare services (public versus private, urban versus rural) and the prevalence of low-resource settings. These characteristics make healthcare management more complex and challenging. In low-resource settings, both healthcare structure and care processes are typically characterized by significant shortcomings, or functioning gaps, that result in worse healthcare outcomes and in a higher chance for medical incidents to occur.

The concept (theory and practice) of Community Ergonomics (CE) stems from the macroergonomics subdomain, and extends the application of HFE theories to complex societal systems (Taveira and Smith, 1997; Smith et al., 2002). CE focuses on distressed community settings where certain groups of people have disadvantaged access to resources and participation in their surrounding (societal) environment, for example due to inequities created by power hierarchies or social rules. CE offers a people-centred design approach of community–environment interfaces, bringing contextual relevant aspects to the integrated design of community (capabilities) and environment as a whole. Although it was not specifically formulated for healthcare in low-resource settings, its application is rather flexible to accommodate the uncertainty and unpredictability, inherent of such distressed settings. Fig. 1
                         illustrates the relation between the HFE domains, models and tools referred in this introduction. Given the potential offered by CE to address macroergonomic problems, the approach will be further discussed in Section 5.5.

Haiti offers an interesting opportunity to study healthcare safety due to the prevailing poverty and socio-economic challenges that impact the healthcare system. Haiti has a long history of conflict and natural catastrophes and ranks as the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere and one of the 15 most susceptible countries to the impact of a natural disaster in the world (Guly, 2004; World Risk Index, 2011; United Nations Development Programme, 2014). After a devastating earthquake in 2010 and the following cholera outbreak, recovery is slow. Until today the main public hospital in the capital of Port-Au-Prince has not been rebuilt and there is limited information regarding existing healthcare infrastructure. Generally, the access of the population to healthcare is low due to a combination of financial affordability, remoteness, lack of functional services and cultural aspects (Guly, 2004).

The gaps in both healthcare structure and care processes in Haiti affect anaesthesia outcomes negatively. Regarding the healthcare structure in Haiti (i.e. expertize, tasks, technology, environment and organization) there is a large shortage of experienced medical staff. The existing staff is disproportionally concentrated in healthcare facilities in the Port-Au-Prince metropolitan area (United Nations Development Programme, 2014; Pan American Health Organization, 2012) resulting in a strong dependency of rural hospitals on the presence and donations of numerous international aid organizations. This contributes to a lack of standardization and reliability regarding skills and techniques (e.g. frequent exchange of visiting staff, short working week), but also of medical equipment and drugs (e.g. differing drug concentrations, recurrent supply shortages). Gaps in infrastructure include insufficient facilities and accessibility and lack of diagnostic and therapeutic means, or even basic resources (e.g. fuel, telephone). The distinction between care processes, such as emergency and elective cases is in the given context, largely undefined due to, for example, delays in seeking care. The lack of coordination resources also contribute to an uncertain planning, record-keeping and follow-up of medical procedures.

HFE show that innate human factors influence work performance on a daily base and that the most effective way to overcome this potentially negative influence is to systemically minimize the chances of human error to occur, through the design of user-friendly, fail-safe medical devices, implementation of standard operating procedures and improvement of workspace layout (Shah and Alshawi, 2010; Martin et al., Jan. 2012; Buckle et al., 2006). In HFE, medical devices and supplementary medical equipment make up the ‘Technology’ system element. The study of technology in healthcare is important, because medical equipment have become essential in modern healthcare for the diagnosis, treatment, monitoring and follow-up of patients (European Commision, 1994). Furthermore, studying medical equipment is an effective vehicle to evaluate the performance of a system, especially if the interrelationship of micro- and macro-ergonomic aspects are considered (e.g. infrastructure, maintenance and supply inventorization) (Mittermeyer et al., 2011; Liem and Brangier, 2012). However, the application of HFE in healthcare in low-resource settings has been rather poorly explored (O'Neill, Dec. 2000; Shahnavaz, 2009; World Health Organization, 2010). In low-resource settings, the reliance on donated medical equipment of various origins is one of the factors determining the extent to which care is delivered. There is evidence that ergonomic guidelines are not followed in this context and that a large amount of donated medical equipment is not functioning. Studies are lacking that focus on the safety of the remaining functional medical equipment (World Health Organization, 2010; Dzwonczyk and Riha, Apr. 2012; Rice et al., Dec. 2010).

This study focuses on understanding the safety contexts of human interaction with medical equipment in low-resource settings from an HFE perspective. The aim is to identify concrete safety challenges of medical equipment use, by identifying performance obstacles related to medical equipment during the training of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti.

This study is a follow-up of a study about the dynamics of medical emergencies (Santos et al., 2013). This case study was conducted in the hospital L’Hôpital Bon Sauveur in Cange (HBSC), Haiti during a training program of nurse anaesthetists (Rosseel et al., 2009). This hospital is administered by the Haitian subsidiary organization of Partners in Health in collaboration with the Haitian Ministry of Health Care (MOH). The training program was organized in cooperation with Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF).

HBSC though being a peripheral hospital situated in a remote area, has built a high reputation and has well known and attended surgical and obstetrical services (Ivers et al., Apr. 2008). The hospital has offered surgery since 1993 and has seen a fast increase in number and variety of surgical procedures. At present, the surgical service of HBSC has been transferred to the new Hôpital Universitaire de Mirebalais in a small village, half way between Cange and Port-Au-Prince, also administered by Partners in Health and MOH. At the time of this study approximately 50–70 surgical cases were performed each month, with a variety of cases, with hernial repairs and caesarean sections being the most frequent. There were two operating complexes, one for general surgery, incorporating two operating rooms (OR) and another separate OR in the maternity ward building. There was no recovery room or Intensive Care Unit. The hospital's infrastructure included inpatient wards, an outpatient clinic, an infectious disease unit and complementary services (e.g. women's health, dental, radiology and ophthalmology clinics, laboratories, pharmacies and a blood bank).

In Haiti there is a shortage of midwives, intensive care nurses and nurse anaesthetists (Hoyler et al., 2013). A universally accepted solution for the severe lack of specialized staff, in particular in rural settings, is task shifting. In task shifting nurses from varying background are trained to substitute anaesthesiologists (Rosseel et al., 2009; Ivers et al., Apr. 2008). While the official training program of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti was not functional anymore MSF implemented a comparable training program because of (local) staff shortage. And although training is often performed by international aid organizations, it is not their core task and therefore their training programs do not necessarily comply with international standards. The aim of the nurse anaesthetists training program by MSF (performed in HBSC) was to select and train registered nurses to become nurse anaesthetists capable of practicing autonomous anaesthesia without the regular presence of anaesthesiologists. Seven training cycles of 18 months each were held between 1999 and 2012 and 40 nurse anaesthetists have been successfully trained by a full time expatriate anaesthesiologist. Each training comprised of theoretical and practical training in pre-, per- and post-operative anaesthesia care, including handling medical equipment and aspects of quality control and teamwork. During the seventh training program, at the time of this study, a total of 238 procedures involving different types of anaesthesia were administered by 11 nurse anaesthetists.

Given the exploratory nature of this case study, and in order to get a rich understanding of the performance context in real settings, a qualitative approach was used. The SEIPS model was chosen amongst several tools available from the HFE toolbox that could be suitable to this purpose (e.g. contextual inquiry, event tree analysis, walkthrough or cognitive task/work analysis, timeline or critical path analysis) (Stanton et al., 2005; Cacciabue, 2004). The SEIPS model was chosen because of its flexibility to be used as a tool and as a framework, because it is a thoroughly validated tool and because of its distinct visual simplicity (Gurses and Carayon, 2007; Carayon et al., Dec. 2006; Holden et al., 2013). As such, the SEIPS model allowed 1) a practical application to guide observations and interviews as well as structuring the data analysis, 2) acknowledging the dynamics of the system rather than a time-based or retrospective approach and 3) communication with participant healthcare practitioners.

So a tool called Observable Performance Obstacles (OPO) was developed to systematise the collection and analysis of information about the systemic relations of medical equipment (Fig. 2
                        a). The OPO tool is a complementation to the SEIPS (Fig. 1) focussing exclusively on the technical subsystem (Technology and Tools) and the respective relations with the elements of the work structure (Person, Task, Environment, and Organization) (Carayon et al., 2014). According to the suggestion of Waterson (2009) to research cross level relationships in HFE, the exclusive focus on the technical subsystem should contribute to enrich the understanding of the healthcare system. In addition, the principle behind the Input-Transformation-Output model (Karsh et al., 2006) was used to categorize the ways in which the performance of healthcare practitioners is affected by the relations of medical equipment with the system elements during the process of care.

The categories of performance obstacles in the OPO tool are amenable to be addressed by ergonomists and designers, because they relate to needs and capabilities of users, providing information about medical equipment embedded in activity rather than in isolated functions. Observation logs, photographic records or surveys may be used to collect information. Fig. 2b illustrates the used format for data collection, derived from the original OPO tool (Fig. 2a). The OPO categories were iteratively defined after a previous case study (Santos et al., 2013) where the OPO tool was used and discussed with participant experts. The definitions of the OPO categories were further revised by the first two authors until consensus was reached. During its use, the OPO tool is useful to provide a clear and effective way of communicating the research purpose and process. In the previous case study, “Improvisation” has been discussed in the authors' earlier study as a mechanism of problem-solving in which temporary solutions are created to work around a problem (e.g. insufficiency of medical supplies or poor condition of medical equipment) and are systematically adopted by healthcare practitioners and the organization (Gosbee, 2002; Tucker and Edmondson, 2003; Spiess et al., 2014). In this paper, coping strategies and improvisations are discussed separately from performance obstacles and some modifications of the tool are introduced.

The study was performed over a period of six days and consisted of observations and photographic recordings during evaluation sessions in the ORs. Three consecutive days were dedicated to observations of surgical procedures in which different nurses were shadowed in their activities. The observations, made by the first author, included the activities occurring during a full day in the OR (i.e. defined by the time the patient is in the room) and excluded the remaining activities (i.e. call of patients and assistance in recovery room).

Data collection focused on identifying the origin of performance obstacles (as defined in Section 1.1) occurring in the independent relations of the elements user, task, environment and organization, with medical equipment. Systemic relations not including medical equipment were excluded, such as organization-task or user-environment relations. Furthermore, context variables, such as type of procedures, type of anaesthesia, the number and type of devices per procedure, the age and experience of the nurse and the number of team members were not retrieved and are only mentioned if relevant for the description of a performance obstacle.

Authorization was required by both MSF and Partners in Health in which the ethical aspects of the research and visit were clarified and approved. A human ethics approval was not requested since no patient or staff information were recorded and patients remained anonymous. Furthermore, inquired nurses or other professionals were asked permission for inquiry and observation. In case of disagreement, they could refuse answering or participating in the study.

Data analysis was targeted at the categories of the performance obstacles from the OPO tool. The tool has been iteratively designed and was subjected to some modifications (Table 1
                           ) since the previous study (Santos et al., 2013).

A distinction between procedure-specific and general OPOs was made. Procedure-specific OPOs include issues that were identified once during a specific procedure and general OPOs include issues that were identified more than twice or reflect therefore a common practice in the hospital. The final OPO tool is depicted in Fig. 2a and b and a full description of the OPOs can be found in Table of Observable Performance Obstacles (Appendix A). The OPOs registered in observation logs and photographic records were categorized according to the existing table of OPOs using a coding technique (Saldaña, 2013). Each OPO was coded in the most prominent category. In case of diverging opinions regarding the association of OPOs to different work system elements, the definitions of each category and code were reviewed by the first two authors and the options were discussed until consensus was reached. All categorizations were reviewed and approved by all authors.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results revealed several OPOs that characterize the dynamic and challenging working conditions of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti. In total, 13 surgical procedures were observed (Table 2
                     ). A table of OPOs was generated from the observation logs and photographic records. These were coded and quantified in 14 different categories (see Table of Observable Performance Obstacles – Appendix A). In total, 123 OPOs were included. Fig. 4a–h
                      illustrates examples of identified OPOs.

Of the total 123 OPOs, the most frequently experienced were related to relations of the medical equipment with the work structure elements Environment (n = 59/123; 48%) and Organization (n = 31/123; 25%) (Fig. 3a). Within the environment-related OPOs, 25/59; 42% (n = 25/123; 20.3% of the total OPOs) were related to the category “Avoidance” which defines incidents, such as falls, collisions or entanglements. 17/59; 28.8% OPOs (n = 17/123; 14% of the total OPOs) were related to inadequate “Positioning” of medical equipment and 17/59; 28.8% OPOs (n = 17/123; 14% of the total OPOs) to “Infrastructure” limitations. Within the organization-related OPOs, 13/31; 41.9% (n = 13/123; 10.5% of the total OPOs) were related to a poor, old or deteriorated condition of medical equipment, 9/31; 29% (n = 9/123; 7% of the total OPOs) were related to unavailability of medical equipment which resulted in sharing medical equipment or adapting domestic solutions for its replacement. 5/31; 16.1% (n = 5/123; 4% of the total OPOs) and 4/31; 12.9% (n = 4/123; 3% of the total OPOs) were related to hygiene practices and lack of designated storage location respectively.

Of all the reported OPOs, 67 were procedure-specific (54%) and most of these (n = 39/67; 58.2%) were related to Environment (n = 39/123; 32% of the total OPOs). The distribution of performance-specific OPOs in Fig. 3b shows how environment-related OPOs are equally distributed across the type of procedures. Of the 56 remaining general OPOs (46%), 26; 46.4% were mainly related to Organization (21% of the total OPOs). The OPOs with least expression were related to unfamiliarity with medical equipment (n = 1; user-related OPO), multiple users (n = 3) and intensity of activity (n = 3) (both task-related OPOs).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study shows there are different ways how work dynamics affect the performance of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti. The identified OPOs demonstrate a strong relation between human factors, tasks and available equipment that might potentially contribute to the occurrence of life-threatening medical incidents by delaying a procedure, diverting attention, introducing errors or worsening work conditions (Santos et al., 2014). The authors consider the context described in this study also illustrative for other hospitals in low-resource settings.

Similar to the results of the previous study, environment-related OPOs were the most frequently experienced (n = 59; 48%). Environment-related OPOs include equally relevant aspects like limited infrastructure (e.g. insufficient electric sockets or power loss occurrences) and dynamic organization of equipment in space (e.g. improper arrangement). These characteristics are expected to be comparable to other hospitals in low-resource settings since facilities are often not specifically designed to function as ORs. In addition, training settings imply the presence of additional people (i.e. supervisors, trainees). This, besides resulting in crowded small spaces, increases the chance of stumbles, falls or uncoordinated disposition of medical equipment. Also, the presence of idle equipment in the workspace forces nurses into inadequate body postures and causes delays. Nurses arrange medical equipment in space mostly as a consequence of the dynamics of their activity. The lack of appropriate infrastructure leads to using medical equipment as e.g. an instrument table or arm rest for the patient. Mobile lamps or vacuum devices are arranged across the room according to the availability of electric sockets which means cables will block or endanger the movement of nurses. Furthermore, this misplacement, sometimes intended to facilitate sharing equipment between ORs, clearly puts hygiene and safety at stake (e.g. nurse crossing sterile area to use trash bin; glove package containing used needles on the floor). Due to the unequal number of procedures in each OR in this study (Table 2), it is not possible to identify a systematic difference between the types of procedures.

The second most frequent experienced OPO's were organization-related (n = 31; 25%) and included hospital management and logistic limitations. Amongst these, the condition of medical equipment was the most frequently observed problem. The use of old or domestic equipment does not necessarily impede, but limits nurses' performance and comfort. Some medical equipment is not used because it is noisy (i.e. air compressor) or it is deprived of some functions (i.e. malfunctioning air conditioning). Other organization-related issues include the lack of clear hygiene policies and of allocated storage place outside the OR. Several types of donated supplies exist in surplus (e.g. surgical drapes) while others (e.g. batteries; oxygen stock) are lacking.

Studies in anaesthesia proved that medical equipment related incidents are more severe when related to human factors (i.e. inappropriate use, poor maintenance and use of obsolete devices) than to medical equipment failure (Donaldson et al., 2014; Beydon et al., 2010). The results of this study demonstrate that medical equipment relates with medical practice in a variety of ways that contribute to increased chances of medical incidents. The results also help to understand the order of performance obstacles that may contribute to human error and provide evidence for a fundamental role of often overlooked environmental and organizational factors in safety of healthcare (Hoff et al., 2004).

In the context of healthcare quality and safety, work-arounds and safety violations are coping strategies defined as “deliberate acts (from patients or healthcare practitioners) that deviate from (or break) rules and standards” (2 p.15), policies or established protocols of practice in response to the latent misfit of macroergonomic problematic factors and bad work system design. As mentioned earlier, improvisation is a form of problem-solving, similar to a workaround, resulting in equipment-related solutions that are eventually adopted by healthcare practitioners as common practice. These “practical solutions”, such as the use of alternative equipment to compensate for unavailability or the repeated use of equipment as a table (Fig. 5a–c) are adopted because they may address these problems effectively and timely.

Unlike errors in healthcare, few studies describe task-disrupting problems, performance obstacles and problem-solving behaviour (Gurses and Carayon, 2007), (Spiess et al., 2014). Nonetheless, these issues offer evidence about system malfunctioning. This implies that problem-solving behaviour must be acknowledged and taken into account when addressing safety in low-resource settings. Another coping mechanism related to infrastructure limitations, is the need to provide and coach nurse anaesthetists with knowledge, complementary to training skills. In contrary to skills (i.e. ability to carry out planned action steps), knowledge (i.e. underlying understanding of action) is key to be able to find solutions when equipment malfunctions. This problem-solving behaviour reflects the compromise between not treating a patient or treating a patient with increased risk and an uncertain degree of safety or comfort.

The compromise between the advantages of coping strategies and their associated risks for patients, healthcare practitioners and institutions, usually protected by standards, raises important opportunities for future research regarding the balance between a highly regulated and a resilient practice (Dekker et al., 2012). In the future such HFE research has the potential to contribute both to the fields of design and policymaking.
                     

This study has both practical and technical limitations. First, the characteristics of a training setting, such as the imposed administration of one type of anaesthesia over another for educational purposes, the concentration of nurses in the workplace and the pressuring presence of an evaluator limit the number of observable procedures and the generalization of this study. Nonetheless, it is relevant as the training setting is a common practice of aid organizations working in low-resource settings. Possible solutions to overcome this would be to involve local researchers or nurses to create a sense of ownership of the research or, integrating such a study into the training program. Second, the study is hampered by technical limitations. The frequency of recurrent performance obstacles was not quantified but it is important to assess the risk associated with each performance obstacle. Further, context variables were not considered critical for the identification of the origin of performance obstacles, they are meaningful to be retrieved and investigated in future research in order to measure and quantify the OPOs in terms of variance per procedure and per location. Finally, the coding of OPOs as listed in the Table of Observable Performance Obstacles (Appendix A) are subject to interpretation regarding their association to the different work system elements, despite the descriptiveness of the categories. This can derive from the fact that the OPO categories were created from a design engineering perspective. Nonetheless, validity efforts were made by testing two iterative cycles with feedback from participant experts and discussion amongst the authors (see Section 3.2). These reliability limitations should be addressed in future research on the use of the OPO tool. Case studies offer a good opportunity to study the applicability and validity of the OPO tool because they focus on in-depth insights of practice and therefore, on the differences between use settings, which are particularly relevant in emergency settings. Furthermore, possible improvements to the research design include introducing video recording or assigning more observers with a different focus. This would lead to the possibility to introduce multiple layers to the study which would facilitate the analysis of a dynamic setting. Additional layers of this study could include e.g. different room configurations and mapping of existing infrastructure using technology assessment and surveillance tools (Polisena et al., 2014; Markin et al., 2014; World Health Organization, 2006). In addition, the optimization of the OPO tool could benefit from a stronger association with the SEIPS model during its use, and an evaluation of its distinct value in comparison with other tools available within the HFE toolbox. Focused and individual interviews with the nurses would offer a chance to exchange feedback regarding the research design and results.

Several authors suggest that additional skills and considerations are needed to perform HFE research in low-resource settings. During this study some challenges were identified, which contribute to the literature of HFE (O'Neill, Dec. 2000; Dul et al., Apr. 2012).

There is, in the perception of nurse anaesthetists, a large gap between the perception of problems or safety threats, and the occurrence of an accident. This leads the nurses to oppose to the existence of problems if no accident occurred. “Was there a problem with the oxygen? No, there was not, why refer to it?” (nurse anaesthetist reaction to the author's observation). In the same manner, the nurses were reluctant to answer when asked about comfort. This affects not only the nurse–observer relation but also the reliability on the results. Language can be an additional barrier due to a perceived power distance, common in humanitarian work. “Not even my creole (local language) will help to convince him (the local biomedical technician) that we need an honest answer” (visiting surgeon). The unawareness or rejection of the need for change might be caused by 1) absence of reference standards, 2) job security (Johnson et al., 2007) and 3) fatigue of trying to change “It's the organization you need to convince regarding change ideas, most people give up insisting and cope” (visiting surgeon). It is important for a researcher to consider the “invisible rules” by which practitioners guide themselves to bypass problems.

An open and clear relation about culture is needed in order to avoid incorrect findings (Gurr et al., 1998; Hofstede, 2001). Although there is value in HFE as an external point of view and guidance of policies and standards, in this context “ergonomic guidelines or standards might exist but that does not mean they are used” (training supervisor). The difficulty in following safety policies, is an indication of a lack of appropriate quality indicators in this setting. The observer is susceptible to bias not only in technical but also in cultural aspects. Examples include reluctance to dialogue in multicultural teams or differing practices towards hygiene. Healthcare-related research also requires attention to ethics and protection of both patient and practitioner. This is particularly relevant in training settings given the implicit additional pressure amongst trainees. These aspects are common in humanitarian work and offer opportunities for future research. Additional time should be considered for the researcher to accustom with the surroundings and engage with the subjects being studied, creating a shared awareness of problems (Coelho, 2012).

The HFE approach states that safe healthcare implies compliance with minimal requirements regarding infrastructure, expertise, effective communication, and standardized practices. This study shows a vast number of challenges at different levels of healthcare provision. Some of the challenges identified in this study are comparable to challenges occurring in hospitals in highly developed countries (e.g. Germany) (Matern and Koneczny, 2007). Others however, relate to characteristics of low-resource and humanitarian aid settings where safety standards are seldom applicable and problems are worked around. Many low-resource settings, comparable to Cange in Haiti, depend on international aid organizations and foreign missionary groups for much of the healthcare infrastructure, services (in the form of training or complementary and specialized services). Given this important role of aid organizations, there is much room for improvement regarding healthcare safety.

The earlier mentioned concept of Community Ergonomics (CE) is an interesting approach to look at the work settings of humanitarian organizations as it could help to refocus aid interventions to address the high incidence of environment- and organization-related OPOs (results from Section 5.1). The concept of CE has also been applied in the international cooperation context for development and trade, where corporations transfer technology to low-income countries (Derjani-Bayeh and Smith, 2000). In this application of the CE approach, businesses should be redesigned to fit local multicultural dynamics as a key condition for the “survivability, acceptability and long-term success of the corporation”. Although aid organizations often share similar challenges with corporations, and amongst themselves, they work and manage their quality differently (Hilhorst, Sep. 2002). Besides that, there is a certain degree of unpredictability inherent in their work regarding budget, type and length of assistance (short-term emergencies or long-term development). Budget and mandate restrictions inhibit a more structural approach that goes beyond mere replacement of absent or insufficient services and aims at building a sound and resilient healthcare system. The compliance to minimum equipment standards and basic treatment and management processes, such as the highly recommended availability of a pulse oximetry in surgery by WHO, are essential for a safe transnational healthcare system. Their assurance can contribute to an effective handover of knowledge and services after the programs are completed. This aim does not depend alone on aid organizations but should involve host governments and institutions.

CE proposes an organizational re-orientation of practices towards the community of users. CE is action-oriented and highly participative. This means that the participation of a large diversity of actors in a CE design intervention, in this case the aid and formal local health sectors, requires diversity and conflict management. An important characteristic of the CE approach is the role of a professional facilitator who is responsible for the coordination of efforts and equitable participation of different actors. Furthermore, this facilitator is intended to encourage learning and empower leadership by transferring skills and know-how to the participants. In this case, aid interventions could benefit from a facilitator that engages participants from aid and formal local health sectors in adopting, through safety-related ergonomics, a holistic perspective of their interventions. Such a holistic safety focus should lead collaborative partnerships to overcome organizational barriers by crossing the hierarchy and tackle different phases of a healthcare system. A macroergonomics perspective, can promote the anticipation of system gaps (through identification of latent and active system failures) and inform the design of safeguard barriers (e.g. standardization of equipment and processes, workplace regulation) along care processes and work structure.

The role of the professional facilitator can further ensure the sustainability of aid-related CE design interventions through the empowerment of self-regulation and feedback mechanisms that enable formal local health sectors to independently innovate and manage problems, addressing, on the long-term, emerging challenges in continuously changing and turbulent settings. The contribution of CE in particular, raises awareness and supports the fact that, efforts in teaching and implementing ergonomics in healthcare programs and aid partnerships (e.g. by integration of continuous research, review and dissemination of HFE) would contribute to the development of a safety culture (Gosbee, 2002). This would facilitate a mutual communication and beneficially inform technology development or donation processes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study attempts to be an original contribution to the literature related to safety in healthcare. Performance obstacles, specifically focused on medical equipment, were observed and reported during the training of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti. The results show how the safety of medical device use is affected by the relationship between medical equipment and other elements of the work structure, in particular Environment and Organization. In addition, the results illustrate the vulnerable healthcare working environment in low-resource settings. Finally, several opportunities were uncovered for future research within the field of application of HFE in low-resource settings, namely in regard to the coping strategies and the concept of Community Ergonomics.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors thankfully acknowledge the permission conceived by Paul Farmer and Maxi Raymonville from Zamni Lasanté Hospital, and by Médecins Sans Frontières and the dedicated welcoming and collaboration of the nurse anaesthetists in training. This project is financed by a dissertation grant from Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (PTDC/SAU-SAP/118838/2010).


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                    Number OPO's
                                    Percentage
                                    Observable performance obstacles (OPOs)
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Total
                                    123
                                    100%
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Person related OPOs
                                       Technology relations with user (patient, healthcare practitioner) intrinsic characteristics (reach, size, mood, skills, expertise and behavior) n = 9 (7.3%)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Ergonomics
                                       Device or accessory leads to inadequate posture or discomfort of user
                                    8
                                    6.5%
                                    Inappropriate posture due to incorrect workplace ergonomics (anaesthesia machine and medication behind nurse) (Fig. 4e)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    IV support too high for nurse to reach
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Incorrect monitor position for visualization by nurse (short nurse does not adjust monitor and seems not to be aware it is possible)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Inappropriate posture (nurse writes on the lap) (Fig. 4g)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Inappropriate posture (nurse sits with bended back)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Nurse expresses annoyance, because bed is not high enough
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Nurse complaints about strong incident light on back of patient
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Closet of supplies is too high for nurse to reach
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Familiarity
                                       User is not familiar with device or accessory
                                    1
                                    0.8%
                                    Confusion with anaesthetic dose (adult/child)
                                 
                                 
                                    Task related OPOsTechnology relations with task characteristics (dynamics, variety and density of activity) n = 24 (19.5%)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Workflow settings
                                       Difficult or uncommon (re)adjustment of device or accessory leads to additional or extended tasks
                                    8
                                    6.5%
                                    Difficult access to adjust bed
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Arm rest is adjusted to give space/mobility to nurse
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Difficult adjustment of arm rests by nurse
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Difficult adjustment of arm rests by nurse
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    After surgery, the patient is difficult to position due to attached cables, large weight and sudden involuntary moves
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Difficult coordination in handling trocar and needles leads to drug spill resulting in loosing track of administered dose
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Lengthy replacement of new oxygen cylinder (approx. 15 min dragging and replacing oxygen cylinder
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Pulse oximetry, Foley catheter and access to bed adjustments are covered by surgical drape
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Multiple users
                                       Action requires more than one user
                                    3
                                    2.4%
                                    Interchange of balloon operator
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Circulating nurse is shared between 2 ORs (the observer was asked to help to open needle package)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Nurses help each other
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Intensity
                                       Action performed quickly or simultaneously
                                    3
                                    2.4%
                                    Nurse multitasking (nurse writes while ventilating patient)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Nurse multitasking (nurse holds mask/head of patient while lifting bed)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Nurse multitasking (nurse holds mask/head of patient while ventilating)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Adequacy
                                       Device or accessory is misplaced, insufficient or ineffectual at needed moment and for specific task;
                                    5
                                    4.1%
                                    Lack of resources to warm up patient and avoid hypothermia (high air-conditioning)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Microwave (used to heat IV solutions is not available in the room and must be collected in different building)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Unused supplies over anaesthesia machine (Fig. 4d)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Ineffectual use of pulse oximetry (left idle on the floor)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Crowded workspace of anaesthesiologist
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Functioning
                                       Device or accessory does not function as expected or responds with no intention from user
                                    5
                                    4.1%
                                    Pulse oximetry stops working and reinitiates again after opening the battery lid and fiddling with the batteries
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Two backup pulse oximetries malfunction
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Lamp detaches from wheeled feet when nurse holds it (wheels malfunction)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Blood pressure device is replaced
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Portable and extra pulse oximetries are available due to frequent malfunctioning of OR pulse oximetry
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Environment related OPOs
                                       Technology relations with environment characteristics (external and internal conditions where and how task is undertaken) n = 59 (48.0%)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Positioning
                                       Device or accessory is temporarily arranged for convenience of user in uncommon or dangerous position
                                    17
                                    13.8%
                                    Fixation of cables under patient's head
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Placement of sterilized instrument containers on vacuum device (Fig. 4b)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Pulse oximetry is placed on the ground (Fig. 4h)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Pulse oximetry is placed on the ground due to lack of space and confusion
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Placement of diverse supplies and paper registries on anaesthesia machine
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Placement of surgical devices on vacuum machine
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Placement of supplies on vacuum machine
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Placement of medicines on low stool (Fig. 4a)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Equipment piled up on each other (and used during procedure)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Placement of medicines on arm rest used as table (Fig. 4c)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Cables crossing room
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Used glove package left on the floor containing needles (over which observer stepped)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Nurse crosses OR (and sterile area) to use trash bin
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Nurse crosses OR (and sterile area) to use trash bin
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Sharp container in a corner
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Battery charger on the floor
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Lamp socket is replaced making cable cross over room
                                 
                                 
                                    AvoidanceDevice or accessory falls, collides or becomes entangled causing direct hindrance or disturbance of performance
                                    25
                                    20.3%
                                    Pulse oximetry falls
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Near fall of plate with syringes
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Pulse oximetry falls during stressful situation
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Pulse oximetry probe falls
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Lamp collides with microscope
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Scissor falls and is not picked up (no nurse available to pick it up)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Tube falls when extubating patient
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Blood pressure cable stuck when patient gets up for administration of spinal anaesthesia
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Blood pressure and package of vacuum pump probe fall
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Laryngoscope falls
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    IV fluids fall
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Cable rolled around nurse legs
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Entanglement of vacuum device and stool due to limited room space
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Cables blocks wheels of surgeon's chair
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Stethoscope falls and gets entangled in cables
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Cables from anaesthesia machine contribute to a messy environment
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Stumble causes plugs from devices to be disconnected from wall socket
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Stumble causes plugs from devices to be disconnected from wall socket
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Stumble over electric cable
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Stumble causes instability of IV pole
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Surgeon is surrounded with buckets and devices on the floor
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Electrocautery cable crosses room
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Nurse reaches behind unused oxygen cylinder to access to the electric socket
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Stumble over lamp legs
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Wheeled feet of surgical lamp in the way of circulating nurse
                                 
                                 
                                    InfrastructureLack or limitation of required infrastructure, space or energy supply
                                    17
                                    13.8%
                                    Followedi blackouts (power loss)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Followed blackouts (during approximately 3 min)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Followed blackouts (one time including generator power loss)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Vacuum device cannot be plugged in, due to occupied electric socket
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Warming unit (Bear Hugger) must be switched off in order to turn on vacuum
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Blackout forces the electrocautery to be replaced
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Limited space to walk due to overload of people
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Limited space to adjust two surgical tables
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Overload with people in OR (given supervisor explanation)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Overloaded with people in OR (given complexity of procedure)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    No space to move behind two nurses
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    No space to walk around surgical table
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Lamp adjustment requires changing light socket
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Limited space to pick up fallen equipment from the floor
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Busy floor around nurse
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Nurse writes in the dark, using mobile telephone light due to blackout
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Lack of space to write (nurse writes while standing)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Organization related OPOs
                                       Technology relations with organization characteristics (managerial and logistical settings and decision making) n = 31 (25.2%)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Availability
                                       Required device or accessory is not available in hospital stock and cannot be timely acquired
                                    9
                                    7.3%
                                    Medication is shared between ORs due to stock insufficiency
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Laryngoscope is shared between ORs
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Paper notes taped are on the wall due to missing white board
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Sharp container is shared between two ORs
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Use of microwave to heat up blood
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Use of inappropriate tool to tighten bolt of oxygen cylinder
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Use of sterile glove to cover battery of the surgical drill
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Different pulse oximetry models available
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    No standardized oxygen stock (pure oxygen instead of air mixture)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Storage
                                       Lack of designated storage location for device or accessory
                                    4
                                    3.3%
                                    Locked storage cabinet containing urology equipment stored in OR and of forbidden use for other disciplines
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Unused cylinders in OR
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Unused vacuum devices (n = 3) and lamp (n = 1) are stored in corridor at entrance of OR (Fig. 4f)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Old and broken radiology device kept at entrance of OR
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Condition
                                       Poor, old or deteriorated device or accessory; incomplete, broken or not calibrated
                                    13
                                    10.6%
                                    Nurse replaces batteries with other batteries (old) which does not seem to work
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Three lamps (not fully operational)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Rusty bed
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Overused batteries
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Deteriorated and unlabelled cylinders
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Domestic refrigerator used as blood bank
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Broken lamp
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Use of tape to secure lamp transformer
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Air conditioning is either on or off
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Use of tape to repair electric cables
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Noisy vacuum pump and air compressor
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Idle wall clock
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Notes from maintenance on anaesthesia machine
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hygiene
                                       Device or accessory is subjected to (inadequate) cleaning practices
                                    5
                                    4.1%
                                    Nurse repacks unclean suction tube
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Unclear shoe cover policy
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Domestic method of sterilizing devices
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Door between ORs is kept open
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                    Presence of (flying) insects in OR
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 i “Followed” OPOs occurred more than once during the same procedure.
                              OR – Operating Room.
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

