@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effects of simulated fog and motion on simulator sickness in a driving simulator and the duration of after-effects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We checked how the simulator test conditions affect the simulator sickness.


                        
                        
                           
                           The sickness symptoms persisted at the highest level for the mobile platform.


                        
                        
                           
                           The simulator sickness symptoms varied depending on the time.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Disorientation symptoms

Driving task

Nausea

Oculomotor disturbance

Simulator sickness

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In the study, we checked: 1) how the simulator test conditions affect the severity of simulator sickness symptoms; 2) how the severity of simulator sickness symptoms changes over time; and 3) whether the conditions of the simulator test affect the severity of these symptoms in different ways, depending on the time that has elapsed since the performance of the task in the simulator.
                  We studied 12 men aged 24–33 years (M = 28.8, SD = 3.26) using a truck simulator. The SSQ questionnaire was used to assess the severity of the symptoms of simulator sickness. Each of the subjects performed three 30-minute tasks running along the same route in a driving simulator. Each of these tasks was carried out in a different simulator configuration: A) fixed base platform with poor visibility; B) fixed base platform with good visibility; and C) motion base platform with good visibility. The measurement of the severity of the simulator sickness symptoms took place in five consecutive intervals.
                  The results of the analysis showed that the simulator test conditions affect in different ways the severity of the simulator sickness symptoms, depending on the time which has elapsed since performing the task on the simulator. The simulator sickness symptoms persisted at the highest level for the test conditions involving the motion base platform. Also, when performing the tasks on the motion base platform, the severity of the simulator sickness symptoms varied depending on the time that had elapsed since performing the task. Specifically, the addition of motion to the simulation increased the oculomotor and disorientation symptoms reported as well as the duration of the after-effects.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The ongoing need to reduce human error leads to more and more frequent use of simulators in both experimental studies and training (e.g., Edquist et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2013). An important advantage of the use of simulators in experimental studies is the ability to control many environmental factors, as well as the possibility of recording a number of variables relating to the cardiovascular system, electrodermal response or oculomotor response – to name just a few (e.g., Brookhuis and de Waard, 2010, 2011; Haarmann et al., 2009; Underwood et al., 2011; Zuzewicz et al., 2011). An analysis of these variables can be helpful in assessing the impact of specific tasks on the occurrence of fatigue or workload (Davenne et al., 2012; Sung et al., 2005). The data collected from these studies allow, on the one hand, an optimal working environment to be constructed from the point of view of a man as an operator, and on the other, an assessment of the influence of certain occupational conditions or used substances on the functioning of humans (Siedlecka and Bortkiewicz, 2012; Stoner et al., 2011; Stough et al., 2012). Simulators are also increasingly used in the treatment of patients with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and fear of flying, as well as for training (Classen et al., 2011; Devlin et al., 2012; Kraft et al., 2010).

A wide range of applications for simulators, together with their increased use in scientific research and training, has highlighted the problem of simulator sickness (SS) (Brooks et al., 2010; Biernacki and Dziuda, 2012; Kennedy et al., 2010).

Simulator sickness can affect the reliability of the measurement (this applies to both physiological variables and the performance of the task), limit the effectiveness of one's training, and increase the number of people who are not able to complete the task (Brooks et al., 2010; Stoner et al., 2011). The occurrence of simulator sickness can also provide an additional source of stress. This is particularly important in the case of the use of simulators in the treatment of PTSD or in the treatment of fear of flying (Beck et al., 2007; Classen et al., 2011; Devlin et al., 2012; Kraft et al., 2010).

Research on simulation sickness includes an even wider number of factors relating to individual characteristics (e.g. gender, age, experience), the time of the study and test conditions, to name just a few. A detailed review of the studies devoted to this subject can be found in the articles by Classen et al. (2011), Kennedy et al. (2010) and Stoner et al. (2011). However, from the perspective of our research, we were particularly interested in two issues: the impact of test conditions on the intensification of simulator sickness symptoms and the after-effects of simulation sickness.

One important aspect of tests involving simulators is how different simulator test conditions affect the severity of simulator sickness symptoms. Among the simulator test conditions, we should specify those related to the mobility of the platform as well as those related to the type of visual stimuli (e.g. Drexler, 2006; So et al., 2001). For example, Sharples et al. (2008) conducted a study in which she decided to check whether the severity of simulator sickness symptoms is different in the case of four virtual reality display conditions. The conditions that were used in the study included head-mounted display (HMD), desktop, projection screen and reality theatre. This study also involved user control (active vs. passive viewing) and lighting conditions (light vs. dark conditions). To assess simulator sickness symptoms, the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) was used, which allows the relevant assessment on the level of total severity and three subscales that represent separable dimensions of simulator sickness: nausea, visuomotor disturbances and disorientation (Kennedy et al., 1993). The obtained results showed that in 60–70% of cases, exposure to HMD was associated with an increase in simulator sickness symptoms. In the case of comparisons between HMD and desktop, a significant change in nausea symptoms was observed, while in the comparison of HMD and reality theatre an increase in regard to nausea, oculomotor disturbances and disorientation was noted. An intensification of simulator sickness symptoms was also recorded, particularly with regard to oculomotor disturbances and Total SSQ symptoms, in persons who were passive viewing compared to the participants who had control over their movements in the virtual environment (VE) (Sharples et al., 2008). The severity of simulator sickness symptoms also varies depending on the kind of traditional simulator used. The research by Drexler (2006), who compared a fixed-wing, rotary-wing and driving simulator, indicates that the greatest severity of symptoms related to disorientation, compared to fixed-wing and rotary-wing simulators, is observed in the case of using a driving simulator. The highest level of oculomotor disturbances was noted for the fixed-wing, then the rotary-wing, and finally for the driving simulator. On the other hand, the level of nausea remained at a similar level in all test conditions applied. In the case of using a driving simulator, the most severe symptoms were observed in oculomotor disturbances, then disorientation, and the least severe symptoms were recorded for nausea (D > O > N SSQ profile). Apart from the kind of applied visual stimuli, another factor taken into account in research on simulator sickness is the type of platform used (fixed base vs. motion base platform). In the case of experiments using fixed base platforms, information concerning the motion is provided to the tested person via visual information. Motion base platforms are used to increase the fidelity or realism of the simulation. In the case of motion base platforms, information concerning the motion provided via changes in visual display are supplemented with the changes in the position of the platform (motion base platforms enhance the sense of self-motion provided by the visual display (Stoner et al., 2011). Thus, motion base platforms used in simulators can provide two types of inertial cues: acceleration and tilt (Kennedy et al., 1987; Stoner et al., 2011).


                     Curry et al. (2002) decided to assess the differences in the severity of simulator sickness between a fixed base and a motion base with a 6 degrees of freedom (6 DOF) driving simulator. The analysis of results showed that the severity of simulator sickness symptoms was higher when using a fixed base simulator compared to the motion base one. However, in both cases, the profile of individual SSQ subscales was the same (D > O > N). On the other hand, some studies indicate that when the perceived motion is only based on visual stimuli, as it is in the case of fixed base platforms, a particular increase is observed for the nausea symptoms (e.g. McCauley and Sharkey, 1992; May and Badcock, 2002). Stoner et al. (2011) also point to the fact that the use of motion base platforms may not result in a difference between the severity of simulator sickness compared to fixed base platforms, and may even increase the severity of its symptoms. Therefore, it seems that the research on the influence of the type of the simulated motion (fixed base vs. motion base platforms) on simulator sickness symptoms needs to be undertaken in the future.

Another question highlighted in the studies on simulator sickness refers to how long the effects of exposure to simulated conditions persist over time and how quickly the symptoms of simulator sickness appear. For example, Min et al. (2004) assessed the level of simulator sickness, estimated by SSQ and psychophysiological indicators, in 5-minute intervals in the course of performing a 60-minute task in a driving simulator. The analysis of the results showed that subjectively experienced simulator sickness symptoms already appeared 10 min after the main experiment started in the case of nausea, disorientation and Total SSQ, and after 15 min in the case of oculomotor disturbances. Moreover, the severity of the symptoms increased linearly with each next measurement. This result confirms that simulator sickness is a result of the time spent in a simulator (e.g. Kennedy et al., 2000; Kennedy and Fowlkes, 1992 
                     Lampton et al., 1994; Stanney et al., 1998). In addition to this, the changes in psychophysiological variables, for both the autonomic and the central nervous system, already showed a significant change after 5 mins from the start of the study. This means that the subjective psychological evaluation is delayed compared to the response of the physiological indicators. Demonstrating that the physiological parameters react faster to the simulator test conditions compared to the subjective evaluation can help identify early signs of simulator sickness, before it is noticeable under the subjective evaluation of the tested person. The fact that the duration of the experiment on the simulator is accompanied by the intensification of simulator sickness symptoms and the changes in the level of physiological variables raises the question how long simulator sickness symptoms persist (after-effects) after the cessation of performing the task on the simulator. This issue was investigated, inter alia, in the study conducted by Muth (2009), which assessed the level of cognitive functions (Cognitive Test Battery), the individual's balance (Sharpened Romberg) and the integrity of the visual-vestibular interaction (Dynamic Visual Acuity Test) before the test, immediately after it, and 2, 4, 6, 8 and 24 h after the simulator test. The analysis of the results showed that “uncoupled motion scenario” resulted in a deterioration in cognitive functioning. This deterioration was particularly evident 2–4 h after the exposure to the simulated conditions. The changes in physiological parameters were noted 1–2 h after the end of the experiment. Muth points out, however, that the resulting after-effects in cognitive functions should be not be associated with the experienced symptoms of simulator sickness. Baltzley et al. (1989), in a study on a group consisting of 700 subjects, showed that simulator sickness symptoms were experienced by 45% of the people examined. In addition, 25% of simulator sickness symptoms persisted for a period exceeding 1 h and 8% of such symptoms persisted for over 6 h after the end of the simulator test.

Thus, simulator sickness is a phenomenon that needs to be controlled as much as possible. Otherwise, it may impact on the effect of experimental manipulation, the effect of training or the therapeutic effect.

The aim of our study was to answer the following questions:
                        
                           1)
                           Do different simulator test conditions affect the severity of simulator sickness symptoms?

Within this question, we were mainly interested in:
                        
                           -
                           whether the application of the conditions in which the visual stimuli reception is disturbed (fog condition) will change the severity of simulator sickness. This question is particularly important because we do not know of any studies related to this visual condition.

whether the use of the motion base platform will change the severity of simulator sickness. This question is particularly important as the issue of how the use of motion base platforms reduces or increases the severity of simulator sickness symptoms remains valid.

How does the severity of simulator sickness symptoms change over time?

Within this question we were mainly interested in how long the simulator sickness symptoms persist. This question is significant since few research attempts refer to the presence of symptoms a day after the simulator test.
                        
                           3)
                           Is there any interaction between the simulator test conditions and the moment of measurement?

In formulating this question we were particularly interested in whether the simulator testing conditions affect the severity of simulator sickness symptoms in different ways, depending on the time which has elapsed since performing the task in the simulator?

In other words, we were interested in whether the symptoms of simulator sickness persist for different periods of time after the end of the simulation test, depending on the simulator test conditions.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Twelve men aged 24–33 years (M = 28.8, SD = 3.26) participated in the study. All the tested subjects were professional drivers who had possessed a driving licence authorizing them to drive trucks (driving licence category C) for a minimum of 5 years. The average number of kilometres travelled by the drivers in the study group was about 400,000 km. All subjects had a valid medical examination certificate entitling them to drive.

The subjects had no prior experience of performing any tasks in simulators.

The study used a truck simulator manufactured by ETC-PZL Aerospace Industries. The simulator was built based on a fully equipped, air-conditioned cabin of a modern Mercedes-Benz Actros truck. The cabin was mounted on a motion base platform with 6 DOF, which allowed the position of the simulator cabin to be changed along and around the longitudinal, transverse and vertical axes. The parameters characterizing the movement of the motion base platform are presented in Table 1
                     .

The projection of the simulated road environment images took place on the cylinder screen with a radius of 4.10 m, and a 180° horizontal and 40° vertical field of view. The frequency for generating the image was 60 Hz and the frequency for projecting the image also equalled 60 Hz. The image was displayed at a distance of 4.03 m in a straight line from the optic point. The simulator allowed the realization of the selected route with automatic transmission, and a camera system installed in the cabin facilitated the ongoing observation of both the road environment and the driver's behaviour while driving. The simulator test conditions met the standards for this type of study (Stoner et al., 2011).

To assess the severity of the simulator sickness symptoms, the SSQ questionnaire was used, which is currently the most widely applied measure for the subjective assessment of simulator sickness symptoms (Kennedy et al., 1993). SSQ contains 16 diagnostic items rated by the participants as “none”, “slight”, “moderate” or “severe”. These items form three subscales: nausea (N), oculomotor disturbances (O) and disorientation (D), and the total SSQ score (T) (Kennedy et al., 1993).

Each of the subjects performed three 30-minute simulator driving tasks running along the same route. Each of these tasks was carried out in a different simulator configuration:
                        
                           •
                           set of conditions A – fixed base platform and poor visibility (fog)

set of conditions B – fixed base platform and good visibility

set of conditions C – motion base platform and good visibility.

Sets of conditions B and C did not differ in terms of visibility and varied in the use of a motion or fixed base platform. Fig. 1
                      shows an example of poor visibility conditions (A), while Fig. 2
                      shows an example of good visibility (B and C). On a scale from 0 to 100, mist was set on 30, with 0 being very good visibility and 100 indicating very poor visibility.

The measurement of the severity of the simulator sickness symptoms took place at the following intervals: before exposure to the simulator; 2 min after exposure to the simulator; 0.5 h after exposure to the simulator; in the evening of the same day; in the morning of the next day.

The order of exposure to the various test conditions was random. This minimized the impact of the order of measurement and repeated measures on the level of experienced simulator sickness symptoms (e.g. Kennedy et al., 2000). This is particularly important in the context of the study conducted by Kennedy et al. (2000) which showed that an increase in the hours spent in the simulator (successive flights) is accompanied by a decrease in the level of experienced simulator sickness symptoms.

N, O, D and T variations during the experiment were all analysed by means of two-way ANOVA with repeated measures, the measurement time point set as the within-the-subjects variable (5 levels: before exposure to the simulator; 2 min after exposure to the simulator; 0.5 h after exposure to the simulator; in the evening of the same day; in the morning of the next day), and the simulator conditions (fixed base platform and poor visibility, fixed base platform and good visibility, motion base platform and good visibility) as the between-the-subjects variable.

The effect size for each significant result was calculated using the eta-squared (η2) measure.

Huynh-Feldt epsilons were used in case of sphericity assumption violation. Post hoc comparisons were performed with the Bonferroni test. The PASW 19 statistical package (formerly SPSS) was used for all analyses.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Descriptive statistics (M and SD) for all measures are reported in Table 2
                     . The first part of the analysis referred to the influence of the simulator test conditions and the time that has elapsed since performing the task in the simulator on the severity of nausea. The main effect of the simulator test conditions appeared not to be statistically significant at the assumed level of significance, F(2.22) = 3.003, p = 0.070, η2 = 0.214. The main effect of the measurement time was statistically significant, F(4.44) = 7.902, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.418, ε = 0.355. However, the effect of the interactions between the simulator test conditions and the time that has elapsed since performing the task in the simulator was not statistically significant, F(8.88) = 0.952, p = 0.479, ε = 0.582. The main effect of the time of the measurement was characterized by the fact that the severity of nausea was significantly higher 2 min after exposure to the simulator (M = 41.34), compared to the results of the measurement taken in the morning of the next day (M = 13.2) p < 0.05; higher 0.5 h after exposure to the simulator (M = 19.9), compared to the results of the measurement taken in the morning of the next day (M = 13.2) p < 0.05; and higher in the evening of the same day (M = 24.91), compared to the results of the measurement taken in the morning of the next day (M = 13.2) p < 0.05. These relationships are illustrated in Fig. 3
                     .

Then, we analysed the influence of the simulator test conditions and the impact of the time that had elapsed since performing the task in the simulator on the severity of oculomotor disturbances. The main effect of the simulator test conditions proved to be statistically significant, F(2.22) = 5.387, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.329, ε = 0.669. The main effect of the time that had elapsed since performing the task in the simulator was also statistically significant, F(4.44) = 8.896, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.447, ε = 0.521. Similarly, the effect of the interactions between the simulator test conditions and the time that had elapsed since performing the task in the simulator proved to be statistically significant, F(8.88) = 3.133, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.222, ε = 0.700. Since the interaction effect was statistically significant, the next step of the analysis was to compare the simple effects. Firstly, we decided to check whether the severity of oculomotor disturbances differs between the simulator test conditions at different times of the measurement. The severity of oculomotor disturbances 2 min after exposure to the simulator was significantly higher under the conditions of the motion base platform and good visibility (M = 53.69), compared to those with the fixed base platform and good visual conditions (M = 27.16) p < 0.05. Apart from that, the intensity of oculomotor disturbances 0.5 h after exposure to the simulator was significantly higher under the conditions of the motion base platform and good visibility (M = 41.06), compared to those with the fixed base platform and good visual conditions (M = 17.68) p < 0.05, and also compared to those with the fixed base platform and poor visibility (fog) (M = 17.68) p < 0.05. The differences in the severity of oculomotor disturbances were also significant in the evening of the same day. The intensity of oculomotor disturbances was higher under the conditions with the motion base platform and good visibility (M = 50.53), compared to that observed in the case of the fixed base platform and good visibility (M = 24.01) p < 0.01. To better understand the interaction effect, we also decided to compare how the level of oculomotor disturbances changed within each set of simulator test conditions, depending on the time of the measurement. Under the conditions of the motion base platform and good visibility, the subjects experienced greater severity of oculomotor disturbances 2 min after exposure to the simulator (M = 53.69), compared to the level recorded in the morning of the next day (M = 12.63) p < 0.05. Similar dependencies were also observed for: 0.5 h after exposure to the simulator, as compared to the level noted in the morning of the next day (M = 12.63) p < 0.05, and in the evening of the same day (M = 50.53), compared to the results obtained in the morning of the next day (M = 12.63) p < 0.05. These relationships are illustrated in Fig. 4
                     .

The next part of the analysis concerned the impact of the simulator test conditions and the time of the measurement on the severity of the disorientation symptoms. The main effect of the simulator test conditions appeared not to be statistically significant at the assumed level of significance, F(2.22) = 2.407, p = 0.113, η2 = 0.180, ε = 0.680. The main effect of the measurement time was statistically significant, F(4.44) = 6.283, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.364, ε = 0.406. Similarly, the effect of the interactions between the simulator test conditions and the time of measurement was statistically significant, F(8.88) = 2.197, p < 0.05, η2 = 0.166, ε = 0.609. Since the interactions effect was statistically significant, the next step of the analysis was to compare the simple effects. First, it was decided to check whether the severity of the disorientation symptoms is different for various sets of the test conditions at different points of the measurement. The severity of the disorientation symptoms 0.5 h after exposure to the simulator was significantly higher under the conditions with the motion base platform and good visibility (M = 44.08), compared to those with the fixed base platform and poor visibility (fog) (M = 15.08) p < 0.05. To better understand the interactions effect, we also decided to check how the level of disorientation changes within each set of simulator test conditions at different times of the measurement. Under the conditions with the motion base platform and good visibility, the subjects experienced a greater severity of disorientation 2 min after exposure to the simulator (M = 71.92), compared to the level noted 0.5 h after exposure to the simulator (M = 44.08) p < 0.05, and compared to that recorded in the morning of the next day (M = 13.92) p < 0.05. These relationships are illustrated in Fig. 5
                     .

The final stage of data analysis was to examine the impact of the simulator test conditions and the time of the measurement on the severity of the simulator sickness symptoms expressed by the general result – SSQ Total. The main effect of the simulator test conditions proved to be statistically significant, F(2.22) = 3.721, p < 0.05, η2 = 0.253, ε = 0.730. The main effect of the time of the measurement also appeared to be statistically significant, F(4.44) = 7.967, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.420, ε = 0.373. Similarly, the effect of the interactions between the simulator test conditions and the time of the measurement was statistically significant, F(8.88) = 2.167, p < 0.05, η2 = 0.165, ε = 0.659. Since the interactions effect was statistically significant, the next step of the analysis was to compare the simple effects. First, it was decided to verify whether the severity of the simulator sickness symptoms differs between the sets of simulator test conditions at various points of the measurement. The severity of the simulator sickness symptoms 0.5 h after exposure to the simulator was significantly higher under the conditions involving the motion base platform and good visibility (M = 43.32), compared to that with the fixed base platform and good visual conditions (M = 20.25) p < 0.05, and compared to the conditions of the fixed base platform and poor visibility (fog) (M = 19.63) p < 0.05. The severity of the simulator sickness symptoms in the evening of the same day proved to be significantly higher under the conditions of the motion base platform and good visibility (M = 47.06), compared to the conditions with the fixed base platform and good visual conditions (M = 22.12) p < 0.05. To better understand the interactions effect it was also decided to check how the overall level of simulator sickness changes within individual sets of the simulator test conditions at different times of the measurement. Under the conditions with the motion base platform and good visual conditions, the subjects experienced greater severity of simulator sickness 2 min after exposure to the simulator (M = 64.82), compared to that experienced in the morning of the next day (M = 14.64) p < 0.05. The severity of the simulator sickness symptoms was also higher for 0.5 h after exposure to the simulator (M = 43.32) and in the evening of the same day (M = 47.06), compared to that experienced in the morning of the next day (M = 14.64) p < 0.05. These relationships are illustrated in Fig. 6
                     .

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Technological development and the subsequent advancement of simulators have led to a simulation of natural human work environment conditions that is as good as possible. An example of this type of solution is the implementation of motion systems in numerous simulators, including the increasingly popular platforms with 6 DOF.

The idea of using the motion base platforms is to increase the fidelity and realism of simulation conditions. Consequently, it is expected that the symptoms of simulator sickness should be reduced (Curry et al., 2002). At the same time, there are studies showing both the positive effects and the lack of significant differences due to the use of 6 DOF motion systems (McCauley, 2006). The results of our study indicate that the enrichment of the simulator test conditions with proprioceptive cues leads to the intensification of the symptoms of the simulator sickness. It was found that the average level of simulator sickness of all the measurements in good visibility on the motion base platform was higher compared to the level noted for the fixed base platform in good visibility. These differences relate in particular to oculomotor disturbances and the Total SSQ score. However, there were no statistically significant differences observed between the conditions in which visual stimuli were disturbed (fog) compared to good visibility conditions on the motion and fixed base platform. Analyses of the results averaged of all measurements for each type of test conditions also showed that in the conditions of poor visibility, the SSQ profile had the form of N > D > O and in the case of good visibility conditions, both on the motion and fixed base platform, the SSQ profile was as follows: D > O > N. The average level of D and O was at a similar level.

Another issue was how long specific simulator sickness symptoms persist. In the case of complaints related to nausea, the highest level was observed in the 2 min after exposure to the simulator conditions and 0.5h after exposure to such conditions. The disorientation level was the highest in the 2 min after exposure to the simulator. The oculomotor disturbances persisted for the longest period of time, i.e. until the evening of the same day.

It turns out that the severity of most symptoms of simulator sickness is impacted upon both by the simulator task conditions and the time that has elapsed since performing the task in the simulator. What is more interesting, in the case of symptoms associated with oculomotor disturbances, disorientation and the total simulator sickness symptoms (total SSQ), is that it was observed that the simulator test conditions affect the intensity of the simulator sickness symptoms in different ways, depending on the time that has elapsed since performing the task in the simulator. The above-mentioned symptoms of simulator sickness (oculomotor disturbances, disorientation and the total simulator sickness symptoms) persisted for the longest period of time, especially in the case of the motion base platform and good visibility.

The SSQ profiles obtained in our study for the motion base platform and the fixed one are the same as those presented in the work of Curry et al. (2002). However, the SSQ profile obtained in our study for the motion base platform is much higher than the profile for the fixed base platform. What is more, the fact that the average values of all the test trials for disorientation and oculomotor disturbances symptoms are similar does not mean that both of these conditions have the same course. The symptoms of disorientation as a result of the exposure to the test conditions with the motion base platform are rapidly intensified immediately after completion of the task on the simulator and then they gradually fade away. On the other hand, although oculomotor disturbances resulting from the exposure to the test conditions on the motion base platform are also intensified just after the completion of the task on the simulator, they persist longer – until the evening of the day on which the examination took place. The results obtained in this study are of interest in light of the data presented by Baltzley et al. (1989) which showed that 25% of the simulator sickness symptoms persisted for more than 1 h and 8% of the symptoms persisted for over 6 h after the end of the simulator test. It is possible that the persistence of the symptoms over a long time relates particularly to oculomotor disturbances. This issue requires further study on a larger number of subjects.

As noted earlier, it is assumed that the use of the motion base platform may, by better reflecting natural conditions, reduce the symptoms of simulator sickness. The results obtained in this study indicate the opposite. Implementing the motion base platform may provide an additional source of conflict. In our opinion, the mismatch between the true motion of the vehicle and the motion produced by simulator actuators can in fact induce or increase simulator sickness. It seems, then, that the closer the conditions in the simulator get to the real conditions (by involving a wider range of cues), the greater the risk of conflict and, as a consequence, of simulator sickness. Thus, it seems crucial to look at the performance of the tasks in the simulator from the perspective of their usefulness and purpose for which they are applied. Undoubtedly, the phenomenon of simulator sickness must be minimized. If, however, it is not possible to eliminate this phenomenon, it seems necessary to take into account the severity of simulator sickness in the analysis of the variables recorded during the performance of the simulation tasks.

The results of our study may therefore be both of practical importance for persons carrying out studies and of theoretical importance when used while dealing with theoretical models of simulator sickness.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This article includes the results of the work carried out within the framework of Project No. O N518 259140 “Identification and examination of factors influencing the onset of simulator sickness in drivers and military pilots during training in simulators”, financed from the resources of the National Centre for Research and Development. The authors would like to thank Robert S. Kennedy for making the SSQ questionnaire available to them.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

