@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Energy expenditure at work in physical education teachers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Energy expenditure (EE) was measured in physical educators during 2 workdays.


                        
                        
                           
                           Physical education teachers showed a high level of fitness level.


                        
                        
                           
                           Average EE was low-to-moderate (kcal min−
                              1) and low in relative values (% VO2max).


                        
                        
                           
                           However, physical educators reached very high work intensities for significant periods.


                        
                        
                           
                           Physical educators should be prepared to perform tasks with different levels of EE.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Oxygen consumption

Heart rate

Teaching

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The objective of this study was to quantify work energy expenditure (EE) in physical education (PE) teachers. Sixty-four (64) physical educators (49 men, 15 women) had their individualized linear function between heart rate (HR) and oxygen consumption measured by laboratory testing. HR was then recorded on 2 different days at work to estimate EE, correlated with a diary of daily tasks. Average absolute EE was low-to-moderate (2.7 ± 1.4 to 4.6 ± 2.5 kcal·min−1) and low when expressed in relative values (15.3 ± 6.1% to 24.8 ± 7.6% of VO2max). However, these physical educators often reached very high intensities (from 7.5 ± 7.9% to 23.8 ± 22.3% of work time at 100 bpm and more). PE teaching requires a light-to-moderate EE with more intense periods of physical activity. The variety of tasks performed (office work, supervision and monitoring, mixed participation and active participation) significantly influenced EE.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Physical educators are a special category of teachers. Sandmark et al. (1999) suggested that workload is heavy among physical education (PE) teachers. In fact, some authors claim that the occupational requirements of PE teaching compare to those of forestry, agricultural and construction workers (Skiold, 1999). Such heavy workloads have also been associated with a high rate of musculoskeletal dysfunction and injuries among PE teachers (Lemoyne et al., 2007; Sandmark, 2000). Indeed, in a qualitative survey of Quebec PE teachers, few perceived themselves as being able to actively continue their profession until retirement age (Bizet et al., 2010).

Energy expenditure (EE) among PE teachers was not assessed quantitatively in previous studies. Sandmark et al. (1999) analyzed their work tasks by direct observation. High physical load may be caused by equipment handling, by supporting the load of students' weight in certain situations, by prolonged standing, stress and repetitive or sudden movements (Sandmark et al., 1999). Not only do they have to lift students in parades for gymnastics or psychomotor learning, often in awkward and difficult positions, but they are also exposed to additional horizontal shear forces. Ultrafast, dynamic forces can inflict large and sudden mechanical loading with increased risk of musculoskeletal injuries or fractures. Heart rate (HR) was recorded per daily work duration and was on average above 100 beats per minutes (bpm) for 42% of the work period in women, and 25% in men (Sandmark et al., 1999). Activities which generated the highest HRs were warm-ups, aerobic exercises, dance and circuit training. In these activities, teachers usually participated and helped students through demonstrations. Participation in warm-ups, aerobic exercise and support of students in gym class generated peak HRs of 150 bpm or more (Sandmark et al., 1999). However, the literature tells us little about the relative workload that these teachers must face. HR was not converted into EE values. Indeed, to the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated the average percentages of maximum metabolic capacity (max) that physical educators must endure every workday.

The main purpose of this research is to quantify EE in PE teachers in their work environment. We also compare EE across various conditions (teaching levels, types of tasks performed, gender, age, and years of experience).

@&#METHODS@&#

Sixty-four (64) PE teachers from the south central part of Quebec (Mauricie, Bois-Francs, and Quebec City), involved at different levels of education, volunteered to participate in this study. A special feature in Quebec is that across all school levels (from primary to pre-university), PE is taught by specialists. Our sample included 22 teachers from primary schools (18 males and 4 females), 32 from secondary schools (24 males and 8 females), and 10 from colleges, i.e. pre-university (7 males and 3 females). Table 1
                         gives details of sample composition. The project received prior approval from the institutional Human Research Ethics Committee at the Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières. Each eligible participant visited once in the laboratory, and data were collected twice in the field. Informed signed consent was obtained in the laboratory session, and health status was profiled according to procedures for risk stratification of the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology (CSEP, 2003). Anthropometric and fitness variables were measured. Oxygen consumption/HR regression equation was established during progressively maximal treadmill testing, detailed later in the text. During the laboratory visit, participants identified 2 workdays for data collection in the field. During these workdays, they each wore a HR monitor with built-in memory and an accelerometer to quantify movement counts.

At the beginning of the laboratory session, blood pressure (BP) was monitored by sphygmomanometer (Tycos Healthometer, Mansfield, Mass., USA) on 2 occasions separated by 10 min, as stipulated by the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology (2003). Anthropometric measurements were undertaken, as directed by the CSEP (2003). The weight of study participants was measured with a beam balance (Detectomedic, Detecto Scales, Inc., Brooklyn, NY, USA). Participant height was noted by stadiometer (Healthometer, Bridgeview, IL, USA), and waist circumference (WC), by tape. Finally, skinfold thickness was measured on the right side of the body (CSEP, 2003) with a Harpenden adipometer (John Bull British Indicators, UK).

We quantified back muscle (modified Sorensen test) and abdominal muscle (sit and reach) endurance, leg power (vertical jump), elbow extensor/shoulder flexor endurance, hip flexibility and handgrip strength (CSEP, 2003).

EE was computed on the basis of interpolation of regression built with the relationship between HR and oxygen consumption (VO2), by maximal incremental laboratory testing. To determine this relationship, we calculated a regression equation specific to each subject, and then measured HR at the worksite. The corresponding predicted value of VO2 was then calculated by interpolation.

During their presence in the laboratory, participants were tested by progressive maximal modified Bruce protocol for treadmill exercise with 3-min increments (American College of Sports Medicine, 2009) to achieve a steady state. Before the stress test, the VO2/Fc relationship was measured when the subjects were seated. Incremental testing was continued until VO2max to ascertain the maximum aerobic capacity of each participant. Expired gases were assessed by Moxus metabolic analyzer (AEI Technologies, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) to measure VO2. All devices were calibrated before each use. Criteria for determining the maximum were: 1) respiratory exchange ratio >1.10; 2) participant inability to continue the current level or to progress to another workload; 3) achievement of theoretical maximum HR, i.e. 220 – age; and 4) plateau identification (±150 ml) of VO2 gain. At least 3 of these 4 mandatory criteria must be met with achievement of the required respiratory quotient.

During treadmill testing, HR was recorded by Polar transmission belt coupled to a receiver connected to a data acquisition system (Polar S810 i, Polar Electro Oy, Kempele, Finland). The same monitor recorded HR during workdays. Research assistants went to all sites to install wrist HR monitors and hip accelerometers and to deliver task diaries for completion. At the end of the day, research assistants returned to all sites to collect the equipment and help physical educators complete their logbooks. HR and accelerometry counts were downloaded to our laboratory computer. These data were averaged over each 1-min period for further calculation. EE values during selected work phases were estimated by interpolation of VO2/HR linear function specific to each individual.

Participants wore a belt accelerometer (Actigraph, MTI Health Services, Pensacola, FL, USA) during work to estimate amounts of movements during a given time period of the day. It served to verify movement periods occurring during work (every minute) and to corroborate diary entries. In the logbook, participants described tasks performed during the day in bouts of 10 min. After the analysis of all participant logs, we identified 4 categories of activities according to their EE: 1) office work: telephone, paperwork, meetings, marking of assignments, displacements in school or between schools, and course preparation, 2) supervision and monitoring: observation, monitoring at recess, student assessment, surveillance of facilities, student management and courses without demonstrations; 3) mixed participation: partly-active refereeing, demonstrations followed by educational supervision, assisting students in carrying out activities; 4) active participation: participation while teaching and active refereeing involving running and game's involvement at the same pace as the pupils.

In none of the data collection periods did temperature exceed 25.6 °C, a threshold value (Rowell, 1986). In fact, the 2 main data collection periods in spring were cooler than average (Environment Canada).

Data were expressed as means ± standard deviations. Data handling and statistical functions were undertaken with Excel 2010™. Pearson correlations were determined for specific relationships. Differences between averages of measured and calculated variables were compared by ANOVA using SPSS 15.0. The results were analyzed with the statistical tables of Laurencelle and Dupuis (2000). Differences and correlations were considered to be statistically significant if P < 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Depending on the fitness variable measured, participants had a fitness rating of “good-to-excellent” for their age group in both men and women, according to CSEP standards for the Canadian population. Aerobic fitness of both male and female physical educators was categorized as excellent. Cardiovascular risk variables – BP, body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference (WC) – were considered optimal in male and female teachers. There was no effect of age on VO2max, as indicated by the zero correlation between age and VO2max (r = −0.05, NS). Height, weight, BMI, WC and back extension (modified Sorensen) were significantly greater in males than in females (Table 2
                        ). Males had significantly more years of experience than female teachers (10.50 ± 8.22 vs. 6.55 ± 3.95 years).

Average length of workday and average % of VO2max sustained during workdays were similar for males and females (Table 3
                        ). Days identified as being intense by participants (males + females) were significantly longer in duration and more intense in terms of % of VO2max (Table 3). For women, total absolute EE expressed in kcal·min−
                        1 tended to be lower for workdays perceived as being intense (Table 3). No differences were evident between males and females or more intense vs. less intense days in the percentage of time spent or in the percentage of maximal HR working at ≥100 bpm (Table 3). However, males expended significantly more kcal·min−
                        1 than females during periods at >100 bpm (Table 3).

Given the similarity of EE expressed as % of VO2max between men and women, we pooled the data to study the effect of teaching level on EE. For all grades taught, average working time was generally longer on days considered by teachers as being intense. Percentages of max and absolute EE (kcal·min−
                        1) were significantly greater during days perceived as being more intense. Although average EE was rather low, PE teaching was characterized by periods of more intense work. Thus, based on the raw data for each participant, we calculated the percentages of time spent at HRs higher than 100 bpm. Teachers at the college level spent lower percentages of time at >100 bpm but reached higher % of VO2max during these periods (Table 4
                        ).

Average work intensity (ranging from 2.03 to 5.33 kcal·min−1) depended on the combination of different tasks performed by physical educators. In Fig. 1
                        , we can see that some tasks required more EE than others. Thus, work intensity increased from office work, supervision and monitoring to mixed participation and, finally, active participation (Fig. 1). The number of subjects was not the same for each task since they employed different intervention strategies in comparison to their colleagues. Considering the high between-subjects variability and the similarity of patterns between genders, data on male and female participants were pooled. Active participation was significantly more energy-demanding than all other classes of tasks, while mixed participation was different from office work only. Moreover, EE intensity (kcal·min−
                        1) showed a significant upward trend across the 4 categories of tasks considered (Fig. 1). The total energy expenditure (duration in minutes × kcal·min−
                        1) was higher for active participation than for office work (Fig. 2
                        ).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Participants in our study were in excellent aerobic fitness, according to Canadian standards (CSEP, 2003). If we compare our data with those of Åstrand et al. (1997), participants in our sample had VO2max similar to Swedish physical educators of the same age, either male (50.6 in Quebec vs. 52 ml·kg−1·min−1 in Sweden) or female (46.6 vs. 43 ml·kg−1·min−1). Physical fitness of our participants for all other variables was good-to-excellent (Table 3). With the exception of back extension, the physical fitness of females was similar to that of males. Yet, the physical fitness of males was better than average, except for body composition, where BMI showed slightly higher than recommended values (Table 3). However, since their WC was in the low-risk zone and their % fat was found good, it is likely that this slightly higher BMI may be attributed to a higher lean mass (Nevill et al., 2010). Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that PE teachers are generally in better physical fitness than the average population, regardless of gender and age.


                        Sandmark (2000) suggested that the EE of physical educators was comparable to occupations with high EE. We found that, on days identified by them as low-intensity, physical educators were working at intensities deemed by Kroemer et al. (1997) to be “light/easy”, whereas intense days lay between “light/easy” to “medium/moderate”, according to absolute values estimated in kcal·min−
                        1.

Relative EE values averaged over the workshift expressed as % of VO2max can be considered low, with nearly 16.5% VO2max for “easy” days and nearly 22% for “intense” days (Rodgers et al., 1986; Wu and Wang, 2002). Theoretically, according to these two authors at an intensity of 28% of VO2max, workers could work for 12 h. With working times measured for our participants (generally between 277 and 437 min, with a median time of 360 min), intensities of 43 and 40% of VO2max could theoretically be sustained. Hence, it appears that work intensity in physical educators is quite low on average. EE in physical educators is between 2.03 and 5.33 kcal·min−1, or 15.3 and 24.8% of VO2max, values which correspond to those found in butchers, bakers, carpenters and coal oven workers (Sobane, 2003). However, a particular characteristic of the profession, which can make it more strenuous than others, is the occurrence of high-intensity periods found during active participation interspersed with low-intensity periods associated with office work or supervision and monitoring. During periods with HR > 100 bpm, labor intensity averaged 59–65% of VO2max for durations of 28.5–90 min spread throughout the day. This is highly variable between participants, each using his/her own combination of tasks to undertake PE teaching.

Many authors have suggested that the burden of work acceptable for an 8-h shift is about 30–40% of VO2max (Bink, 1962; Saha et al., 1979; Rodgers et al., 1986; Åstrand et al., 2003). This theoretical workload is an average that should be stable. Brouha (1967) suggested that an average of 110 bpm over a work period of 8 h should not be exceeded by industrial workers. However, to rely to an absolute value of heart rate without reference to the HR vs. VO2 relationship of an individual results in an approximate estimation of EE (Bradfield, 1971).

Subjective evaluation by Lemoyne et al. (2007) indicated that perceived task load is significantly greater among primary school teachers. However, in the present study, objective measurements of EE between comparative levels of education invalidate the observations reported in the questionnaire survey of estimated workload. This may also be due to the fact that EE measures do not take into account some subjective factors that may increase the perceived burden of tasks without augmenting HR as noise, non-adapted school gymnasiums in primary schools, assignments in different schools, etc. (Kovač et al., 2013; Mäkelä et al., 2014b).

Our results, expressed as % of VO2max, indicate similar EE in male and female participants. However, when expressed in kcal·min−
                        1, there is a slight (but not significant) tendency to higher EE in males, which is explained by their heavier body weight. Our hypothesis – that EE may be higher among women – is reversed when considering % of VO2max as an EE measure. Energy expenditure expressed as the % of VO2max is a better gauge of physiological strain in general and more so if a task requires support of body weight (Åstrand et al., 2003).

In the scientific literature and in governmental documents, EE is often expressed in absolute values (kcal·min−
                        1) rather than relative values (% max). We believe that this approach has several drawbacks. As we have seen, absolute values were slightly higher in men, suggesting greater task burden. However, absolute EE values in males were somewhat higher, mainly because of their greater weight. Kilogram for kilogram, as task burden is better represented by % of VO2max, we conclude that the task of PE is similar for men and women.

Finally, EE can't be considered as the only measurements of job strain as many factors other can influence the workload. The working environment is also a factor than can increase the work strain. As an example, it was determined that scheduling and the lack of material resources make the work harder (Mäkelä et al., 2014b). Other factors like students' behavior or their lack of motivation (Mäkelä et al., 2014a) may also impact on the job strain and should be considered when evaluating job's strain in physical education teachers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

PE teachers are a group of workers with a high level of fitness, and particularly aerobic fitness. Our results confirm those of Åstrand et al. (1997) on PE teachers in Sweden. The data on most fitness variables were very similar for women and men except for body composition and back extension. The physical fitness of physical educators in our sample was not influenced by age. Can this be explained by maintenance of their physical fitness over the years, as suggested by the longitudinal data of Åstrand et al. (1997), or is it due to attrition of individuals with lower fitness level, or both? Other previous findings suggest that some physical educators no longer feel they are fit enough to continue teaching PE and choose to change their career path (Bizet et al., 2010). Our study has not been able to answer these questions, which would require a longitudinal protocol.

The EE of physical educators is, on average, low-to-moderate when expressed in absolute values (Kroemer et al., 1997) and low when expressed in relative values (Rodgers et al., 1986; Wu and Wang, 2002). However, their work includes periods with very high intensities that must be taken into consideration when analyzing task difficulty. A weakness of our study is the lack of measurement of tasks requiring sudden and short bursts of muscular contraction (e.g. lifting or recovering falling students) that may increase the occupational burden without augmenting HR. Finally, we observed high inter- and intra-variability (gender, age and level) because teaching practices varied greatly from one physical education teacher to another and across workdays. Our results are in agreement with Sandmark et al. (2009) in her work with physical education teachers: «the variability in physical exposure is substantial.» Therefore, if we expect PE teachers to actively participate with students, good fitness is warranted.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was supported by a grant from the Institut de recherche en santé et sécurité au travail du Québec. The authors thank the many physical educators who gave so generously of their time, making this study possible. They also acknowledge the contributions of graduate students Rami Chaibi, M.Sc. and Rosalie Cadieux, B.Sc. and research professionals Nicolas Lesage, M.Sc. and Melissa Lesage, M.Sc.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

