@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of mild hypoxia in aviation on mood and complex cognition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Mild hypoxia equivalent to 8000 ft does not appear to impair complex cognition.


                        
                        
                           
                           Aircrew and passengers may feel more fatigued and less vigorous at a cabin altitude of 12,000 ft.


                        
                        
                           
                           This may be restored by breathing supplementary oxygen.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Aviation

Altitude

Psychology

Performance

Stressors

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Thirty six volunteer air force personnel were sequentially exposed in a randomized balanced order in a hypobaric chamber to 30 min of baseline (sea level) and mild hypoxia induced by a specified altitude (sea level, 8000 ft and 12,000 ft), followed immediately by breathing 100% oxygen from an oro-nasal mask. Mood and complex cognition were assessed. Analysis of variance indicated that mood (fatigue and vigour) remained the same at 8000 ft but fatigue was increased (p = 0.001) and vigour reduced (p = 0.035) at 12,000 ft and was restored by supplementary oxygen. Complex cognition was not significantly altered by the test conditions. The results of this study do not support prior evidence that mild hypoxia equivalent to either 8000 or 12,000 ft, impairs complex cognition, but suggests that some aspects of mood may be affected at 12,000 ft and can be restored by breathing 100% oxygen.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

This paper questions the appropriateness of designing pressurised aircraft to maintain a cabin pressure equivalent to about 8000 ft (mild hypoxia). The reason for asking this question is that numerous studies have suggested that some aspects of complex decision-making by pilots may be impaired due to mild hypoxia, especially in novel or unusual situations such as emergencies. It is possible that mild hypoxia may be an under-recognised latent flight safety hazard that may have contributed, and possibly will continue to contribute to root causes for aircraft accidents. As far as the authors are aware, this has never been proposed as a possible contributing factor in the recent Malaysian MH370 aircraft disaster mystery, nor the Air New Zealand Flight 901 Mt Erebus disaster in Antarctica, to take two prominent examples. We believe it is remiss to exclude the possibility of mild hypoxia as a latent pre-condition for aviation disasters such as these.

The question is not new for aviation medicine specialists - as far back as 1984 Ernsting (1984) questioned the ‘appropriateness’ of the generally accepted aviation threshold of 10,000 ft before the use of supplementary oxygen or cabin pressurisation was mandatory. The question has largely been ignored by aircraft manufacturers and aviation industry regulators. It is worth asking again because the commonly accepted and regulation ‘10,000 ft threshold’ could be construed as irresponsible if there were widespread agreement, based on evidence such as that summarised below and in the present study, that a lower threshold such as 8000 ft, were more appropriate as a guide for future aircraft design. This could have major implications for future aircraft design technology and cost, since it could mean that a fuselage strength/rigidity capable of safely withstanding a greater internal/external pressure gradient would be needed. A design goal in many newer aircraft, although not all, is to lower the ‘cabin altitude’ with the aim of improving passenger and crew comfort and preventing exposure to mild hypoxia, altitude sickness and barotrauma.

Most routine commercial and military pressurised aircraft maintain a cabin pressure equivalent to about 8000 ft (2438 m). National and supra-national aviation authorities allow pilots to fly unpressurised without the requirement for supplemental oxygen to an altitude of 10,000 ft (3048 m) (Civil Aviation Authority Australia (2011)). In the United States this can be up to 14,000 ft (42678 m) for 30 min (Federal Aviation Administration, 2011). Aircrew operating below 10,000 ft are not generally considered to be at risk of developing significant symptoms of hypoxia (Kupper et al. 2011). Aviation medicine texts often emphasise the benign nature of operating below this altitude (Pickard, 2008) and some advisory documents even reassure aircrew that ‘significant effects of altitude hypoxia do not occur in the normal healthy pilot below 12,000 ft’ (Federal Aviation Administration, 2013). Much of this acceptance is based on a literature review of papers published between 1950 and 1963 (Tune, 1964).

The literature about the presence and significance of cognitive impairment in pilots at moderate altitudes (i.e. between 6000 and 14,000 ft and corresponding levels of mild hypoxia) is controversial. The earliest studies of mild hypoxia reported that learning in complex tasks (such as a manikin task) at altitudes as low as 5000 ft (1500 m) was slower than at sea level (Denison et al., 1966) and that exposure to hypoxia equivalent to an altitude of 8000 ft could affect complex, multiple, time-shared tasks, or simulated flight activities (Frisby et al. 1973; Gold and Kulak, 1972). Subsequent studies reported that well-learned cognitive, vigilance and perceptual-motor performance tasks were not affected (Fowler et al. 1985; Paul and Fraser, 1994; Hewett et al. 2009). Others have reported that the performance of novel and complex cognitive tasks involving memory and multiple demands may be impaired (Fowler et al. 1985; Farmer et al. 1992; McCarthy et al. 1995; Legg et al. 2014), including procedural errors in simulated flight (Nesthus et al. 1997). Cable (2003) reported the occurrence of four adverse aircraft safety reports (out of 27 such reports in the Australian Defence Force during 1990–2001) due to hypoxia at altitudes below 10,000 ft. This is consistent with real-world observations of acute symptoms of hypoxia at altitudes below 10,000 ft in operational helicopter crew (Smith, 2007) and impaired sleep quality in aircraft cabins at 8000 ft (2438 m) (Muhm et al. 2009). Coote et al. (2010) have pointed out that though the routine cockpit tasks of pilots can be performed competently ‘it would appear that at present cabin altitudes, the learning of a novel task is impaired’.

In a recent systematic review of the effects of hypoxic hypoxia at moderate altitudes on cognitive and psychomotor performance, Petrassi et al. (2012) reported increased reaction time on orientation tasks from 7000 ft (2134 m), learning impairment in a manikin test at rest at 8000 ft (2438 m), increased errors in arithmetic and decision making by 12,000 ft (3658 m) with working memory affected as low as 9136 ft (2785 m) in some studies but not until 14,000 ft (4268 m) in others. The review concluded that performance on simpler tests appeared to be more readily preserved with altitude, for example for finger tapping, and simple reaction time. The authors interpreted the preservation of simple tasks and decrements in more complex tasks as indicating that at ‘mild’ levels of hypoxia, psychomotor performance is maintained whilst truly cognitive functions are affected. They also suggested there was a greater likelihood of decrements in cognition with greater complexity (e.g. in terms of decision errors in complicated flight situations) for a given level of mild hypoxia, and that subtle undetected complex cognitive deficits can be dangerous and unforgiving in terms of accident causation preconditions. It also seems likely that the effects of mild hypoxia on mood will be important, but in most previous studies mood has not previously been included and reported.

Some of the laboratory studies mentioned above were poorly controlled or un-blinded and included relatively straightforward tests of complex cognition that were not well related to aspects of cognition that are required in real-world conditions. Some have used a hypoxic gas mixture at sea level (i.e. normobaric hypoxia) to simulate hypoxia at an altitude equivalent to 2438 m (8000 ft) (i.e. hypobaric hypoxia). Since Baumgardner et al. (1980) have shown that there are no differences in responses to hypoxia imposed by these two different methods, the results of normobaric hypoxia studies (e.g. Legg et al. 2014) are likely to be equally applicable for hypobaric hypoxia i.e. for the mild hypoxia to which aircrew are exposed in aircraft cabins. Nevertheless, in order to improve face validity, there is merit in conducting similar studies in a hypobaric chamber. Thus, despite the findings of Petrassi et al.’s review, there is still a need for a well-controlled and blinded hypobaric chamber laboratory study of mild hypoxia that examines mood and includes tests of complex cognition that have a higher level of real-world face validity.

The present study was designed to be well controlled, to be fully blinded and to include tests of complex cognition that could justifiably be considered to include aspects of complex cognition required in piloting large long haul aircraft. Specifically, it examined the effects of exposure of air force personnel to hypobaric hypoxia equivalent to altitudes of ground level, 8000 ft and 12,000 ft. Mood and complex cognition were assessed using a battery of psychological tests that drew on some of the complex cognitive capacities that are common in a wide variety of real-world situations by pilots. We hypothesised that mood and performance for the complex cognition tests were likely to be affected by exposure to altitude on account of their complexity and novelty and because they involved multiple demands. The study also explored the efficacy of a potential practical ‘simple fix’ for any potential effects of exposure to mild hypoxia (i.e. the provision of supplementary oxygen via an oro-nasal mask during exposures to 12,000 ft), in which it was hypothesized that mood and complex cognition test performance would be restored to normal levels.

@&#METHODS@&#

The study protocol was approved by the Massey University Human Ethics Committee and performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Thirty six Royal New Zealand Air Force personnel aged between 18 and 40 years volunteered and participated. All were male, non-smokers and had no colour blindness as this could have influenced performance on some of the tests. Twenty four were base staff with experience of air operations. Twelve were active aircrew. Each participant attended two sessions, each separated by at least two days. The first session was for briefings, chamber and procedural familiarisation and practicing the mood and cognitive tests. The second session was the main study session in which participants undertook three hypobaric chamber exposures which included performing seven mood and six cognitive tests at three separate altitudes: ground level (0 ft), 8000 ft and 12,000 ft, and also with supplementary oxygen at 12,000 ft in a hypobaric chamber.

The first session started either in the morning at 0830 h or afternoon at 1330 h. It included briefings, familiarisation with the hypobaric chamber and oxygen mask and four practices of the mood and cognitive tests, with the following timings for the start of each activity. 0 min: briefing about the study and protocols, provision of prior informed written consent, chamber familiarisation, fitting and use of oxygen mask; 30 min: enter chamber and first practice at ground level; 60 min: simulated ascent to altitude; 66 min: resting at simulated altitude; 75 min: second practice (at simulated altitude); 105 min: don oxygen mask and breathing 100% oxygen (still at simulated altitude): 114 min: third practice whilst wearing mask and breathing 100% oxygen (still at simulated altitude); 144 min: descent to ground level, doff oxygen mask; 150 min: fourth practice (at ground level), exit chamber; 180 min: debrief. All of the first session was conducted at ground level, but included a simulated ascent and descent. This lasted 6 min and was effected by cross-venting the chamber so that the participants became familiar with the effects of the cooling and warming and noises of the hypobaric chamber and so that these effects would become less likely to influence their test performance in the main session. It also formed part of the experimenters' strategy to maximise the chances that the participants remained ‘blind’ to the altitude exposures in the main session. During the first and second practices, participants were allowed to interact with experimenters and receive guidance, assistance and instruction. They performed the third and fourth practices alone and as fast and accurately as possible.

The main study session comprised three separate exposures on one day, starting at 0900, 1130 and 1400 h during each of which the participants performed the mood and cognitive tests three times: during an initial period of 30 min at ground level, during a succeeding period of 78 min at either ground level (0 ft), 8000 ft or 12,000 ft, and during a following period of 30 min in which the participants breathed 100% oxygen via an oro-nasal mask. The specific timings for the exposure are shown in Fig. 1
                        . There was then a period of 30 min at ground level as a break for food and toileting prior to the next exposure. Food and beverage consumption during main sessions was controlled and standardised. Participants were required to consume a sandwich, a piece of fruit and 200 ml of fruit juice 30 min before every exposure and had ad lib access to water at all times. If they drank tea or coffee between exposures they were asked to be consistent and do the same before each exposure and to replicate their usual daily consumption.

The altitudes for exposures within each main session were presented in a balanced randomised order. The participants, as well as two experimenters and a safety officer inside the chamber were blinded to the order of the altitudes. Ascents and descents were at a fixed rate of 2000 ft per min and were always completed over a period of 6 min, including short stops and cross-venting, as mentioned above, in order to blind the participants (and the experimenters) from any knowledge of the destination altitude. For safety reasons, the only person not blinded to the altitudes in real time was the chamber operator. Participants (and experimenters) were only told the order of presentation of altitudes at the end of each day. Participants were formed into groups of six because this was the practical limit for fitting them into the hypobaric chamber, so there were six main session days.

Peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2%) was measured by finger pulse oximetry (Vacumed, Ventura, California) and recorded systematically during all exposures by one of the internal chamber experimenters.

The seven mood and six complex cognitive tests were selected from the ANAM4 (Automated Neurophysiological Assessment Metrics, developed for the US Department of Defence and licensed by Vista Life Sciences) test battery (Eonta et al. 2011). They were presented to each individual on a laptop computer in the following order: mood (for anger, anxiety, depression, fatigue, happiness, restlessness and vigour); complex cognition: logical relations, 3-dimensional spatial rotation (Manikin test), mathematical processing, memory search, selective attention/inhibition (Stroop test), problem solving (decision-making/mental flexibility) (Tower puzzle test). They took about 12–15 min to complete.

The mood tests were based on the profile of mood states, validated by Nyenhuis et al. 1999. Participants selected their response to indicate their current mood state by moving a mouse cursor across a seven point (0–6) scale, with word anchors as follows: 0 - ‘Not at all’, 3 - ‘Somewhat’ and 6 - ‘Very Much’.

The logical relations test assessed abstract reasoning and verbal syntax ability by asking the participant to select true or false buttons to indicate the truth of a statement (e.g. ‘& comes after #’) describing the order of two symbols displayed on the screen (e.g. ‘&, #’). There were 24 trials and the outcome measure was the ANAM throughput measure (i.e. number of correct responses per minute).

The manikin test assessed three dimensional spatial rotation ability, left-right orientation, problem solving and attention. A man was displayed on the screen. The man was holding a ball in one hand and a cube in the other, and a ball or cube was displayed at the bottom of the screen. The man was standing upright or upside down and either facing toward the participant or away. The participant was instructed to determine which of the man's hands was holding the object displayed at the bottom of the screen and to press one designated button to indicate the left hand and another to indicate the right hand. The outcome measure was throughput (i.e. number of correct responses per minute).

The mathematical processing test assessed basic computational skills, concentration and working memory. During the task, an arithmetic problem involving three single-digit numbers and two operators was displayed (e.g. ‘5-2+3 = ’). The participant pressed buttons to indicate whether the answer to the problem was less than or greater than five. There were 20 trials and the outcome measure was throughput (i.e. number of correct responses per minute).

The memory search test assessed verbal working memory, immediate recognition and attention. A set of letters (the positive memory set) was displayed for memorisation. Individual letters were then displayed and the participant pressed designated buttons to indicate if each letter was or was not a member of the memorised set. There were 40 trials and the outcome measure was throughput (i.e. number of correct responses per minute).

The Stroop test assessed selective attention, inhibitory ability, executive functioning and processing speed. Three levels of complexity were used, in blocks. In the first block, the words RED, GREEN and BLUE were presented individually in black type on the screen. The participant was instructed to read each word and to press a corresponding key for each word (1 for RED, 2 for GREEN, 3 for BLUE). In the second block, a series of XXXX's were presented on the screen in one of three colours (red, green or blue). The participant was instructed to decide on the colour of the XXXX's and to press the corresponding key based on colour. In the third block, a series of individual words (RED, GREEN, BLUE) were presented in a colour that did not match the name of the colour depicted by the word. The participant was instructed to decide about the colour of the word and to press the response key assigned to that colour. The outcome measure was the mean reaction time for the third block divided by the mean reaction time for the second block (the ratio of block 3 to block 2). This provided an index of the ease with which a subject could respond appropriately to incongruent stimuli relative to their ability to respond to congruent stimuli. The higher the number the worse the performance.

The Tower puzzle test assessed problem solving that included visuo-spatial ability, motor control, rule adherence, spatial planning, strategy development and execution (decision-making and mental flexibility). Three spindles (posts) and five discs, each disc a different size, were displayed on the screen. The participant was instructed to move and arrange all the discs on the centre spindle in size order from largest on the bottom to smallest on the top. Only one disc could be moved at a time and a larger disc could never be placed on top of a smaller disc. Discs were moved using a mouse to select the spindles for disc moves. The outcome measure was the average actual number of moves made.

A 3 (Condition) × 3 (Altitude) repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to examine the effects on arterial oxygen saturation, mood and cognitive test performance of ‘Condition’ (baseline, altitude, altitude + supplementary oxygen) and ‘Altitude’ (where 0 = ground level, 8 = 8000 ft, 12 = 12,000 ft and 12 + O2 = 12,000 ft plus supplementary oxygen). Neither main effect was relevant as, for ‘Condition’ it was averaged over the three altitudes, and for ‘Altitude’, it was averaged over the three conditions. Because we were interested only in the changes (primarily in mood and cognitive test performance scores) between conditions by altitude, the test of interest for each variable was the significance of the interaction term. This would indicate whether mild hypoxia affected participants' mood or performance i.e. whether changes in mean scores for altitude differed by condition. The analysis therefore focused primarily on the 2-way interaction for each of the variables. A statistically significant interaction term for Condition*Altitude would be indicative of the effect of test condition differing with altitude. Statistically significant differences were accepted at p < 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

There were no differences in baseline values for SpO2 between Altitudes (p > 0.15) (Table 1
                     ). There was a main effect of Condition (p < 0.001), such that values decreased from baseline upon reaching Altitude (apart from at 0 ft) and then recovered and increased beyond baseline values once supplemental O2 was administered. There was a main effect of Altitude (p < 0.001), such that values upon reaching altitude were different from each other. Finally, a Condition*Altitude interaction was observed (p < 0.001).


                     Tables 2 and 3
                     
                      show the mean (SD) data for the mood and complex cognition tests respectively, and also the results of the statistical analyses. The only tests of mood for which there were any statistically significant effects for the Condition*Altitude interaction, were fatigue (F (4, 35) = 5.05, p = 0.001) and vigour (F (4, 35) = 2.67, p = 0.035). The significant interaction term for fatigue appeared to be due to an increased level at altitude in the 12,000 ft condition, relative to other data points. Consistent with this, the significant interaction for vigour appeared to be due to a decreased level of vigour at altitude in the 12,000 ft condition. Thus in summary, fatigue and vigour remained the same at 8000 ft but fatigue was increased and vigour reduced at 12,000 ft and was restored by supplementary oxygen. The only test of cognition for which there was any statistically significant effect for the Condition*Altitude interaction, was logical relations (F (4, 35) = 2.92, p = 0.023). Although this interaction term was significant, it appeared to be driven by a single outlying (high) mean score for the second trial of the zero altitude condition (37.1).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The main findings in this study were that feelings of fatigue and vigour remained the same at 8000 ft as at baseline, but fatigue was increased and vigour reduced at 12,000 ft and were restored by supplementary oxygen. This is one of the first studies to specifically examine mood. For long-haul aircrew, and for passengers too, the findings are reassuring, but the same cannot necessarily be said for flight situations where crew or passengers are exposed to mild hypoxia equivalent to a cabin altitude approaching 12,000 ft. It is not known yet how exposure to an in-flight cabin altitude of 10,000 ft will influence aspects of mood.

Although the effects of mild hypoxia equivalent to a cabin altitude of 12,000 ft were significant for one test of complex cognition, logical relations, this may have been due to an unexpectedly high value (37.1) during the second ‘altitude’ exposure at sea level. This might have occurred because there was an improvement due to practice from baseline to the ‘specified altitude’ but was negated by hypoxia at 8000 ft and 12,000 ft. With supplementary oxygen, performance may have fallen, perhaps because of the effect of the mask and/or time-related fatigue. Although the value of 37.1 for the sea level altitude condition might be unexpected, the finding could be taken to indicate an effect of mild hypoxia on logical relations performance. It is also consistent with findings of the critical review by Petrassi et al. (2012). However it is hard to unequivocally argue this point and it is clear that all of the other tests of complex cognition that were used in the present study were not significantly affected by mild hypoxia. Thus the present study does not support the view that complex cognition is impaired by mild hypoxia, even at cabin altitudes equivalent to 8000 ft. This finding differs from many previous studies. The present study had a strong experimental design in which there was a control condition and participants were blinded to their exposures. The results may therefore have greater validity than many of the earlier studies, many of which were less well ‘controlled’.

Paradoxically, the present findings contrast with the field observations of hypoxia symptoms (e.g. difficulty with calculations, feeling light headed, delayed reaction time, mental confusion) associated with real world exposures in helicopter operations below 10,000 ft (Smith, 2005, 2007). In Smith's studies the effects of mild hypoxia were particularly marked in loadmasters who also engaged in a lot of physical activity. It seems possible therefore that a combination of mild hypoxia and physical activity could combine to produce symptoms when the mild hypoxia and the physical activity in isolation fail to do so. It therefore seems plausible that complex cognition may be more likely to be degraded by exposure to mild hypoxia combined with other mild stressors such as physical activity, dehydration, sleep loss, long continuous working hours and circadian dysrhythmia, all of which are common in aviation and all of which might affect complex decision making. Thus any future investigation of the effects of each of these single stressors should be complemented by a systematic exploration of their combined effects. The present findings also contrast with the observation of procedural errors in simulated flight (Nesthus et al., 1997). In view of the disparity between our findings and these real-world findings, it seems that it would be prudent to undertake further investigations to examine the effects of mild hypoxia in well controlled conditions that more closely simulate real flight conditions.

The present study used a hypobaric chamber to simulate real-world exposures to mild hypoxia. The participants were blinded to the level of hypoxia (i.e. the altitudes) to which they were exposed and they were given adequate practices (four) of the mood and cognition tests prior to the main study, so that large learning improvements were unlikely as it has been shown that test result stability is reached within four practices (Eonta et al. 2011). To that extent, the findings are credible. It is therefore surprising that they contrast with the outcomes of some previous studies and with the conclusions of the systematic review by Petrassi et al. (2012). However, the present study was not a real-world, in-flight exposure to mild hypoxia. Future studies should be conducted in flight simulators and/or real flight to further explore these findings.

The study used a battery of psychological tests that drew on some of the complex cognitive capacities, including problem solving and decision-making that are common in a wide variety of real-world situations by pilots. However the tests did not fully simulate real operational activities. Thus although we hypothesized that some of the cognitive tests selected for the study would be affected by mild hypoxia on account of their complexity and novelty and because they involved multiple demands, the findings remain limited to a ‘field laboratory’ setting. Future studies should include tests that are more highly ecologically valid. In particular, future studies could be extended to include more discerning tests of complex reasoning/decision-making which include aspects of novelty and conflict decision making. This is easier said than done. They could include a range of tests that tax participants' performance in areas such as executive, innovative, creative and flexible thinking, typical of that required in crisis or emergency management.

To our knowledge there have been no studies of the effects of prolonged exposure to mild hypoxia. Coote et al. (2010) point out that ‘the effect of the relative hypoxia of aircraft cabins on learned tasks . . . are unlikely to have any important effect on most present day operations’ but that ‘there is uncertainty whether this situation would be the same with ultra-long range flights involving aircrew in exposures to cabin altitudes approaching 2438 m (8000 ft) for up to 20 h’. . . and that ‘studies are needed on the central effects of prolonged exposures to the present day accepted limits of the cabin altitude of commercial aircraft’. Future studies should examine the temporal aspects of exposure to mild hypoxia. It would also seem appropriate that future studies should also examine multiple levels (e.g. 6, 8, 10, 12 and 14, 000 ft) of hypobaric hypoxia in aircrew and include either flight simulators or be conducted during real flight operations.

An additional consideration should be to examine the effect of exposure to mild hypoxia on differences in performance of ‘high ability’ versus ‘low ability’ participants since there is some evidence in the cognitive psychological literature that the former suffer more than the latter from ‘cognitive load’ on cognitive tasks. A possible ‘fix’ might be to identify pilots who are more affected by mild hypoxia than others as a target for the use of supplementary oxygen. This approach is undesirable as it does not address the problem ‘at source’ and is thus not a preferred ergonomics/human factors solution, nor do we have sufficient knowledge of inter-individual variability in cognitive responses to acute hypoxia, let alone such responses to mild hypoxia. In addition, future studies should endeavour to include participant samples that are composed fully of pilots, rather than the opportunity and operationally-constrained mix of pilots and aircrew that we were able to secure in the present study.

The present study explored the efficacy of a potential practical ‘simple fix’ (i.e. the use of supplementary oxygen) in which it was hypothesized that mood and complex cognition would be restored to normal levels. It is gratifying that all of the mood and complex cognition tests were maintained at baseline levels regardless of altitude. Thus, the use of supplementary oxygen is, unsurprisingly, likely to be a credible, but short-term, ‘fix’ for any potential mood and cognitive impairments that may occur due to mild hypoxia at cabin altitudes equivalent to 8000–12,000 ft. The implications are equally applicable to aviators in smaller unpressurised aircraft.

In practice for operational decision making, the findings of the present study suggest that greater consideration could be given, by pilots and policy makers, to the use of supplementary 100% oxygen as a possible way of minimising any possible latent effects of mild hypoxia on pilots' mood and aspects of complex decision making, especially in novel or unusual situations. From an ergonomics or human factors perspective, this approach would be equivalent to the use of individualised PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) in other industries. It would not be the preferred solution since it is well-known that a solution at source is far superior in preventing exposure (in this case to mild hypoxia). An ‘at-source’ solution would be to strengthen the fuselage to allow a greater internal/external pressure gradient.

Whilst it is premature to seriously reconsider redesigning the strength and rigidity of the fuselages of pressurised aircraft, based on these findings alone, it is noteworthy that recent developments in materials used in aircraft construction have meant that some modern aircraft have reduced the cabin pressure to an equivalent of about 6000 ft. This should have benefits for both flight safety and passenger and pilot/crew comfort – and is to be lauded.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In a controlled laboratory study using a hypobaric chamber, the present study failed to show that mood and complex cognition were impaired by mild hypoxia equivalent to 8,000 ft altitude. However, it supported the view that some aspects of mood (feelings of fatigue and vigour) may be impaired by mild hypoxia equivalent to an altitude of 12,000 ft and this can be restored by breathing supplementary oxygen. The data in the present study do not support the view that mild hypoxia equivalent to either 8000 or 12,000 ft, impairs complex cognition. Unexpectedly, these findings do not support some recent uncontrolled field observations of symptoms and practical consequences of mild hypoxia at levels to which civil and military pilots are routinely exposed during long haul operations.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This study was supported by the Massey University Research Fund (11/0051). Squadron Leader Andy Campbell, Commanding Officer of the Royal New Zealand Air Force Aviation Medicine Unit provided valuable professional input and support for the study. Professor Hugh Morton advised on the statistical design and analysis.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

