@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Extending systems ergonomics thinking to accommodate the socio-technical issues of Systems of Systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           SoS differ from systems with subsystems, because of multiple ownership.


                        
                        
                           
                           This requires a different socio-technical approach to sustain them.


                        
                        
                           
                           ‘Surprises’ are endemic to the SoS and resilience is a key attribute.


                        
                        
                           
                           It is sensible to treat the SoS as a ‘wicked problem’, and use appropriate methods.


                        
                        
                           
                           Governance is therefore of primary importance as a feedback mechanism.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Systems of Systems

Characteristics

Wicked problems

Methods

Governance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Socio-technical issues for Systems of Systems (SoS) differ in several ways from those for systems, mainly because the individual systems that are components of the SoS are usually owned by different organisations, each responsible for the optimisation and operation of its own system. Consequently, management of the SoS is about negotiation and management of the interfaces. Because of issues of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs), commercial confidence, and the like, there is seldom sufficient, timely information in circulation about the SoS. Surprises are endemic to SoS, and resilience is a fundamental requirement. This paper outlines the different characteristics of SoS compared to ordinary systems, discusses many of the socio-technical issues involved, and then outlines a generic approach to these issues, treating the SoS as a ‘wicked problem’. Endemic to this is the need for governance, which is discussed briefly. This is followed by a description of the evident gaps in knowledge about the functioning of SoS, and a listing of tool classes, the development of which would enable progress to be made more effectively. Finally, the paper discusses how the SoS approach might be the best way to entrain ICT to address global drivers, thus pointing to the importance of the SoS approach.
               
            

The ergonomics profession is fairly well-equipped to deal with the socio-technical issues of systems, as the papers in this Special Issue attest. However, when one moves up to the next level of complexity, where systems themselves become bound into Systems of Systems (SoS), more issues emerge that require consideration, and which affect both the application of systems ergonomics thinking at the lower level of systems and at the SoS level. This paper discusses these extra issues, and ways in which they may be addressed.

By definition, SoS are much larger than the systems of which they are composed, and in many cases will be in existence for much longer than these component systems. They are often fundamental to the fabric of society and the functionality of the nation-state; examples are the government of the state itself; defence, law and order, and the continuous provision of energy, clean water, health & social security, and transport.

The aim of this paper is to highlight particular Human and Organisational issues that pertain to the design and operation of an SoS and to outline new approaches, methods and tools that need to be developed to address these issues. We begin by setting the context to provide a framework for the discussion which follows.

Section 1 introduces some of the established ways of characterising SoS, and outlines some of the differences compared to Systems Engineering. Section 2 discusses a number of the socio-technical issues arising from these differences; section 3 outlines how complexity within an SoS renders nugatory the standard, reductionist approach to solving systems issues. Section 4 then addresses the problem of delivering resilience in a SoS, making use of the ‘wicked problem’ approach, and section 5 discusses the technical and engineering governance of SoS, without which the ‘wicked problem’ approach is unlikely ever to succeed, and finally section 6 outlines a role for the SoS approach in addressing global drivers, as a way of showing its importance. However, on the basis of what goes up also comes down, the paper ends by considering some of the lingering drawbacks of this approach.

There are many definitions of System(s) of Systems, some of which are dependent on the particularity of an application area. Jamshidi (2009) has reviewed more than seven definitions of SoS and, although none are accepted universally by the community, the following has received substantial support and is adopted for the purpose of this paper:
                           
                              “A SoS is an integration of a finite number of constituent systems which are independent and operable, and which are networked together for a period of time to achieve a certain higher goal” (Jamshidi, 2009)
                        
                     

Firstly, it should be noted that according to this definition, formation of a SoS is not necessarily a permanent phenomenon, but rather a matter of necessity for integrating and networking systems in an organized way for specific goals such as robustness, cost, efficiency, etc.

Secondly, there are overlaps with the concepts of Systems, and of Complex Adaptive Systems. Indeed, the SoS approach, as currently understood and discussed, can be seen as an organizational version of the latter, and therefore as a class of system. However, the characteristic of managerial independence for the constituent systems and the implications that flow from this justify a separate classification for SoS, as discussed later.

As an example, consider a hospital, funded by the state, and serving a local community. In essence, this is a patient-processing system where initial triage defines the path each patient will take through the specialities, services and functions that are resident within the hospital, such as an ambulance service, X-ray, neurosurgery, paediatrics, maternity, physiotherapy, ward management, nutrition, patient records, waste management, portering, maintenance and many more.

Functionally, each of these services can be considered to be a system; for each there is a group of people supported by technology, intercommunicating and interoperating to reach a given goal, and, from a control perspective, able to do this independently of other systems. In practice, as opposed to just a control perspective, each of these will rely on the infrastructural systems such as water, power and so on in order to perform, and, on the basis of the flow of patients and information among the constituent systems, each will fulfil its goals. Fig. 1
                         illustrates the generic interfaces that such systems will require in order to participate long-term in a SoS.

The inter-relationship among these systems is highlighted when the phenomenon of ‘bed-blocking’ occurs, as discussed cogently by (Williams, 2010), where wards become full (for example because of a local epidemic or serious industrial accident). Because in the UK the hospital is legally obliged to accept patients, new ones are allocated to other wards. When these in turn become full, patients may be shifted on again; the problem becomes significant when patient records on occasion are not able to keep up with this, and a patient may become temporarily ‘lost’ in the system of systems that comprises the hospital, with a hunt going on to find the patient and restore the patient's treatment path through the designated services.

A widely-adopted characterization (Maier, 1998) is given below:
                           
                              ▪
                              The elements of the system are themselves sufficiently complex to be considered systems

Operating together the systems produce functions and fulfil purposes not produced or fulfilled by the elements alone

The elements possess operational independence. Each element fulfils useful purposes whether or not connected to the assemblage. If disconnected the element can continue to fulfil useful purposes

The elements possess managerial independence. Each element is managed, at least in part, for its own purposes rather than the purposes of the collective.

As Maier points out, the implications of these characteristics are:
                           
                              ▪
                              The development of stable intermediate forms over time for the SoS. Since the constituent systems have managerial independence, they may evolve in their own ways. For the SoS to remain fully functional it may be necessary to identify intermediate forms that enable this evolutionary process to occur without compromising the whole SoS

There is a need for policy triage for the whole SoS; in other words, to know what can be fixed and what can't. Standards and agreed functional protocols are a means of ensuring a degree of constancy and stability in the SoS.

Because of the endemic characteristic of managerial independence of the constituent systems, the main sources of leverage to control the development of the SoS must be at the interfaces of the systems, not within them.

The maintenance of collaboration across the SoS is essential if it is to succeed in its aims. Necessarily, collaboration is a human-centric process.

Latterly, the five SoS criteria above for SoS Engineering have been extended to include: inter-disciplinarity, heterogeneity of the systems involved, and networks of systems (DeLaurentis and Callaway, 2004). Not all SoS will exhibit all of the characteristics, but it is generally assumed that a SoS is characterised by exhibiting a majority of the Maier criteria, and particularly that of managerial independence. Although the individual systems in a SoS are usually considered to have independent operational viability, it is sometimes the case that the SoS must contain some systems the only purpose of which is to enable the interoperation of the other component systems; i.e. the enabling systems cannot operate outside the SoS.

A further categorization of SoS has been proposed, reflecting different degrees of control over the SoS, moderating the effect of the implications above (Dahmann and Baldwin, 2008):
                           
                              ▪
                              
                                 Directed. Directed SoS are those in which the system-of-systems is created and managed to fulfil specific purposes and the constituent systems are subordinated to the SoS. This class of SoS is best accomplished within a single organisation, which has the authority, resources, common standards and protocols to act as the foundations of the SoS.


                                 Acknowledged. Acknowledged SoS have recognized objectives, a designated manager, and resources for the SoS; however, the constituent systems retain their independent ownership, objectives, funding, development and sustainment approaches. Supply chains in the automotive industry are an example of this class.


                                 Collaborative. In collaborative SoS the component systems interact more or less voluntarily to fulfil agreed central purposes. This class of SoS is best suited to those SoS where the component systems are ‘owned’ by different organisations, all of whom are in fairly equal positions and there is no dominant organisation. The automotive and aviation industries provide examples of this.


                                 Virtual. Virtual SoS lack a central management authority and a centrally agreed purpose for the system-of-systems. Large-scale behaviour emerges—and may be desirable—but this type of SoS must rely on relatively invisible mechanisms to maintain it. The world-wide-web is often cited as an example of this.

While this is a useful categorization, it should be noted that most large SoS will have parts of the SoS that fit each of these categories, exacerbating the control problems.


                        Table 1
                         below, taken from a recent report (Barot et al., 2012), outlines some of the differences in design and operation between systems and SoS. Many of these point to the need to consider SoS as examples of a ‘wicked problem’ (Rittel and Webber, 1973).

An industrial body, the ‘Network Centric Operations Industry Consortium’
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           
                              https://www.ncoic.org/about/
                           
                         has identified a number of levels at which interoperation at the interfaces of an SoS will occur (see Fig. 1). These are shown in Fig. 2
                        . In recognition of the aims of the Journal and its readership, the discussion that follows is limited to just the five upper levels of this diagram. This is merely a convenience, it is a mistake to assume that there is no interaction between the technical and people levels.

There is a particular difficulty in defining the boundaries of a System of Systems when a socio-technical perspective is adopted, arising from the fact that people are now included. It is the capacity of people to operate as thinking, decision-making, responsibility-accepting, goal-seeking entities that makes them of fundamental importance to organisations, and their needs for a support network (sustenance, relaxation, accommodation, training, recompense, etc.) which significantly widens the boundaries to include many more systems. In relation to boundaries, time is of significance. For SoS of short duration (e.g. a year or less), many support systems can be assumed to be stationary, because nothing much will change within that period. For longer-lasting systems, perhaps with an expected duration of 50 years or more (in effect, ‘immortal’), issues of sustainability and change immediately emerge (the social system of systems for policing society, for example). It is also observable that most of the long-life SoS are essential to the continuity, safety, security and well-being of citizens in all the nations of the world, and that many of these SoS are global in extent.

Technically, there will be upgrades to the SoS at various intervals, occasioned by new technical developments, competitive pressures, and changes in goals for the SoS and its constituent systems. Socially, for the people in these SoS, there is the inevitable churn over time; as pointed out earlier, within 10 years of operation of a SoS it is likely that some 30% of its human operators and managers are likely to have been replaced, and all of them will have been replaced within 50 years.

Furthermore, because humans have cognitive skills far exceeding the capabilities of technical systems in their scope and subtlety, including the ability to know what they don't know, the boundaries of a SoS may have to be widened to include sources of information, knowledge and understanding such as professional societies and web-based networks. It may be necessary to include more amorphous ‘communities of practice’ (Wenger et al., 2004) and ‘megacommunities’ (Napolitano, 2010), in which SoS organisations may pass information to external organisations in other SoS for their benefit, without necessarily having a formal agreement to do so. In passing, this is a different arrangement to a Japanese keiretsu because there are no cross-holdings of shares to bind the participating companies together into a conglomerate and to entrain stability and influence among them.

Naturally, the definition of SoS boundaries becomes even more difficult when one appreciates that, for example, other members of the community of practice are probably protagonists in other SoS; where then are the boundaries? It is clear that some degree of pragmatism is required, using some stopping rule such as ‘the system and its owner is within the socio-technical boundary if it is accessed more than 10 times per week, else it is outside the SoS’.

An example of these issues was mentioned earlier; consider the policing SoS. The police force itself is composed of many systems to address the ills of society; recruitment, training, specialist units; development of procedures and processes, procurement, operations, maintenance and disposal of assets, links to the prison, justice and probation services, together with less-formal links to victims, criminals, witnesses, lawyers, informants, and the like. And all of these will require sustainment into the distant future.


                        Hubbard et al. (2010) refer to an emerging approach known as Organisational Systems Engineering (OSE) which involves treating the organisation as a system, made up of human, process and technical sub-systems, which interact and interface with each other. Within a SoS context there will be many organisational systems involved in operating and controlling the SoS and hence OSE {from now on relabelled as Organisational Systems of Systems Engineering or OSoSE) will need to incorporate additional purposes as noted below:
                           
                              •
                              Maintain the purposes of the SoS, including the strategies and policies that enable the purposes to be reached

Ensure that the SoS configuration is fit for purpose

Ensure interoperability of the systems that comprise the SoS

Ensure that the SoS, and the systems within it, are resilient and agile with respect to both foreseeable and unforeseeable risks, the latter requiring considerable human involvement should they eventuate (Provan and Milward, 1995; Barabasi, 2002; deMeyer et al., 2002)

Accommodate the restrictions on information flows around the SoS caused by Intellectual Property Rights, commercial confidentiality, security requirements, and many other sources.

Ensure compliance with legal and regulatory requirements (the ‘stay out of jail’ requirement)

Assure distributed situation awareness to minimise the likelihood and consequences of emergent SoS behaviour

Enable evolution of the SoS to occur with minimum disruption

We give two examples of the need for OS0SE; the first is a military example, in which the USAF B52 bomber, which entered service in 1955 as a high-altitude, nuclear-capable strategic bomber. It is still in service nearly 60 years later, but is now adapted for a role as a high-altitude, close air support capability for ground troops, with an appropriately-reconfigured support network (Willis, 2005a), both to keep it in the air and to enable it to carry out its missions accurately and precisely. This example demonstrates the evolutionary issue for SoS; furthermore, it is noteworthy that given the near 60 years' service lifetime of this aircraft type, there will be nobody actively involved in the support of its current capability who was there at the beginning – the longevity issue.

The second example is from the automotive industry (Sheffi, 2005). In the 1990s, Toyota supplier Aisin Seiki made P-valves for brake systems. These anti-skid valves regulate pressure across the brake system, and this company supplied 99% of all Toyota models. Factory No.1, manufacturing these valves, caught fire; 506 machine tools were destroyed. Toyota's alternate supplier was Nishin Kogyo, making 1%, and unable to ramp up production fast enough. Toyota at this time was running at 115% of normal production, as a commercial response to impending legislation.

Because of just-in-time processes, Toyota had only a few hours' stock of valves, with trucks on the road carrying another 2 day's capacity. Aisin salvaged some tools, replaced others and was in production in 2 weeks, making 10% of requirements and 60% after 6 weeks, and 100% after 2 months. Both Aisin and Toyota, in their respective keiretsus, asked for help. 22 organisations from the Aisin keiretsu and 36 from the Toyota keiretsu replied. Within 5 days, Aisin had made available blueprints and process expertise and production had been allocated. Notably, Denso, a major Toyota supplier, outsourced their own production to free up tools and processes to produce these P-valves (as did others), and helped to develop alternative processes for the valves using different precision tools in other smaller suppliers. Within 2 days some valves were delivered by these alternate suppliers; within 9 days of the fire, all Toyota plants were functioning as normal again.

During this period, neither financial nor legal negotiation took place, nor was pressure applied to Aisin Seiki to prioritise Toyota over other customers such as Hino trucks. However, Aisin eventually covered the direct costs – labour, equipment, materials involved for these suppliers, and Toyota gave their Tier 1 suppliers 1% of their respective sales to Toyota for the January–March quarter as an appreciation gesture. These firms passed on the benefit pro rata to their suppliers, and so on.

The examples have been chosen to highlight some of the important human and organisational issues concerning SoS; the need for adaptability, resilience and evolutionary planning. These examples are not unique; other similar (and dissimilar) cases are known around the globe, in different industries in different countries. Altogether, there are many more aspects influencing OSoSE that have been discussed in the professional literature; for example, (Keating et al., 2003; Fisher, 2006; Schaeffer, 2006; DOD, 2008; Rebovich, 2008; Sousa-Poza et al., 2008; Jamshidi, 2009). We discuss a selection of the issues below, using the classes of Government & Legal, Strategic, Policy, Operations and Transaction while bearing in mind the common threads across this classification; bounded knowledge, continuous change, longevity, and the need for resilience.

At this level, the three main considerations are the legal framework that ensures competition (in a capitalist society), the governance of SoS, and the implications for society in general should any (or several) critical SoS fail. The competition issue arises when in a given industry, various groups of organisations band together to form SoS that are more able to meet market demands, and thus secure a competitive advantage. At a simplistic level, if most of the organisations involved become components of various SoS, the net effect is to reduce the number of competitors in that market. Furthermore, if some of the SoS are larger than others, they may also accrue an advantage merely due to their size.

For example, a major clothing retailer in Europe was in a position where most of its national suppliers sent to it about 30% of their production, making that retailer the major customer whose contract was critical to the survival of the supplier. This meant that the retailer was in a very powerful position to control the supply chain. Over a number of years, because of its size and buying power, the retailer moved into the purchase of raw materials for its supply chain, with the acquiescence of its suppliers. This evolutionary move meant that the retailer had control of input to its suppliers, and control over the suppliers' output, and in principle resulted in a coercive SoS. Fortunately, the retailer was very ethical in its dealings, so the practical outcome was that the suppliers were buffered from the vagaries of the supply-side market very well, and goods for this retailer were produced at lower cost compared to the same goods for other retailers.

In a competitive, capitalist economy, this amounts to a loss of competition, which may lessen the benefits that society is expected to gain from such an economy. While this argument is indeed simplistic and somewhat purist, it does point to a role for governmental oversight and for a legal basis for intervention. Both of these require suitable metrics and trigger points for governmental action, and these are probably best addressed by the establishment of a SoS as a legal entity responsible for its actions and the provision of a governance framework for any such SoS. This becomes especially important when a SoS is of critical importance for the security of society in general.

This level is concerned with the strategy of the SoS itself. Its strategy will depend on its environment, the volatility of that environment, its geographic spread across different legislations in different national states, and the nature of its business domain and its perceived risks (deMeyer et al., 2002; Hammer, 2002; Tranfield et al., 2004; Sheffi, 2005; Fisher, 2006; Woods and Hollnagel, 2006; Sinclair, 2007; Siemieniuch and Sinclair, 2008; Taleb, 2008). There are two important aspects to this; firstly the operational processes that deliver capability or services that meet the purpose of the SoS, and secondly the maintenance of the SoS itself as it transforms itself over its lifetime to meet extant exigencies, both expected and unexpected.

For SoS that may be classed as Directed or Acknowledged, it may be possible to set up Steering Committees and Management Committees (or equivalents) to manage the strategic and policy issues that will arise – NATO military expeditions are an example; in the civilian world, in the UK there is the mandatory ATOL scheme designed to provide a ‘get you home’ service for air travellers booking through holiday companies, requiring those companies firstly to be registered and assessed, and to contribute to an insurance scheme for the air travellers. For co-operative and virtual SoS, such as the rapidly-growing ‘Internet of Things’ –IoT (Marsden, 2012; Swaminathan, 2012), it is largely left to the constituent systems to manage these, through their interfaces. For all of these, and particularly the Co-operative and Virtual SoS, they will flourish best on a ‘level playing field’ delineated and supervised by governments.

This general level is more concerned with how the SoS regulates and constrains what and how it executes its business. It is at this level where considerations such as inter-organisational trust, partnering, service level agreements, and contracts are important. Various fundamental issues such as the potential clash between lean operations and the need for resilience must be addressed, and plans for risk mitigations are prepared. As an example, in the automotive industry lean operations imply the smooth, continuous running of assembly lines with minimal holdings of stocks. In turn, this means an operating environment of constant state and ‘no surprises’. To achieve this for the production process requires much managerial and organisational effort around the edges of the process. This can be achieved by extending the stable environment as far as is possible up the supply chain, so that the managerial effort is moved elsewhere. The result, as shown in the Aisin Seiki example mentioned earlier, becomes more brittle; less able to withstand interruptions to supply and any other emergent happenings that impinge on the whole supply chain. Of particular importance in these is the issue of SoS complexity, considered in more detail in section 3, because of the likely occurrence of unwanted emergent behaviour characteristic of systemic complexity.

Inter-organisational trust is vital. Because of the bounded-knowledge problem, most SoS operate with incomplete knowledge most of the time. This implies that organisations in the SoS must behave with integrity and fairness, in order that other organisations may predict with some accuracy the likely behaviour, and operate accordingly. Some reassurance will be generated by the terms of contracts, service-level agreements and other formal arrangements; however, unexpected disruptions and other emergent behaviour is always likely (consider the Aisin-Toyota example above), and it is trust in the promises and performance of others that enables co-operative solutions to be found quickly. The intra-organisational conditions for the building of trustworthy behaviour have been discussed elsewhere (Siemieniuch and Sinclair, 2000; 2002); however, some implications for the organisational interfaces within the SoS are discussed below, since they apply to SoS in government, military and civilian domains.
                           
                              •
                              In many inter-organisational interfaces within the SoS, it is the relationship and authority of the roles on each side of the interface that is important. Authority over resources is also important, to obtain the swift response necessary to deal with the day-to-day disturbances and the occasional ‘black swans’ that are characteristic of SoS operations within noisy environments. An implication of this is that the interfacing roles should not have long chains of approvals above them in order to obtain appropriate reactions to events, and maintain the resilience of the SoS. However, in order for delegation of authority and responsibility to work well, there are a number of other issues to be addressed; situation awareness, communications, knowledge and information dissemination being three of these. In other words, the interfaces should be seen as ‘thick’ interfaces; not just abut the transfer of information and products, but reaching further into the organisations to include their cultures and ways of working.

Many of the interactions that happen across such interfaces are small-scale problems that require solutions that are not envisaged in the formal agreements between organisations, or may require some ‘bending’ of the rules on both sides of the interface for efficient, swift resolution of the problem. For such exercises to work well, each organisation must have an appropriate culture; good, distributed knowledge of operations, ‘work-arounds’ and events; and devolved authority and responsibility. It also helps if the personnel involved across the interface know each other well, so that they may trust each other during the rule-bending phase.

One organisation may have several interfaces with another organisation within the SoS, each managed independently of the other interfaces (e.g. operations, maintenance, financial, etc). This can create a confused image of each organisation, depending on the quality of the interfaces. This points to the need for a strong organisational culture of co-operation, so that the important characteristics for the SoS are dominant. These are usually honesty, integrity, rapid and effective response, the willingness to share both benefits and pain, and respect – in short, the usual characteristics of partnering. These may differ for different SoS, but, whatever the set, they should be demonstrated across all the interfaces.

It is at this level where organisational and Information and Communications technologies (ICT) considerations overlap. The ideal for the SoS is smooth operations within the established strategic and policy constraints of each of the individual organisations and of the SoS in which they are embedded. The quality of each interface between the organisations is critical in achieving this ideal, and we discuss some issues below; firstly for ITC, and then organisational.

For ITC, the use of well-established open architectures, standards, codes of practice, agreed terminology, etc., is essential. Nevertheless, there remains the problem that local interpretation of these by the designers of software systems, which in the past has resulted in the concatenation of several different ‘best in class’ systems supposedly designed in accordance with the same interface standards, failing to interoperate as consistently as required. The resilience requirements of SoS indicate that there should be provision within each organisational interface of sufficiently-skilled personnel to devise suitable ‘work-arounds’ to allow the SoS to keep operational until a more complete solution is devised. Since these failures of interoperation are likely to occur when unusual circumstances pertain, there is a need for some careful resource planning for this.

For the organisation that is contributing a system to a SoS, there are some structural considerations for resilience and smooth operations within the SoS. A service-oriented organisational architecture is a good option in most cases, since its priorities fit the needs of organisations within a SoS. Whatever structure is adopted by an organisation to suit its circumstances, it is likely that a particular issue will have to be addressed; the potential clash between process integrity and process delivery. There will always be pressures, driven by the changing environment of the organisation; to adjust processes to fit a given SoS needs more economically, or more effectively. However, if the process also services other SoS, or there are duplicate processes for other SoS, any such adjustment can result in a loss of overall process integrity and resilience. There appears to be no generalised solution to this issue; each organisation must find its own best solution.

In addition, there is the issue of potential incompatibilities of operations within the SoS. Fig. 3
                         below (Gover, 1993) illustrates this, showing a lifecycle for organisations in the computer-chip manufacturing industry, with changes in the drivers for the organisational architecture and operations as the lifecycle matures. It may be that different organisations within a single SoS are at different stages of lifecycle maturity of the market and hence have different drivers and management styles appropriate to these. Clearly this could present incompatibilities on each side of an inter-organisational interface. Equally clearly, the possible existence of these incompatibilities indicates the importance of the considerations discussed in this paper, necessary to ameliorate these incompatibilities.

At this level, Information Technology and Communications (ITC) play a critical part. From an organisational perspective, the goal for transactions is to deliver at the interface(s) the content of the transaction (product, capability, information, etc) on time, in full, and at acceptable quality, according to service level agreements. Organisationally, this requires attention to all of the matters discussed above. From an ITC perspective, this implies attention to architectures, networks, protocols, taxonomies, and security issues.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

This section has discussed a number of impediments to the efficient and effective operations of an SoS. These impediments occur at a number of levels, ranging from the super-SoS level where governmental and regulatory issues are addressed, down to the level of transactions, which are the real-world expression of the functionality of the SoS.

Having mentioned the term, ‘complexity’, in the discussions above, it is timely to ensure clarity of meaning for the term, from an organisational perspective. By the very nature of the SoS concept, it suffuses all aspects of the SoS. Sometimes complexity within the SoS aids the purpose and operations of the SoS; more often complexity manifests itself in emergent behaviour that is both unexpected and detrimental to the smooth functioning of the SoS.

Unfortunately, there are a number of definitions: for example (Simon, 1981; Allen, Boulton et al., 2005; Kuras and White, 2005; Sheard, 2005). For this paper the authors have adopted the following:
                        
                           •
                           “Complexity is a behavioural characteristic of the network of agents and relationships that make up the system. It is not decomposable to individual elements or relationships.” (Siemieniuch and Sinclair, 2002)

Considering each organisation/system within a SoS, the characteristics that define it as complex are (Gregg, 1996):
                        
                           •
                           Many agents, of different kinds

Some degree of behavioural autonomy for agents

Multiple steady states for agents

Interactions between agents in an environment

Lots of connections between agents

Communicating in parallel

Effects of an evolving environment

Effects of evolving agents

Interactions between different goals within an agent

Interactions between agents with different goals

Language/culture differences

As Gregg pointed out, “If several of these are present, the global behaviour of the system is likely to be unpredictable, long-term”. For a SoS, having systems with such characteristics within the SoS is a near-guarantee of emergent behaviour. At the level of the SoS, the implication is that OSoSE necessarily must address resilience.

Furthermore, there is the ‘Law of conservation of complexity’, attributed to (Woods and Hollnagel, 2006):
                        
                           "Complexity is conserved under transformation and translation".
                     
                  

This does indeed appear to be a law as observed empirically and is in accordance with the complexity definitions referred to above. However, there are two loopholes; firstly, it seems to be possible to translate complexity to different parts of the SoS which provide a more amenable environment where managerial action can ameliorate the effects of complexity more easily and more effectively. Secondly, it is necessary to distinguish between two types of complexity; induced and intrinsic. Intrinsic complexity is in the nature of the problem being addressed, and conforms to the law above. Induced complexity, on the other hand, arises from the way in which the SoS (or its component organizations) organize themselves to address the situation. Induced complexity can be reduced, or even near-eliminated, by appropriate organizational design, and a prime function of OSoSE is to address this. An example of both of these points is provided by a Colombian bakery, as the excerpt below indicates (Guitink et al., 1994):
                        “An example from Colombia … Productos Ramos S.A., an industrial bakery, was faced with an aging fleet of delivery trucks. Not only did replacement mean a large cash outlay, but the 135 trucks often operated with partial loads and had trouble parking near their destination. … However, after considering all the options, the bakery introduced a decentralized computerized distribution system – a fleet of 50 trucks hauled products to satellite warehouses, where a fleet of 904 [independent] cargo-tricycles picked up the goods for final delivery. As a result of this inter-modal integration, distribution costs dropped from 27 to 8 percent of total costs, and employment increased substantially”
                     
                  

A similar example concerns the EU; a global supplier in the ‘Fast Moving Consumer Goods’ (FMCG) retail sector had factories across the EU, supplying the local region with a range of products. These factories were efficient, but had significant downtime because of frequent changes of product. The complexities of reducing this downtime proved to be enormous; the company took a different route. It reduced the range of products within each factory, and distributed them more widely. Net, they removed induced complexity from the production side and moved it to the distribution side, where the complexities could be managed more efficiently and at lower cost.

It is instructive at this point to consider a comment by Alberts. He has said, cogently (Alberts, 2011):
                        
                           “If it is local interactions that give rise to the outcomes that occur, we can no longer think about organizing activities solely from a top-down perspective. The simple fact is that complex systems or situations cannot be predicted or controlled. The best that one can hope for is to exert some influence to keep behaviors within acceptable bounds.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           As a result, there is virtually nothing left in our traditional tool kit to deal with the degree of difficulty that attends complex endeavors.”
                        
                     
                  

Clearly, then, resilience of any SoS is a prime engineering requirement, and as a general remark, will best be delivered by humans operating within the SoS.

Two portmanteau concepts encountered in discussions of SoS are Agility, and Resilience. Depending on the author, each can include the other. For the purposes of this section, we assume that one cannot be resilient unless one has agility. The definition of resilience, then, is as follows:
                           
                              "…the capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change so as to still retain essentially the same function, structure, identity, and feedbacks". (Walker et al, 2004).
                        
                     

Organisationally, several characteristics are required to be resilient:
                           
                              •
                              Organisational coherence is critical, and implies:
                                    
                                       ○
                                       better design of the organisation to reflect the needs and purposes of the SoS – roles, allocation of responsibilities and authority, resources, rewards, etc.

shared values, culture and goals

open access to information and knowledge

Process measurement is critical

Acceptance of organisational reconstruction both within organisation and within the SoS

Conflict management is a necessary, fundamental skill for all middle and top-level managers, and a desirable skill for all personnel.

Unfortunately, providing solutions to these requirements is not trivial. Adapting Alberts in his discussion of complexity and agility/resilience (Alberts, 2011):
                           
                              •
                              Because emergent behaviour is a major characteristic of complexity, it removes the use of reductionism as an approach to understand SoS problems. Instead, understanding must come from experience and simulations, through the recognition of patterns.

Because we cannot predict the long-term future, we cannot determine whether an envisaged solution is good or bad, long-term. This implies that resilience is a critical attribute for SoS, together with close attention to the trajectory of the SoS in time, so that the patterns of mistakes and their associated lessons from the past are not repeated.

Adopting an incremental change approach as an alternative way forwards is unlikely to work all the time, because it may encounter emergent discontinuities in SoS behaviour, due to limits on resilience for individual systems, for example. Nevertheless, given a resilient SoS and an environment of lower variability, it is one way to evolve the functionality and performance of the SoS.

Because of the inherent characteristic of bounded knowledge in the SoS, it is probable that problem solvers will face situations that they do not completely understand and perhaps cannot hope to understand, particularly when information flows are limited by policy constraints, etc. Simulation is probably the best help in this, as will the avoidance of decisions that cannot be undone, since recovery from terminal decisions that turn out to be bad ones may not be possible.

Because emergent behaviour tends to be local, with possible global consequences, a centralized, top-down organizational approach to design and operation of a SoS is unlikely to succeed. The best that one can expect is to exert leadership to keep behaviours within acceptable bounds, to ensure that the organization is agile with well-informed people, to ensure that decision-making is devolved rather than centralized, and then rely on resilience to maintain progress.

This last list is an exercise in doom and gloom for the standard approach of top-down decomposition of problems; fortunately, it should be noted that SoS vary in the stability of their environments and internal characteristics, so that for some SoS in stable environments, a standard approach might work well. For most others, this is not so, and it is useful to consider other managerial approaches. Adapting (deMeyer et al., 2002), we may offer the following classification of approaches:
                           
                              •
                              Stable environments (i.e. ‘normality’ is an achievable, recognisable state). Orthodox managerial approaches are sufficient

Foreseeable uncertainty (i.e. likely disturbances and changes are foreseeable, but not their timing). This environment requires risk management techniques, decision trees and preparatory planning, to enable appropriate, agile adjustments to whatever happens.

Unforeseeable uncertainty (i.e. there is no Plan B). Managers are required to be flexible orchestrators, networkers, and ambassadors. Trust within and between organisations is critical. Scan horizons continuously, and sign flexible contracts. The Aisin-Toyota example discussed earlier is in this category.

Fast-changing or chaotic environments (for example, due to disasters). Managers must be entrepreneurs and knowledge managers. Resilience depends critically on having long-term relationships beyond individual SoS lifecycles. Inter-organisational relationships must be based on trust and handshakes, rather than formal negotiations and legal documents. Continuous, ruthless concentration on go/no-go decisions will be required, with planning horizons limited to the next identifiable decision point.

For the last three of these environments, the copious literature on ‘High Reliability Organisations’ is of relevance (Weick et al., 1999; Bigley and Roberts, 2001; Rosness et al., 2001; Sullivan and Beach, 2003; Grote, 2004; Tranfield et al., 2004; Weick and Sutcliffe, 2007; Strigini, 2012).

In the sections above, it has been pointed out that, depending on the nature of the SoS, different managerial approaches will be needed for the organisations that comprise SoS; in other words, a combination of OSE and OSoSE is required in order to deliver a SoS that attains its goals. What will make this already-difficult, complex task even more difficult is the unknowns; the diffuse boundary of the SoS, the effects of IPRs, confidentiality and security considerations on information flows, the disparate aims of the organisations that comprise the SoS, and so on. These continual uncertainties imply that we should approach the design of SoS as dealing with a ‘wicked problem’ (Rittel and Webber, 1973; Vicente et al., 1997; Conklin, 2006; Daw, 2007). Fortunately, a degree of systemisation has been brought to this approach, compiled into Table 2
                         below. This table discusses the characteristics of wicked problems, how they are exhibited, and amelioration activities to these characteristics – not solutions, because wicked problems do not have long-term solutions.

A final key element which need to be addressed in OSOSE is overall governance of the SoS: this is discussed in the following section.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

As stated previously in this paper, despite the fact that our safety, health, education, security, etc. depends on the steady, reliable functioning of SoS, we do not understand enough about the multiple, non-linear connections and dependencies among component systems (as the discussion about wicked problems indicates), nor of the way that they may self-organise and co-evolve within a constantly changing environment over a lifetime. Furthermore these SoS are pervasive through our societies and increasingly are interlinked in a global and distributed fashion. Upgrades or new systems will be required to fit into this complex SoS environment – rarely will they be standalone – and current engineering, governance and control strategies need reconsideration in order to cope with the resultant degrees of uncertainty and unpredictable emergent behaviour that is endemic in the design and operation of these SoS. Hence a wider understanding of Technical and Engineering Governance (TEG) for SoS is required to provide essential input to the process of ameliorating the wicked problem that the SoS can represent. TEG also provides essential support for the tenets of corporate governance (Cadbury, 1992; Turnbull, 1997; OECD, 1999).

Governance in general is concerned with the three questions:
                           
                              •
                              Are we doing the right things (leadership)

Are we doing those things right? (management)

How do we know this? (metrics and measurement processes)

We now consider how these questions might be answered for a SoS, with respect to TEG.

Any kind of Technical and Engineering Governance framework for an SoS should aim to control and monitor the engineering function in an effective way, but with the prime aim of not stifling innovation which is necessary to retain a competitive edge. The following are an initial proposed series of objectives that a TEG framework should aim to achieve:
                           
                              •
                              Manage the engineering function along the SoS lifecycle effectively and efficiently in order to meet or comply with all requirements placed upon it from the customer/stakeholders, other internal business functions (eg finance) and any external usage, safety or other constraints in the SoS environment.

Comply with any associated engineering legislation that may impact on the design or operation of the SoS. An example of this would be airworthiness requirements.

Ensure that the engineering function within the SoS is flexible and adaptive to change since SoS requirements from customers/stakeholders are likely to change over the life-cycle of the SoS, dependent on need and changes in the SoS environment.

Ensure that the engineering function is acting in support of the overall enterprise system delivering the SoS to avoid replicating the situation in some organisations where there is a large wall between the engineering function and the rest of the business, which can breed an ‘us-and-them’ attitude which is counter-productive

Deploy ‘best practice’ processes in the different engineering areas and ensure that key decision making roles are clearly identified. The engineering function should ensure that the configuration of competences among its staff is optimal, and deploy those competent staff to roles in the most effective and flexible way.

The context of governance for different systems within an SoS involves several issues including TEG goals and strategy, policies, existing TEG processes and any recognised TEG problems or risks. Work on an EPSRC Innovative Manufacturing and Construction Research Centre Project at Loughborough University (Nendick et al., 2006) proposed a To Be Model for Engineering Governance. Three key components are fundamental to this model:
                           
                              •
                              
                                 Governance Agents are the people involved in some way with governance flows. Agents include top-level executive management who govern the engineering function, line managers, down to engineers and technicians who work on different SoS subsystems. The structure of the relationships between the various agents is complex, varied and sometimes informal. Therefore, the modelling of agents and the structures of relationships between them is a crucial step to understanding the current state of TEG within a particular SoS.


                                 Governance Mechanisms define the actual implementation of TEG throughout the SoS. Different organisations within the SoS are likely to use a different array of mechanisms depending on the specific circumstances or the nature of the SoS that is being delivered. It has been established that there are 8 main classes of mechanisms commonly in use throughout engineering organisations:
                                    
                                       ○
                                       External drivers – These are standards such as ISO-9000 that may be mandated through customer requirements.

Internal drivers – Initiatives such as CMMI (Ibrahim et al., 2004)

Regulations – Laws with regard to product safety, the environment etc. that individuals are responsible for complying with.

Structure – Including the engineering management hierarchy and Roles and Responsibilities of agents.

Process – Systems of Systems engineering and lifecycle processes that specify how certain activities should be carried out.

Tools – The tools, such as software packages, that support other mechanisms.

Groups – Groups such as committees, working/steering groups and peer reviews.

Informal – Other informal mechanisms such as management styles and culture.

Two critical issues will immediately be apparent: the existence of these mechanisms is not enough – it is in the execution of these that governance resides, and this depends on the disciplined, motivated approach of the personnel involved; secondly a disciplined, motivated approach to any organisational goal depends on the company culture, structure of authority, and leadership. If TEG is to be assured, then these issues must be addressed as well. The development of an overall control subset within the SoS engineering governance framework will be key to this.
                           
                              •
                              
                                 Governance Feedback is crucial to gauging the effectiveness of the TEG strategy at any one time. Examples of governance feedback include:
                                    
                                       ○
                                       Audits – Full assessment of the state of governance (mechanisms).

Whistle-blowing channels – Give those at the bottom of the management structure a link to the top for important matters.

Metrics – Special metrics to evaluate aspects of governance.

Meetings – Hold meetings with agents at different levels.

A particular issue that must also be considered here is the effect of complexity. As outlined above, the conditions exist for unpleasant surprises to occur in the SoS, even in an environment of dedicated engineers doing their best to meet their goals. These could be due to many factors, apart from cutting-edge issues in engineering. These include such things as different groups reaching different levels of maturity in the design of inter-related components or systems, unexpected interactions between unrelated components or systems, different interpretations of documents and drawings, and so on. Because of the nature of complexity, it precludes top-down control, and demands a degree of self-government throughout the engineering systems within the SoS. The delivery of organisational structures and training that encourage this, are important. It then becomes necessary to deliver governance structures, through the considerations outlined above, that will ensure wide-spread engineering situational awareness so that the undesirable emergent behaviours that are a characteristic of complexity can be minimised.

The workshop on Systems of Systems (DG INFSO, 2009) noted that:
                        
                           Through the integration of private and public systems at all levels and scales there is the potential to offer improved societal impact. Societal impact may be direct or indirect, at the level of the individual or at larger scales; increasing efficiencies and producing new techniques and methods and approaches to working.
                     
                  

This statement reveals both the benefits that investment in SoS research may realise and the risks and vulnerabilities that failure to invest may create. The highly, and increasingly, connected nature of modern society means that the existence of SoS is an unavoidable factor of modern life, driving the need for better techniques to analyse, design for, manage, and retire SoS and the individual systems that contribute to SoS. In essence, the challenge is to predict and manage emergence of increasingly complex and complicated SoS. Gaps in knowledge of how to do this exist at all levels and scales and, importantly between levels and simultaneously at several scales. The knowledge gaps identified below (Barot et al., 2012; Henshaw et al., 2013) will require a co-ordinated effort of multi-disciplinary research in which ergonomics/human factors has a key role to play. In almost every case, successful research would lead to improved positive societal impact as well as avoiding negative impact. There is overlap between many of the areas identified below. The list of knowledge gaps is not exclusive and is presented as an initial input to the development of programmes.


                     System Identification: The concept of system identification is not well-defined for Systems of Systems, and an obvious cause of unexpected (and generally undesirable) emergent behaviour is failure to correctly identify the system of interest by the system designers. This is an area for fundamental research in SoSE.


                     Distributed, and distribution of, work: Changes in the demographic of the EU workforce (e.g. aging workforce, changes in mobility, geographical wage differences) mean that it is likely that rather than taking workers to the work, increasingly the work will be taken to the workers. This is already addressed in the ICT domain, but other sectors will need to restructure to accommodate this.


                     Action at a distance: As (Asaro, 2011) has pointed out, SoS allows for unethical and criminal behaviour at a distance from the perpetrators, especially when crossing legislative jurisdictions. This raises detection, regulatory and prosecutorial issues that need to be resolved (e.g. how is responsibility to be allocated?). This is especially a challenge in the cyber domain.


                     Information Security: Loss or corruption of information due to benign and malicious attacks on IT systems. The cost of conducting a cyber attack is very low, but the cost of protection is very high.


                     Assurance of Intellectual Property Rights and competitive advantage: Related to Information Security; a major problem for efficiency and efficacy of large-scale SoS is the protection of information for commercial reasons. The result is that the SoS may operate under conditions of imperfect, incomplete information most of the time. There seems to be a requirement for better mechanisms to protect IPRs, etc., so that protagonists in a SoS feel more able to divulge information without material loss of competitive value.


                     Distributed Risk: The interdependencies between component systems can lead to complex relationships in terms of risk ownership and liability. Furthermore, redistribution of risk because of SoS interdependencies may distort the market for future provision of products and services. Research is needed into the nature of risk ownership in SoS.


                     Automation and autonomy: A SoS may have component systems that have no humans involved in their operations, and have a significant degree of autonomy in decision-making, with direct effects on particular segments of society (e.g. robots for assisted living scenarios). Issues of safety, certification, maintenance and responsibility are raised.


                     Ethical behaviour of SoS: In an environment in which participants in a situation cannot fully comprehend the wider implications of their actions and where SoS behaviours may be the emergent properties of many seemingly independent actions, the requirement for ethical behaviour on the part of all organisations and systems becomes imperative (Seidman, 2012).


                     Safety of SoS operations: Action at a distance has strong implications for safety. These range from different conceptions of safety in different jurisdictions, different expectations for the operational behaviour of SoS, different understanding of the risks of SoS operational behaviour, etc. A significant theme in this problem is better understanding of how to create shared awareness.


                     Governance and regulation: Given that many SoS are of critical importance for the safety and security of society (e.g. health, policing, emergency, etc.), their integrity and security of structure and operations is a paramount consideration (Maier, 2005). Appropriate internal governance systems and external regulatory oversight must be developed.


                     Invariant partial architectures for SoS (Maier, 2005): For most SoS, it is believed that portions of their architecture will remain almost invariant over time, although other portions may be labile. It may be that there are commonalities over types of SoS for these invariant portions that will permit standardisation and operating efficiencies to be obtained. The potential benefits indicate that this should be explored.


                     Variability and ‘tipping points’ (Tainter, 1996; Rudolph and Repenning, 2002; Maier, 2005): Theoretically, there are conditions under which SoS behaviour may collapse (a form of emergent behaviour). For example, there is the variability issue, where although the average rate of response of the SoS is within design limits, there may be occasions where the required rate is beyond these limits and the SoS fails catastrophically. This latter condition may arise because of the extent and complexity of the SoS itself, which inadvertently builds in rigidities that result in collapse as the only available behaviour of the SoS. As the ‘Internet of things’ becomes a reality, and as governments interlink their services, the possibility of collapse becomes ever more critical, and requires better understanding of its characteristics.


                     Problems of distributed intelligence in SoS: Although distributed intelligence within SoS is a desirable goal for effective, efficient and speedy response to local conditions, there are potential problems when conflicting plans are developed dynamically. While these issues are well understood for Directed SoS (Dahmann and Baldwin, 2008), the solutions for other classes of SoS are less obvious, and need development. While there is always the option of legal redress, it is not the best solution to the problem.


                     Tools and techniques for understanding, designing and upgrading SoS behaviour. In particular, there is a severe lack of easy-to-use, effective and efficient tools that convey easy-to-understand meaning for tool users faced with some particular class of SoS problem. This should be addressed as a matter of urgency, and some of the necessary classes of tools are identified in the conclusion to this paper.


                     Knowledge and skills gaps: Many authors have stated that (a) SoS engineering is a multi-disciplinary exercise, and (b) has the characteristics of a ‘wicked problem’ (Rittel and Webber, 1973; Daw, 2007). The creation and management of component systems within SoS requires a workforce with appropriate systems skills and knowledge, requiring training programmes in SoS engineering (Sousa-Poza et al., 2008). Research is required to help define the training and education needed to equip the EU workforce for future SoS challenges.

It is time to stand back and consider both the social benefits and the endemic difficulties of the SoS approach. As was said earlier, the increasingly inter-connected nature of modern society means that the existence of SoS is an unavoidable factor of modern life, driving the need for better techniques to analyse, design for, manage, and retire SoS and the individual systems that contribute to SoS. It is hoped that the examples discussed briefly in this paper demonstrate this. However, looking to the future, perhaps there is a more important reason for adopting this approach; in addressing the ‘Global Drivers’.

A number of significant reports (Wilbanks et al., 2007; UN-FAO, 2009; Halonen and Zuma, 2012; Sulston, 2012; World-Bank, 2012) have pointed to a collection of inter-related, interoperating, global drivers that by about 2050 will significantly affect the world population. A list of these includes:
                           
                              •
                              Population demographics (growth, migration and aging)

Food security (including water security)

Energy security

Resource depletion (including utilisation and re-utilisation)

Emissions and global climate

Community security and safety (including information security)

Transportation

Globalisation of economic and social activity

Taken together, these drivers imply a ‘perfect storm’ of change over the next 50 years and beyond. Since most citizens of the world live in urban environments, and it is in urban environments where most wealth generation happens, the impact of these drivers on the urban environment is of major interest (and given the dependence of the urban environment on the rural environment, the latter will be entrained as well; it cannot be ignored). Consequently, since these drivers are already having an effect, it is of major importance to have a deep understanding of the required change processes to accommodate these drivers, the risks that will be faced as the accommodation is developed, the level of resilience that is required and the resources that must be made available.

It is immediately obvious that if the global drivers are inter-related, then they must be addressed cohesively and coherently, while recognising the legacy infrastructures and systems that already exist in the urban environment. This is best achieved by the ‘smart city’ paradigm (Batty et al., 2012), defined as “a city in which ICT is merged with traditional infrastructures, co-ordinated and integrated using new digital technologies”, and by the adoption of a ‘system of systems’ approach.

It is clear that a co-ordinated approach is necessary. Indeed, systems of systems thinking is needed at every level from the high level public services that must be developed down to much more compact systems of systems upon which the public services depend, and which will underpin other systemic developments as the need for them emerges in the future. Since it will not be public services alone that will provide solutions to the problems that the global drivers will present, there will be heavy reliance on private, mainly civilian SoS too, created and run for a profit, but with the capital resources to develop, implement and manage these SoS. It should be noted that one of the strengths of SoSE approach is the emphasis on resilience, agility and emergence; essential qualities for the complex, potentially dangerous, future before us. The drivers outlined above must be addressed in such a way that the bad effects of the global drivers are either mitigated or, indeed, reversed.

There are several, many of which are described briefly in section 5 above. These are easily identified; there are some others, only now becoming visible. Most of these concern the socio-technical aspects of SoS. We discuss these below.


                        Assurance of appropriate understanding. This is a complex issue, arising from the inherent complexity, data lacunae, and the non-linearity and the endless, continuous data flows of SoS operations, added to the requirement for appropriate data condensing tools to deliver information to human decision-makers, together with the varied knowledge status of those people making decision regarding the SoS. It may be possible to create tools and sufficient AI-based interpretation tools to compress the information sufficiently in real time to be able to present a coherent, valid picture of the SoS, but it is the quality of the resulting human decisions that will determine the future of the SoS and the people affected by it.


                        Decision-making on behalf of individuals. As a consequence of the data compression above, it is likely that the decisions made will be at the level of larger groups. However, the quality of life as perceived by humans is an individual issue, and is based on a unique assimilation of the experiences of life as affected by the SoS with which the individual comes into contact. If we have as our goal the improvement of human well-being, then decisions at the group level may not be adequate. Perhaps sufficiently-intelligent AI systems could deconstruct these group decisions to deliver individual benefit for individuals within the group, but this remains to be demonstrated.


                        Overarching co-ordination mechanisms. It is readily apparent that in the political world, the creation of supra-national co-ordination is a very difficult goal to achieve. As the mega-conferences on the global drivers held successively at Kyoto, Doha and Rio have demonstrated, agreement on goals is difficult, and agreement on global, co-ordinated processes and governance has yet to appear.


                        Conflicting social perceptions. As the political world demonstrates regularly, and as criminal statistics show, there is a wide variety of human opinion on what to do at any given instance. It is not obvious how any large-scale SoS can deal with these conflicting social perceptions and associated mental models.

In short, the technical drawbacks to the SoS approach are serious, but probably solvable. The authors take comfort in this from the words of a senior aeronautics engineer: “We don't have technical problems; if we throw enough good people and enough money at a problem, it will disappear.” However, the second part of this quotation also points to the more long-lasting difficulties with the SoS paradigm that may not go away: “No; our problems are always the people”. It is the ethical, cultural and societal issues that may linger and degrade the SoS approach.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This paper has addressed a number of socio-technical issues to do with the real world operations of SoS: some of these are not often discussed in the SoS literature and in ergonomics/human factors journals. The drivers of the solutions are fairly well-known and the organisational antecedents that must be in place for these drivers to be effective are also well known; the problem is that we lack appropriate tools to arrive at good solutions to the configuration, operation and control of SoS and their interfaces. The sort of tools which are required include:
                        
                           •
                           Tools for modelling and visualisation of the organisational systems within an SoS (typically known as Enterprise Architecture and Modelling Tools) to identify patterns and to explore the tradespace for the organisations within the SoS.

Simulation tools to run models separately and together. These models may be distributed, may only be available in ‘black box’ mode, and may need to be run almost continuously.

Dependability analysis tools, to enable the quality of the output from the tools above to be assessed, as an input to decision-making

Mining tools to derive behaviour patterns, and thereby to provide an input to governance of the SoS.

Governance metrics and measurement tools appropriate for the SoS environment

Tools for cybersecurity assurance

Social network tools for organisations, for knowledge sharing and resolution of ‘surprises’ or other emergent behaviour

The reader is also directed to (Hubbard et al., 2010) for an example of an emerging portfolio of tools to address some of the issues discussed in this paper.

This paper began by setting the SoS context as perceived by the authors and the main differences in approach between Systems Engineering and SoS Engineering. The discussion in the paper was then deliberately restricted to issues surrounding the top 5 levels in the NCOIC Interoperability Framework (while recognising the fundamental importance of the other levels). The impact of complexity on the design and operation of organisational systems within an SoS was followed by a brief overview of possible approaches to dealing with complexity and resilience in SoS socio-technical systems and the characterisation of these approaches as a wicked problem. Within this characterisation the authors attempted to identify how aspects of the ‘wicked problem’ paradigm are manifested in SoS and suggest a range of techniques that could be applied to address them.

However one chooses to approach the problem there will always be a requirement for technical and engineering governance, set within an overall corporate governance framework – this is addressed in section 4. To finish the paper the authors have identified an initial set of key current and emerging knowledge gaps in the area of SoS design and operation and the need for an integrated set of tools to address the socio-technical issues identified in this paper, and have included some higher-level issues about the utilisation of SoS; their appropriateness to address the problems of Global Drivers, and the sociotechnical problems in understanding what they are doing.

Finally it would seem clear from the points made in this paper that the creation of dynamic short and long life-cycle SoS that comprise partnerships of organisational systems will require changes to the individual organisation system structures and processes. This is turn will require different people and resources perhaps from a broader spectrum of national, organisational and professional cultures, including a wider pool of available and accessible knowledge. As Einstein said in 1946,
                        
                           “The world we have created is a product of our thinking; it cannot be changed without changing our thinking.”
                        
                     
                  

It is hoped that this paper makes some contribution in this important but difficult area and encourages ergonomics/human factors professionals to enter into the discussion.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

