@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Experimental investigation of personal air supply nozzle use in aircraft cabins

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Passengers' use of individual air supply nozzles in aircraft cabins was simulated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Human thermal and draft sensations change over time in an aircraft cabin.


                        
                        
                           
                           The reasons of opening nozzles and opening adjustment position were illustrated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Nozzle utilization rate and opening degree increased initially and then decreased.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Aircraft cabin

Nozzle air distribution system

Nozzle use behaviour

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  To study air passengers' use of individual air supply nozzles in aircraft cabins, we constructed an experimental chamber which replicated the interior of a modern passenger aircraft. A series of experiments were conducted at different levels of cabin occupancy. Survey data were collected focused on the reasons for opening the nozzle, adjusting the level of air flow, and changing the direction of the air flow. The results showed that human thermal and draft sensations change over time in an aircraft cabin. The thermal sensation response was highest when the volunteers first entered the cabin and decreased over time until it stablized. Fifty-one percent of volunteers opened the nozzle to alleviate a feeling of stuffiness, and more than 50% adjusted the nozzle to improve upper body comfort. Over the period of the experiment the majority of volunteers chose to adjust their the air flow of their personal system. This confirms airline companies' decisions to install the individual aircraft ventilation systems in their aircraft indicates that personal air systems based on nozzle adjustment are essential for cabin comfort. These results will assist in the design of more efficient air distribution systems within passenger aircraft cabins where there is a need to optimize the air flow in order to efficiently improve aircraft passengers' thermal comfort and reduce energy use.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Increasing numbers of passengers spend more and more time in aircraft cabins (Advisory Council, http://www.acare4europe.org/html/documentation.asp.) and are exposed to environmental conditions artificially created by the aircraft's onboard systems. Since the 1970s, commercial aircraft have been flying at heights of approximately 12 km (ca. 39,000 ft), (Gunnar Grün et al., 2012), with the temperature outside of the aircraft cabins at or below −50 °C, the relative humidity between 20% and 100% above ice (Vaughan G et al., 2005), and the absolute air pressure around 195 hpa (Hinkelbein J et al., 2007). Thus, the environmental control system of an aircraft cabin is critical to both passenger safety and comfort.

The environmental control system of a typical passenger aircraft comprises two parts. The first is the main air distribution system which controls the thermal comfort and air quality of the overall cabin environment (He L, 2010). This main air distribution system cannot however meet the thermal comfort and health demands of every passenger and an individual air system supply is needed to compensate for such limitations. This, the second part of the system, supplies conditioned air directly to each passenger via an individual air supply system. This type of individual supply air system is widely used in the industry. Aircraft manufacturers such as Boeing and Airbus use this type of individual system because of its ease of use and flexibility of its control. It has become an industry standard.

The advantage of the individual air supply system is that each passenger can control both the air flow rate and direction to help achieve their preferred environment. In the past decade, the topic of individualized air supply systems has attracted the attention of several researchers. Jacobs and de Gids (2006) proposed a new concept of aircraft cabin air-conditioning that is built into the seat. Similarly, Zhang and Chen (2007) proposed a personal seatback-embedded air supply system that delivers clean air directly to the inhalation regions of a passenger. Based on these studies, Zítek et al. (2010) considered that each seat in a commercial aircraft should be supplied with a separate individual air flow and a separate exhaust, which could help protect passengers against the possible spread of airborne diseases during flights. Zhang et al. (2012) developed a personal air distribution system with air terminals embedded in chair armrests. This was designed and verified using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation and experimental validation. Furthermore, Gao and Niu (2004, 2008) used a CFD model to investigate the personal ventilation of an air supply pipe located in each of the passenger's breathing area and showed that this type of ventilation can improve passenger air quality. Bolashikov et al. (2010) and Melikov et al. (2012) studied thermal comfort and inhaled air quality using a seat headrest system incorporating personalized ventilation.

In these studies of personal air distribution systems in aircraft cabins, the main focus has been on the improvement of the seat position and how this may influence air distribution. Most of these studies only consider the influence on the air quality in the breathing zone rather than the overall effect on passengers' thermal comfort. The innovations proposed by these researchers are however far from complete and the traditional individual nozzle air distribution system remains in active use. Only a few of these studies included experimental investigations, most used CFD numerical simulation as the research method. The disadvantage of such simulations is that the results require further validation due to the simplification of the models and boundary conditions in CFD simulations. In addition, the dummy models used in these studies to simulate human heat dissipation and breathing are not fully representative of actual humans.

Further research was clearly needed. This led to the decision to design and develop an experimental cabin to carry out an experimental investigation of the influence of the traditional individual nozzle air distribution system on human thermal comfort. To simulate the environment of a real airliner cabin, a three-row aircraft cabin was built to the requirements of ASHRAE161 (2007) in a laboratory building of the Faculty of Urban Construction and Environmental Engineering, Chongqing University. This has led to a range of experimental studies. The focus of the research reported in this paper was cabin occupants' use of the personal air supply nozzles, in particularly the analysis of when the research volunteers decided to open or close the air vents, and the direction selected for the air flow. This was investigated based on volunteers' thermal responses to the overall thermal environment.

The design of the cabin was based on the cross sectional size of the Airbus A320. A cabin sized 4.9 m × 3.9 m × 2.35 m was constructed. From the outside, the cabin structure appeared as a half-cylinder and was made of wood with thermal insulation. The cabin was placed in an air-conditioned room to prevent the influence of the external environment. Fig. 1
                         shows the main dimensions of the simulation chamber.

The environmental control system comprised both the main air distribution system and the personal air distribution system as shown in Fig. 2
                        . In the design of the system, the main air distribution system followed the requirements of ASHRE161 2007 to create a healthy thermal environment for passengers. The process involved mixing the fresh air and return air before processing it to the set condition. Then, through the pressurization fan, air flowed to the slot outlets on the ceiling of the cabin and into the simulated cabin at a smooth steady speed. The air flowed into the mixer through return air inlets for circulation. The personal air distribution system offered flexible control to meet the individual comfort demands of the volunteers undergoing the experiment. In the system process, after the fresh air from outside and the return air were mixed in the mixer, the air was processed by an air conditioner and flowed into the plenum chamber by a pressurization fan. Then it flowed through pipes to the nozzles above the seats and, when turned on by the occupant of the seat, entered the cabin as a jet flow. The two control systems were independent from each other when the temperature of the air conditioned system ranged from 5 °C to 35 °C with a precision of ±0.5 °C. Common airliner nozzles, with the air supply velocity ranging from 0 m s−1 to approximately 25 m s−1, were controllable by adjusting the knob and pipeline valve. These were used in the personal air distribution system in the simulated cabin as shown in Fig. 3
                        .

The volunteers in this experiment were healthy college students and were divided into two groups by gender with equal numbers for each group. They were asked to complete forms to provide relevant information, such as gender, age, height, weight, clothing type, etc. The clothing records were based on the clothes worn by the volunteers on the testing day, and volunteers had been informed that they should wear formal summer clothing with a thermal resistance of about 0.6 clo. Specific information relating to the study participants is provided in Table 1
                        .

The simulated cabin had a total of 18 seats. These seats were arranged in three rows each with six seats arranged in two blocks of three, separated by a central isle. Passenger comfort is affected by passenger density so the experiment included three different passenger densities, 100%, 67%, and 33% capacity, which meant that the number of volunteers used was either 18, 12, or 6. Each experimental condition was tested four times with equal numbers of male and female participants. Table 2
                         shows a summary of the experimental conditions.

The research focused on the study of nozzle use behaviour and the influence of the thermal environment within the cabin on the volunteers' thermal comfort. Thermal comfort data were collected via a questionnaire survey which included questions about thermal sensation and air flow sensation. The thermal comfort was ranked according to seven levels based on the ASHRAE55 (2010) as shown in Table 3
                        . The experiment was conducted in a simulated aircraft cabin. It is unlikely that the volunteers could feel any draft and therefore vote scales widely used for ASHRAE thermal comfort were introduced to evaluate air movement sensation (Baizhan Li el at, 2010; Tan Meilan, 2012). These are shown in Table 3. The results for nozzle use behaviour, including the reasons for nozzle opening, the extent of nozzle opening, and the body parts to which air was directed are shown in Table 4
                        .

The complete experimental procedure lasted for approximately 2 h and 10 min, and the individual steps are shown in Fig. 4
                        .
                           
                              (1)
                              Before the experiment started, the main air distribution system and personal air distribution system commenced working at the same time, while keeping all individual nozzles closed until the volunteers entered the simulated cabin. In accordance with ASHRAE161 (2007), the temperature of the cabin was controlled at less than 26.7 °C, whilst the air speed was kept at less than 0.35 m s−1.

The volunteers were informed of the experimental procedure when they arrived at the laboratory room. They all entered the simulation cabin to start the experiment at the same time with a randomly arranged seating plan thus simulating boarding an aircraft.

After they had entered the cabin each of the volunteers was asked to complete the questionnaire based on their own thermal sensation every 5 min during the first 30 min and every 10 min during the rest of the experimental period time (90 min).

The environmental parameters in the cabin were recorded using a KANOMAX hot wire anemometer with a temperature precision of 0.1 °C and wind speed precision of 0.01 m s−1 during the experiment.

Volunteers were allowed to do minor activities such as reading, playing computer games, and chatting without leaving their seats, but strenuous exercises were strictly forbidden. Participant activity can be observed in Fig. 5
                        .

@&#RESULTS@&#

The experiment required the participants to identify the main reason for their decision to open or adjust their air nozzle. The results are shown in Fig. 6
                        . The main reason stated was ‘stuffiness’. When the cabin was 33% full this reason was given by 42.9% of the participants. This figure increased to 55% when the cabin was 67% occupied and 56.3% when it was 100% occupied. The two other reasons stated were unpleasant odor and stale air. The average response rates across all three occupancy conditions were 51% for stuffiness, 24.2% for unpleasant odor, and 24.8% for stale air.

The direction of the nozzle air flow and the rate of air flow could be adjusted by each passenger to target different areas of the body. Each time the participants adjusted the air flow through the nozzle above their seat they were asked to state the area of the body targeted. The resut are summarized in Fig. 7
                        . The average number of participants targeting their upper body across all three levels of cabin occupancy was 52.9%. An average of 15.2% of the participants targeted their head, 31.9% targeted their lower body. Therefore the average number of participants who targeted their body above waist level was 68.1%

We defined ‘nozzle utilization’ as the opening of the nozzle to permit air flow. Before the experiment commenced the nozzle above each seat was fully closed. During the experiment the particiapnts were free to adjust nozzle air flow at any time. It was found that the level of nozzle utilisation during the experiment varied in a pattern consistent across all three levels of cabin occupancy. The extent to which the participant opened or closed the nozzle was assessed as either ¼ open, ½ open, ¾ open, fully open or fully closed. This extent of nozzle opening was termed ‘degree of opening’.

Analysis of the results showed a difference in the level of nozzle utilisation at the start of the experiment compared with the rest of the experimental period. Fig. 8
                        (i) shows when the nozzle was open during first 30 min of the experiment. Fig. 8(ii) shows when the nozzle was during the remaining 90 min of the experiment.

In the first 30 min of the experiment nearly 70% of the participants chose improve their thermal comfort by opening the nozzle and introducing additional air into the cabin. This level of utilisation was similar in all three levels of cabin occupancy. The overall average nozzle utilisation was 70%. This level of nozzle usage fell to 67% when the cabin occupation was 67%. Over the next 90 min the number of participants adjusting their air supply nozzle fell to an average of 62%. This level of reduction was consistent across all three levels of cabin occupancy. The level of utilization fell to its lowest (58%) when the cabin was 67% occupied. On average more participants opened the nozzle above their seat to adjust their thermal comfort in first 30 min than in the other 90 min in experiment procedure.


                        Fig. 9
                         shows the average utilization rate over time in different occupancy conditions. The figure shows that the usage rate rose rapidly in the first 20 min and then began to slowly decrease with a maximum of 75% and a final percentage of 62% at the end of the experiment.


                        Fig. 10
                         shows the variation in the average opening degree over time in different occupancy conditions (Opening degree is degree to which the nozzle vent was opened). The nozzle opening degree increased initially and then decreased, with maximum values occurring at different times for the different values of cabin capacity. When the occupancy was 100% and 67%, the maximum response values occurred after 40 min and 30 min, respectively. When cabin occupancy was only 33% occupied, the maximum opening occurred after 20 min. The maximum opening degrees were quite similar at greater than 50%, but the differences in opening degree become more significant over time between the different occupancy conditions, especially for the 33% occupancy condition with a final opening degree of 28%. The other two occupancy conditions had much higher final opening degrees: 42.4% for 100% occupancy and 38.5% for 67% occupancy.

In two hours of the experiment most of volunteers chose to use the nozzle to adjust their personal comfort. The results are shown in the Fig. 11
                        . In each of the different cabin capacity experiment cases only a few volunteers never opened their nozzle. For example, When the cabin capacity was 100%, 59 volunteers opened the nozzle whilst 13 volunteers did not. In other cabin capacity experiment cases the results of using the nozzle were similar. A summation of the different experiment cases shows only 20 volunteers never opened the nozzle during the whole experiment process. The number of volunteers choosing to open the nozzle exceeded 120.

The Fig. 12
                         shows the number of volunteers using the nozzle in different time periods during the experiment. Fig. 12(i) and (ii) show data from both the first 30 min and the remaining 90 min of the experiment. In the first 30 min period 28 volunteers never opened their nozzle, but 116 volunteers chose to open the nozzle for improved personal comfort. A few volunteers chose to open their nozzle by selection of only one size of opening. The number of volunteer chosing the 1/4 open size, the 1/2 open size, and the 3/4 open size and full opening was 2, 16, 6, 20 respectively. Most of the volunteers chose to intermittently change different open size during the experiment. This total number is 71. In all three different cabin capacity cases, similar patterns of nozzle opening were evident.

During the remaining 90 min of experiment most of volunteers continued to adjust their nozzle. Only 28 volunteers, the same number as the first 30 min did not open their nozzle. But the number of volunteers intermittently changing their nozzle opening size was 80 a highre total than the first 30. This again shows that most of the volunteers chose to adjust their nozzle. This confirms airline companies' decisions to install the personal nozzle in aircraft cabins and indicates that personal air systems are essential for cabin comfort.

The volunteers' decisions to open or close the individual nozzle systems were driven by their thermal comfort and changes in their thermal sensation. These results are now presented.


                        Fig. 13
                         shows the averaged results of the completed questionnaires for thermal sensation of the volunteers over the duration of the experiment. Overall the average thermal sensation responses were at the peak values when the volunteers first entered the simulated cabin, and then they began to decrease over time until stabilizing. The similar trends in the curves indicate that during the first 30–40 min, the average thermal sensation responses decreased quickly, and after this time period, they decreased slowly.


                        Fig. 13(iv) shows the variation in the overall thermal sensation responses for all participants over the experimental time course. Overall, the thermal sensation began to stabilize after 40 min. In addition, cabin occupancy has an indirect influence on the volunteers' thermal sensation with almost identical results for 100% and 67% cabin capacity. The average thermal sensation response was generally lower with lower cabin occupancy especially in the first 40 min, because the higher crowd density of the first two occupancy conditions decreased the amount of heat dissipation among the volunteers. However, once passengers have been in the cabin for a while this effect is no longer significant.

Air movement has a remarkable influence on the body's thermal comfort, and a main influencing factor is wind speed according to the Fanger thermal equation. Thus, an increase in indoor air movement can obviously improve thermal comfort (Fanger, 1970) and help resolve complaints of air feeling dull or stale or lacking movement, etc. Due to the narrow space and high occupant density (Fan, 2000) in aircraft cabins, the environment is quite stuffy. Therefore, a study of the air movement sensation of passengers in a cabin is of great importance. These results are summarised in Fig. 14.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The results indicate that in the first 30 min of the experiment nearly 70% of the participants chose to improve their thermal comfort by opening the nozzle and introducing additional air into the cabin. This level of utilisation was similar in all three levels of cabin occupancy. The number of nozzle changes and level of activity then changed as the experiment progressed. Why?

The volunteers entered the cabin having travelled a short distance in a similar way to passengers boarding an aircraft. In the experiment the temperature outside the cabin was nearly 29 °C, which affected the thermal sensation of the volunteers at the start of the experiment. When travelling in an aircraft, passengers' thermal sensation as they travel from the departure gate to their seats changes from a common maximum (or minimum) value to a new stable value. Thus, the volunteers' metabolic rates increased, and the thermal sensation results were high. A large number of volunteers whatever the cabin occupancy decided to use their personal air supply system. Again this represents the reality of passengers boarding a plane prior to take-off.

After 40 min in the stable environment of the aircraft cabin, the volunteers' bodies cooled and their metabolic rates experienced no more dramatic changes. At this time, the heat exchange between the human body and cabin environment is in balance, and therefore, the thermal sensation stabilizes. Less activity changing the nozzle air supply takes place over the remainder of the experiment.


                     Fig. 7 shows the areas of the body that passengers targeted when opening their personal air supply nozzle. The flexibility of the nozzle enabled each volunteer to adjust the opening of their individual air nozzle (to determine the air flow) and also the direction of the air flow to target different areas of the body. In all occupancy conditions the results show that most participants targeted their upper body (This response accounting for 52.9% of participants across all occupancy conditions.). The next most common response averaged over all three occupancy conditions was the targeting of the lower body (31.9%). The lowest percentage of participants (over all occupancy conditions) reported targeting their head (15.2%). The analysis of the thermal sensation responses and air movement sensation responses, complemented these results: most participants clearly preferred to adjust the nozzle in the direction of their upper body in order to improve thermal comfort through local stimulation.

According to Zhang (2003), local thermal sensation of the human back and chest have the greatest influence on the overall thermal sensation. Duanmu (2007) drew a similar conclusion: that the upper body matters most to the overall thermal sensation. Although many studies have proved that the face/head is the most efficient radiator of the human body, (Nunneley and Maldonado, 1983), only 15.2% of the participants in this study chose to adjust the nozzle air flow to their face or head. Clearly, many volunteers preferred not to have air blown directly on their face, or at least not for an extended period. This finding is supported by other research, for example ASHRAE161 (2007) states that the head cannot be subjected to a wind speed greater than 1 m s−1, because this creates a strong air movement sensation.

This result is inconsistent with those of previous studies that reported that the preferred ventilation position should face the head (Stevens et al., 1974; Crawshaw et al., 1975; Hensel, 1981; Li, 2004; Zhang, 2005; Park et al., 2011). In these studies most researchers applied the personal air distribution methods targeting the breathing zone without considering the requirement for thermal comfort. Therefore, the parameter of ‘nozzle opening’ chosen in this experiment provides a basis for the design of air distribution that helps regulate human thermal comfort while accomplishing health requirements.

When considering the variation of the average thermal sensation responses for different body parts over the experimental time course, the highest responses were associated with the back and the lowest responses associated with the lower leg. This was consistent across all cabin occupancy conditions. The researchers believe that main reason for this is that the back is part of the trunk, which is nearest to the body's heat source, and the volunteers were sitting back in the seats for most of the experimental time.

Because the back of the aircraft seat was made of cotton material, which has a low thermal conductivity to prevent spreading heat to the outside and reducing the amount of heat exchange, it is understandable that participants selected the highest thermal sensation option for the back (The use of a seat material with greater air permeability and higher thermal conductivity might change the thermal comfort of passengers' backs.). Only a few volunteers directed their air supply nozzle to their lower legs. This was for two reasons. First, because the lower leg is located away from the body's heat source and secondly because most participants were wearing capri-length pants, the bare lower leg experienced a large amount of heat exchange, and hence many participants selected the lowest thermal sensation option for this body part.

The variation in air movement sensation for different body parts is shown in Fig. 14
                      with different cabin occupancy conditions. The air movement sensation rapidly increased over time and then was maintained at a relatively stable level after the first 40 min. This trend over time is similar to that observed for passengers' thermal sensation.

Researchers have shown that improving indoor air movement can compensate for an environmental temperature rise (Jin, 2011; Jiang, 2009). ASHRAE55 (2010) indicates that the maximum change in temperature that can be compensated by air speed is 3 °C, but the air speed cannot exceed 0.8 m s−1. However, the air speed can be increased to 1.2 m s−1 only if it can be controlled by the indoor occupants. ASHRAE161 (2007) limits the air speed around the body to less than 0.35 m s−1, which means the air flow in the cabin can move faster. During this experiment the air speed was controlled within this range. Therefore, based on the responses for thermal sensation and air movement sensation, thermal comfort may be improved by strengthening the ventilation and increasing air speed after the passengers board an aircraft. The air quantity and wind speed can then be decreased once the passengers have cooled after some time in the cabin. This control strategy could be used to maintain the passengers' thermal comfort while saving operation energy for the air conditioning system.


                     Fig. 14(iv) shows that the overall air movement sensation response rose over time from a low starting value and stabilized after 40 min with all cabin occupancy conditions. No significant differences in overall air movement sensation were observed among the three occupancy conditions, yet the average response was relatively high in the 33% capacity condition due to smoother air flow through fewer people.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The results of this study provide a basis for re-evaluating and reducing the energy requirements of the individual air supply system used in aircraft cabins and to improve the thermal comfort of passengers within aircraft cabins. The findings will also assist in the improvement of the environmental control systems of aircraft cabins. The main conclusions are as follows:
                        
                           (1)
                           Stimulated by the thermal environment, more than half of the volunteers opened the nozzle to alleviate stuffiness. The air flow was directed primarily towards the upper body, followed by the lower body, and lastly towards the head. The results showed that the upper body should be the reference point used when determining the influence of a nozzle air distribution system on individual thermal comfort.

We evaluated three different occupancy conditions: 33%, 67%, and 100%. The maximum overall average thermal sensation response across each of these three different occupancy conditions occurred when the participants first entered the cabin. Thermal response decreased over time. Meanwhile, the responses for air movement sensation followed the opposite pattern in that minimum responses were reported initially, and then the responses increased over time, stabilizing after some 40 min.

This study examined the rate of ‘nozzle utilization rate’, (the opening of the nozzle to permit air flow) and the degree of opening’, (the extent to which the participant opened or closed the nozzle). Both of these parameters increased initially and then decreased until becoming relatively stable some 40 min into the experiment.

These findings could be used to assist in the design of air distribution systems within passenger aircraft cabins which need to find a combination of an intelligent automatically controlled system with appropriate individually passenger controls adjacent to their seats. This will demand further research to examine the relationship between individual and group needs and the development of ‘smart systems’ to meet these demands.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors are grateful for the support of the Major State Basic Research Development Program of China (973 Program) (Project No. 2012CB720100), the International Research Centre for Low-carbon and Green Buildings, Chongqing University, the 111 Project, No.B13041.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

