@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of wearing gumboots and leather lace-up boots on lower limb muscle activity when walking on simulated underground coal mine surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Males walked on simulated underground coal mine surfaces in two different boots.


                        
                        
                           
                           Boot structure influenced thigh muscle activity when walking on uneven surfaces.


                        
                        
                           
                           Leather lace-up boots caused increased thigh muscle activity compared to gumboots.


                        
                        
                           
                           Increased thigh muscle activity appears to be a slip and/or trip prevention strategy.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Boots

Mining

Surfaces

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study aimed to investigate the effects of wearing two standard underground coal mining work boots (a gumboot and a leather lace-up boot) on lower limb muscle activity when participants walked across simulated underground coal mining surfaces. Quadriceps (rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis) and hamstring (biceps femoris, semitendinosus) muscle activity were recorded as twenty male participants walked at a self-selected pace around a circuit while wearing each boot type. The circuit consisted of level, inclined and declined surfaces composed of rocky gravel and hard dirt. Walking in a leather lace-up boot, compared to a gumboot, resulted in increased vastus lateralis and increased biceps femoris muscle activity when walking on sloped surfaces. Increased muscle activity appears to be acting as a slip and/or trip prevention strategy in response to challenging surfaces and changing boot features.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Underground coal mine workers incur a high incidence of work-related lower limb injuries (Government of Western Australia, 2011), including sprains and strains caused by slips, trips and falls (Armour, 2003; WorkCover NSW, 2010). Annually, these lower limb injuries contribute to almost 19,000 lost working days (Government of Western Australia, 2011) and an average of $28 million in compensation claims in Australia alone (Armour, 2003). These figures are the highest rate when compared to all other Australian mining industries.

The risk of experiencing a slip (Chambers and Cham, 2007; Lockhart and Kim, 2006; Oates et al., 2010) or trip (Austin et al., 1999) accident is influenced by the shoe–surface interface, particularly at the time of initial contact with the ground and during the pre-swing of the gait cycle. When walking on a level, even surface while wearing everyday footwear, healthy individuals usually make the necessary adjustments to maintain balance in order to avoid a slip or trip (Austin et al., 1999; Chambers and Cham, 2007; Tang et al., 1998). Underground coal mine surfaces, however, are often uneven, unpredictable due to poor light conditions or the surface being occluded by water, incorporate moveable materials such as rocks, and vary in gradient.

To avoid slip and trip injuries while traversing these uneven surfaces, it is vital that underground coal miners recruit the appropriate lower limb musculature (Franz and Kram, 2012). This is particularly important when they negotiate steep gradients because additional muscle activity is needed to raise and lower the centre of gravity (Franz and Kram, 2012; Lay et al., 2007; Patla, 1986). The amount of muscle activity is also dependent upon the design of footwear worn by individuals (Böhm and Hösl, 2010; Noé et al., 2009; Nurse et al., 2005). For example, by manipulating sole flexibility the shoe–surface interface is altered, which can in turn change the lower limb joint angles and muscle activity displayed during walking (Nurse et al., 2005). Changing footwear support also potentially triggers a reorganisation of the muscle activity that is responsible for stabilising the ankle and knee joints (Noé et al., 2009). Mining work boots of varying sole flexibility and boot support may therefore influence how an underground coal miner's feet interact with an uneven surface, thereby dictating the amount of lower limb muscle activity generated to support a joint, such as the ankle or knee, in an attempt to reduce the risk of a slip or trip. This notion, however, is yet to be investigated.

Coal mining work boots are usually made of either leather (e.g. a lace-up boot) or rubber (e.g. a slip on gumboot), and must incorporate a steel-cap to protect the worker's feet from undesirable external stimuli, such as rocks, gravel and dirt, and to satisfy minimum personal protective equipment standards (Marr and Quine, 1993). Mining boots also typically incorporate a high shaft (upper part of the boot that covers the shank), particularly in mines that require the miners to walk through water. Combinations of these boot characteristics and materials, while adhering to safety standards, result in structurally different boots in terms of overall mass, shaft stiffness, support and sole flexibility. The effects of these structural differences in boot design, however, on the gait of underground coal miners and their risk of slipping or tripping are unknown.

If the structural characteristics of the underground coal miners' work boots require these workers to use additional muscle activity during walking, the potential for incorrect foot placement onto the supporting surface exists. As a consequence, the risk of incurring a sprain or strain injury, via slipping or tripping, might increase. Despite these negative implications, no study has systematically examined whether boot type affects lower limb muscle activity when walking on surfaces typically encountered by underground coal mine workers. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the effects of wearing two standard underground coal mining work boots (a gumboot and a leather lace-up boot) on lower limb muscle activity when participants walked across simulated underground coal mining surfaces. It was hypothesised that differences in the mass, shaft stiffness and sole flexibility of the gumboot compared to the leather lace-up boot would influence lower limb muscle activity during gait. Specifically, when walking in a gumboot, which has a looser shaft, more flexible sole and lighter mass than a leather lace-up boot, participants would display decreased intensity of the quadriceps (rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis) and hamstring (biceps femoris, semitendinosus) muscle activity.

@&#METHODS@&#

Twenty male participants (33 ± 12 years of age) who matched the demographics of Illawarra Coal (NSW, Australia) underground coal mine workers (unpublished data, 2013) volunteered to participate in this study. Participant exclusion criteria included lower limb injuries or foot pain/discomfort that impaired their ability to perform the experimental procedures. Participants who habitually wore corrective shoe inserts (such as orthotics) were also excluded because a non-standard sole insert could influence the internal properties of the boots. A priori analysis confirmed that a cohort of 20 participants was sufficient to demonstrate a significant difference between the two footwear conditions with a power of 80% (at an alpha level of 0.05). The University of Wollongong Human Research Ethics Committee approved all testing procedures (HE13/050) and written informed consent was obtained from all participants before commencing data collection.

The two footwear conditions included: (i) a gumboot (Style 015; 2.7 kg; 37.5 cm shaft height; rubber; Blundstone®, Australia) and, (ii) a leather lace-up boot (Style 65-691; 3.1 kg; 35 cm shaft height; full grain leather; Oliver, Australia) ranging from sizes 8–12 (see Fig. 1
                         and Table 1
                        ). These boots are standard safety footwear provided to underground coal miners (Illawarra Coal, Australia) and thus were selected as the experimental footwear.

All participants were provided with a new pair of socks (Miners Corp. Essentials Pty Ltd, Australia) and were fitted into the two boot types (sized according to measuring guidelines provided by the boot manufacturers). After familiarisation, each participant walked at a self-selected pace around three loops of a walking circuit while wearing each boot type, with boot condition order randomly allocated to prevent any order effects. The walking circuit was designed to replicate the uneven and moveable surface conditions that underground coal mine workers typically navigate during their daily work tasks when working in a dry underground coal mine. The circuit included four dry surface conditions: (i) level walking on a gravel surface (flat gravel), (ii) level walking on a compacted dirt surface (flat dirt), (iii) walking up an inclined rocky, gravel surface (incline), and (iv) walking down a declined rocky, gravel surface (decline; see Fig. 2
                        ). Each loop covered approximately 24 m, took 30–45 s and was performed during daylight conditions. The surface inclination angle was approximately 20°, although it is noted that the inclination angle was not uniform due to the unevenness of the surface. In-shoe pressure and muscle activity data were collected while each participant completed the circuit. To minimise fatigue, participants rested between loops of the walking circuit and between the two boot conditions.

In-shoe pressure was collected (50 Hz) using Pedar-X (novelgmbh, Germany) insoles. Each insole (99 sensors) was attached to the Pedar-X box, secured to the participant's waist. Before data collection began, the insoles were factory calibrated and both insoles were zeroed each time they were placed inside a new boot. The Pedar-X data acquisition software (Version 23.3.4; novelgmbh, Germany) was used to collect and filter data from each participant's dominant (as determined by which leg they would kick a ball with) and non-dominant foot during each section of the walking circuit. The in-shoe pressure data were used to calculate the timing of initial contact (first contact of the dominant limb with the ground) and pre-swing (dominant limb loses contact with the ground) for participants throughout the specific sections of the walking circuit. Initial contact and pre-swing were selected for analysis in the present study as they rely on co-ordination of the lower limb musculature to position the foot at an appropriate angle for deceleration and ground clearance, respectively (Perry, 1992). If abnormal foot contact occurs at initial contact, the risk of slipping is increased (Lockhart and Kim, 2006) and if adequate clearance of the foot is not achieved throughout pre-swing, the risk of tripping is increased (Austin et al., 1999). The steps recorded by the in-shoe pressure device were also used to calculate the amount of time participants spent in the stance phase and the swing phase of gait. Alteration to the timing of these phases as a result of boot type could then be determined (Böhm and Hösl, 2010; Mündermann et al., 2001).

Surface electromyography (EMG) data were recorded (1000 Hz; bandwidth 20–450 Hz) using a Trigno wireless EMG system (Delsys Inc., USA). Delsys sensors (37 mm × 26 mm × 15 mm, < 15 g) were attached (Delsys Adhesive Sensor Interface; Delsys Inc., USA) over the muscle bellies of the quadriceps (rectus femoris (RF), vastus medialis (VM), vastus lateralis (VL)) and hamstring (biceps femoris (BF), semitendinosus (ST)) muscles on each participant's dominant lower limb (see Fig. 3
                           ). Sensor placement sites were identified following recommendations by SENIAM (1999) and the guidelines endorsed by the International Society of Electrophysiology and Kinesiology (Merletti, 1999). These muscles were selected for analysis due to their superficial location and their role in controlling the knee and hip joints during gait (Perry, 1992). Furthermore, when negotiating inclined and declined surfaces, previous studies have found that any changes in lower limb muscle activity primarily occur at the knee joint and secondarily at the hip joint, with minimal to no differences at the ankle joint (Franz and Kram, 2012; Lay et al., 2007). Prior to sensor placement, the skin over each designated muscle belly was shaved, abraded with prep tape and cleaned with an alcohol swab to ensure optimal readings (Cram et al., 1998).

After visual inspection of the data (to exclude any trials grossly contaminated by movement artefact), the raw EMG signals were filtered (fourth-order zero-phase-shift Butterworth low pass; fc = 20 Hz). Due to excess noise, the signals from two participant's VM and one participant's ST muscle were excluded from data analysis. EMG data for one participant was not available for analysis as a result of sensor failure. The filtered signals were then processed in a custom LabVIEW program (Larkin, 2013) to determine a 200 ms window either side of initial contact and either side of pre-swing in each section of the walking circuit. The area under this 400 ms window was then calculated (mV/s) to represent the intensity of muscle activity during these two separate phases of the gait cycle (Nigg et al., 2006). This process was conducted for all five lower limb muscles and initial contact and pre-swing were determined from the in-shoe pressure data (see Section 2.3.1). The literature consistently shows that when stability is challenged, muscle activity, expressed in millivolts (mV), consistently increases (Blackburn et al., 2003; Greensword et al., 2012; Mika et al., 2012; Nigg et al., 2006; Romkes et al., 2006). Therefore, the area under the curve (mV/s) was used as a measure of muscle intensity in the present study (Finsterer, 2001; Hamill and Bensel, 1996).

A digital video camera (JVC, Japan; 25 Hz), levelled on a tripod approximately 1.5 m above the ground and positioned to minimise errors of perspective, was used to film the sagittal plane motion of the participants walking the circuit. Two-dimensional knee joint (between the thigh and shank segments) and hip joint (between the thigh and trunk segments) angles at the video frames representing initial contact and at pre-swing were measured (LongomatchVersion 0.18.12 software; Creative Commons, USA) directly from the video images. Two-dimensional analyses of joint angles have frequently been used as an accurate measure to represent gait (Whittle, 2007).

Means and standard deviations of the muscle activity and knee and hip joint angles at initial contact and at pre-swing were calculated over the three walking trials per boot condition per surface condition. A two-way repeated measures ANOVA design, with two within factors of boot type (gumboot versus leather lace-up boot) and surface (flat gravel, incline, decline and flat dirt), was then used to determine whether there were any significant main effects or interactions of either boot type or surface on the muscle activity or joint angles displayed by the participants. Wilks' Lambda multivariate test was used to determine significant main effects and interactions. Paired t-tests further investigated any significant main boot effects and interactions. An alpha level of p ≤ 0.05 was used for all statistical comparisons and all tests were conducted using SPSS statistical software (Version 19, SPSS, USA).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Spatiotemporal analysis of the in-shoe pressure data revealed that the type of boot worn had no significant effect on the time spent in either phase of the gait cycle.

When participants walked across the flat surfaces (gravel and compacted dirt), no significant differences were found between the gumboot and leather lace-up boot conditions in the mean muscle intensity (mV/s) generated during initial contact or during pre-swing (p ≥ 0.05) for any of the muscles analysed. Furthermore, there was no significant main effect of boot type on the intensity of vastus medialis or semitendinosus during initial contact and pre-swing for any surface type. The inclined and declined walking surfaces, however, revealed significant differences between the gumboot and leather lace-up boot for mean muscle intensities calculated for rectus femoris, vastus lateralis and biceps femoris, as described below.

There was a significant interaction of boot type × surface (p = 0.029) for rectus femoris mean muscle intensity during initial contact. Upon further analysis of the interaction, however, no significant results were found. During initial contact, significant main effects of boot type (p = 0.008) and surface (p < 0.001) and a significant interaction of boot type × surface (p = 0.017) on vastus lateralis muscle intensity were present. As shown in Fig. 4
                        , vastus lateralis muscle intensity significantly increased when participants walked down the declined surface while wearing the leather lace-up boot compared to when participants walked down the declined surface wearing the gumboot. However, there were no significant differences between the two boot conditions in vastus lateralis muscle intensity when the participants walked on the two level surfaces (flat gravel and flat dirt) or on the inclined surface. There was no significant boot × surface interaction for vastus lateralis muscle intensity at the time of pre-swing.

There was a significant main effect of both boot type (p = 0.003) and surface (p < 0.001), on biceps femoris muscle intensity generated while the participants walked around the circuit. When walking up the incline (p = 0.047) and down the decline (p = 0.048), biceps femoris mean muscle intensity was significantly increased during pre-swing whilst participants wore the leather lace-up boot compared to the gumboot (see Fig. 5
                        ). During initial contact, however, there was no significant main effect of boot type on biceps femoris muscle intensity.

Analysis of the video data revealed a significant main effect of surface (p < 0.001) and a significant interaction of boot type × surface (p = 0.024) on the knee joint angle at initial contact. Upon further investigation of the boot type × surface interaction it was found that when the participants walked up the incline, their knee was in a more extended position at initial contact when wearing the gumboot compared to when wearing the leather lace-up boot (see Fig. 6
                        ). No significant main effects of boot type were found on knee angle at pre-swing or the hip angle at initial contact.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Gumboots and leather lace-up boots are two types of standard safety footwear provided to underground coal mine workers. Any boot structure that requires miners to use additional muscle activity has the potential to change the boot–surface interaction, increasing the risk of incurring a sprain or strain injury. This study aimed to investigate the effects of wearing two structurally different work boots on lower limb muscle activity when participants walked across simulated underground coal mining surfaces. Boot type was found to significantly influence lower limb muscle intensity of the participants while they walked on inclined and declined surfaces and the implications of these findings are discussed below.

In contrast to the hypothesis, no significant differences in mean muscle intensity were found between the boot conditions when the participants walked on the level sections of the walking circuit. The demand placed on the lower limb during brief periods of level walking was unlikely to be sufficient to require changes to lower limb muscle activity in response to the structural differences in the two boots. Instead, muscle intensity appears to be more related to the power generation and absorption required to successfully traverse more challenging uneven surfaces, particularly inclines and declines (Franz and Kram, 2012; Lay et al., 2007). In agreement with this notion, the muscle intensities recorded in the present study increased when the participants walked on inclined and declined surfaces compared to level surface walking.

Of the muscles controlling knee joint motion, biceps femoris and vastus lateralis were particularly responsive to changes in surface gradient (Lay et al., 2007). Knee joint muscle intensity also increased significantly when the participants wore the stiffer leather lace-up boots, which provided more shank support, compared to the gumboots. This finding was in contrast to a study by Noé et al. (2009), who found that a stiffer ski boot shaft, which provided more stability for healthy male alpine skiers (n = 14, 20 ± 5 years of age) while they performed postural sway tasks, resulted in decreased muscle activity. The authors concluded that muscle activity decreased when sufficient support was provided by an individual's footwear (Noé et al., 2009). We speculate that the between-study difference could be attributed to the influence of boot mass on lower limb motion, irrespective of the changes in boot support (Chiou et al., 2012). It is also possible that regardless of stability, a stiffer boot shaft has more impact when walking on surfaces that already require additional muscular activity and joint motion, such as an incline and decline, compared to static postural sway tasks and level walking.

The leather lace-up boots used in the current study were approximately 0.4 kg heavier than the gumboots. Despite this difference in boot mass, the participants spent the same amount of time in the stance and swing phases of the gait cycle. Therefore, the increased biceps femoris and vastus lateralis muscle intensity when wearing the leather lace-up boot compared to the gumboot might indicate that extra effort was required to walk in a heavier boot. The main objective of pre-swing is to prepare the unloaded limb for successful clearance during swing. As a knee flexor, the role of biceps femoris during pre-swing is to inhibit knee extension and assist the knee in a flexed position ready for swing (Perry, 1992). Immediately after pre-swing, if the limb is not adequately flexed the boot will contact the supporting surface, causing a trip (Austin et al., 1999; Chiou et al., 2012). As heavier boots tend to decrease trailing limb toe clearance (Chiou et al., 2012), the additional biceps femoris muscle activity required in the present study when the participants were wearing the leather lace-up boot compared to the gumboot could be considered a strategy to compensate for the additional boot mass in order to prevent a trip. As there were no significant differences between the knee joint or hip joint angles at pre-swing, it is postulated that the increased muscle activity was successful in maintaining the required limb position when wearing the heavier leather lace-up boots compared to the gumboots.

Increased heel contact velocities have also been documented when wearing heavier boots (Chiou et al., 2012), indicating an additional braking force is required to stabilise the leading limb at initial contact compared to when wearing lighter boots (Lockhart and Kim, 2006). During initial contact vastus lateralis decelerates and controls the leading limb as it contacts the ground (Perry, 1992), particularly when walking down a decline where a larger knee extensor moment is required to control the amount of knee flexion and allow the leading limb to support the body's mass without buckling (Lay et al., 2007). In the present study, increased vastus lateralis muscle intensity at initial contact when walking down the decline suggested that more muscle activity was necessary to decelerate the leading limb when wearing the heavier leather lace-up boot compared to the lighter gumboot. The significant difference in the amount of knee flexion at initial contact between the two boot conditions also supports this notion. The difference in the mean knee angles between the two boot conditions, however, was within the expected range of measurement error (3°) and therefore this result should be interpreted with caution. If the leading limb is not adequately decelerated at initial contact, the shear force of the boot contacting the supporting surface will become greater than the friction opposing the boot's movement, resulting in a slip (Lockhart and Kim, 2006). Slip-related falls are more common on inclined and declined surfaces due to the increased shear ground reaction forces generated at initial contact (Redfern et al., 2001). The observed increase in vastus lateralis muscle intensity when participants wore the heavier leather lace-up boot in the present study, compared to the gumboot, could therefore be a slip prevention strategy by decelerating the leading limb at initial contact. However, further research investigating the relationship between heel contact velocities and vastus lateralis muscle intensity is required to confirm or refute this notion.

The stiffer sole of the leather lace-up boot, compared to the more flexible sole of the gumboot, may also have contributed to the significant increase in biceps femoris mean muscle intensity during pre-swing when the participants walked on both the inclined and declined surfaces. Chiou et al. (2012) found that wearing firefighting boots with a more flexible sole (stiffness index ≤ 15) resulted in larger trailing limb toe clearances when healthy male (n = 14, 28.4 ± 5.5 years of age) and female (n = 15, 33.2 ± 4.4 years of age) fire fighters stepped over obstacles, compared to when these participants wore boots with a stiffer sole (stiffness index > 15; p = 0.051). Boot mass and sole flexibility were simultaneously altered in the study by Chiou et al. (2012), such that the test boots with a more flexible sole had a heavier mass and the test boots with a stiffer sole had a lighter mass. Heavier boots significantly reduced toe clearance and lighter boots significantly increased toe clearance (Chiou et al., 2012). It is plausible, therefore, that sole flexibility alone would significantly alter lower limb toe clearance when it is not overridden by the influence of boot mass. The increased biceps femoris muscle intensity displayed by participants wearing the leather lace-up in our study could indicate the stiffer sole of this boot reduced the toe clearance height compared to the more flexible sole of the gumboots. Further research, however, measuring toe clearance when participants wear the different boot types is required to confirm this theory.

The leather lace-up boot used in the present study had both a stiffer sole and heavier mass and the gumboot had a more flexible sole and lighter mass. It is unknown whether the two factors (sole stiffness and boot mass) contributed together or whether boot mass alone caused the observed increase in biceps femoris muscle intensity during pre-swing on both the inclined and declined surfaces when wearing the leather lace-up boot compared to the gumboot. Nigg et al. (2006) found no significant difference in root mean square EMG values when 20 male runners ran on a treadmill in shoes with different levels of sole hardness. Once again, however, the shoes differed in mass and it is unknown whether there were significant differences at specific sub phases in the gait cycle rather than across the whole cycle; in the present study the significant differences were limited to pre-swing. Systematically altering sole flexibility in the same boot and analysing the effects of these structural changes across phases of the gait cycle is recommended to confirm whether boot sole flexibility can significantly influence lower limb muscle activity while walking in underground coal mining work boots.

Increased intensity of vastus lateralis and bicep femoris at both initial contact and pre-swing in the leather lace-up boot compared to the gumboot could also suggest that the stiffer shaft of the leather lace-up boot restricted the participant's ankle joint range of motion. A restricted ankle range of motion can result in more muscle activity at the knee joint in order to compensate for the inability of the ankle to absorb the ground reaction forces generated at initial foot-ground contact (Böhm and Hösl, 2010). Furthermore, compared to level walking, walking on an incline requires additional amounts of ankle motion (McIntosh et al., 2006), such that any restriction may force the knee to compensate and provide additional movement. During the swing phase of the gait cycle, the ankle dorsiflexor muscles become more active as the gradient increases to help prevent the toe from grazing the ground (Patla, 1986). If the ankle is restricted, further dorsiflexion is inhibited and greater flexion at the knee is required during pre-swing to ensure the foot clears the ground. The additional biceps femoris and vastus lateralis muscle activity could therefore have indicated compensation at the knee due to restricted ankle joint motion. Ankle muscle activity and range of motion were not collected in the present study because the boot structure prevented instrumentation being placed on the shank in a way that would allow valid and reliable data. Further research is therefore needed to confirm how variations in boot shaft stiffness affects ankle motion and muscle activity.

Increased muscle activity appears to be facilitating potential boot-related slip and trip prevention strategies. If a muscle is forced to burst at a higher intensity, muscular fatigue commences more rapidly (Allen et al., 2008). If the knee extensor muscles, such as vastus lateralis, and knee flexor muscles, such as biceps femoris, become fatigued, a lack of sufficient limb clearance and limb deceleration could lead to a higher incidence of slips at initial contact and/or trips during pre-swing, respectively. This is particularly the case when walking on surfaces that are already known to be more challenging and require additional muscle activity, such as uneven inclined and declined surfaces, perhaps explaining the high incidence of slip and trip related lower limb injuries sustained by underground coal miners.

Investigation of individual boot features, such as those mentioned in this study (mass, shaft and sole stiffness), appears to be the next step in order to determine why differences in muscle activity occur when participants wear two different underground coal mining work boots. Understanding how individual design features influence lower limb muscle activity creates the potential to manipulate these features in order to design a boot that meets the demands placed on the lower limb while underground coal miners perform working tasks, ultimately reducing the incidence of slip and trip-related lower limb injuries incurred by these workers.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Due to the field nature of this study, inertial sensors were initially used to determine lower limb joint angles. However, excessive drift in the data was evident and the data were subsequently discarded. Two-dimensional joint angle data were therefore derived from video recordings. The shape of a motor unit action potential is influenced by numerous intrinsic factors (number of recruited motor units, size and shape of recruited motor units, firing rates and duration, and recovery time) and extrinsic factors (age, sex, temperature, fitness and fatigue; Finsterer, 2001). Although the utmost care was taken to minimise the influence of these factors, the EMG data must still be interpreted with caution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Walking in a leather lace-up boot compared to a gumboot resulted in increased vastus lateralis and increased biceps femoris muscle activity when participants walked on sloped surfaces. The increased muscle activity appears to be a slip and/or trip prevention strategy in response to challenging surfaces and changing boot features. Whether the increased vastus lateralis and biceps femoris muscle activity is compensating for differences in boot mass, and/or shaft or sole stiffness and whether this is further influenced by prolonged walking, requires further investigation. By understanding the influence that specific boot structures have on lower limb muscle activity of underground coal miners, future work boots can be designed to be more surface and task specific, potentially reducing the high incidence of work-related lower limb injuries in this industry.

This study was funded by the Coal Services Health and Safety Trust (HST Project No. 20620).

None.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution of our industry partner, Illawarra Coal, and staff at Coal Health Services for their assistance with resources and participant recruitment.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

