@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Safety climate, hardiness, and musculoskeletal complaints: A mediated moderation model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Psychological safety climate was not directly related to WRMSD complaints.


                        
                        
                           
                           Psychological safety climate was negatively related to frustration.


                        
                        
                           
                           Frustration was positively related to WRMSD complaints.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hardiness accentuated the psychological safety climate–frustration relationship.


                        
                        
                           
                           Safety climate had an indirect effect on WRMSD complaints via frustration.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Work-related musculoskeletal disorders

Safety climate

Psychological hardiness

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study explores the mechanisms linking the psychosocial characteristics of the workplace with employees' work-related musculoskeletal complaints. Poor safety climate perceptions represent a stressor that may elicit frustration, and subsequently, increase employees' reports of musculoskeletal discomforts. Results from an employee sample supported that when employees' perceived safety was considered a priority, they experienced less frustration and reported fewer work-related upper body musculoskeletal symptoms. Psychological hardiness, a personality trait that is indicative of individuals' resilience and success in managing stressful circumstances, moderated these relationships. Interestingly, employees with high hardiness were more affected by poor safety climate.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WRMSDs) refer to a broad range of inflammatory and degenerative conditions that affect the body's muscles, tendons, ligaments, joints, and blood vessels (Punnett and Wegman, 2004). In the US, almost 70 million physician office visits each year can be attributed to WRMSD-related complaints and the economic burden resulting from these complaints, including costs associated with workers' compensation, and lost wages and productivity, is estimated at $45 to $54 billion annually (Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 2001). Moreover, in the US and other countries (e.g., Canada, Sweden), WRMSDs lead to more work absenteeism and disability than any other disease group (Punnett and Wegman, 2004). In 2011, WRMSDs accounted for 33% of all workplace injuries and illnesses that required employees to take days off from work (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012). Employees with WRMSDs took a median of 11 days to recuperate before resuming work (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012). WRMSDs represent a significant threat to the health and quality of life of individuals employed in a wide range occupations (e.g., nursing, clerical work, airplane baggage handling, cleaning, truck driving, firefighting) and industries (e.g., service, construction, transportation, manufacturing) (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012; Punnett and Wegman, 2004). In 2011, nursing assistants had the highest number of WRMSD cases (25,010) of any occupation, and heavy and tractor-trailer truck drivers needed the most days away from work (median of 21) to recuperate (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012). Beyond taking time off from work to recuperate, employees may choose a more permanent solution such as changing jobs or retiring (Long et al., 2012).

Studies on WRMSDs have traditionally focused on how physical job demands can lead to WRMSD complaints by generating biomechanical strain (for reviews, see Muggleton et al., 1999; National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health [NIOSH], 1997). For example, repetitive work, handling heavy materials, working in awkward positions (e.g., working above shoulder level, kneeling), and frequently using vibrating tools are physical aspects of job tasks that have been associated with greater risk of WRMSDs (e.g., Engels et al., 1996; Hansson et al., 2000; Latza et al., 2000; Simon et al., 2008; Sobeih et al., 2006; Yassi et al., 1995). However, there is increasing evidence that psychosocial stressors at work can serve as additional risk factors for WRMSDs (e.g., Hauke et al., 2011; Kraatz et al., 2013; Lang et al., 2012; Simon et al., 2008; Sobeih et al., 2006). Psychosocial factors typically refer to aspects of the psychological and social (as opposed to physical) work environment that elicit a mental stress response in workers (Marras et al., 2009; Warren, 2001). High workload, time pressure, and monotony, and low job clarity, autonomy, social support, and job security are examples of psychosocial factors associated with increased WRMSD symptoms (Bongers et al., 1993; Lang et al., 2012; NIOSH, 1997; Sobeih et al., 2006). A meta-analysis by Hauke et al. (2011) estimated that adverse psychosocial working conditions increase the risk of WRMSDs in various body regions by 15–59%.

Unfortunately, the mechanisms linking psychosocial factors to WRMSD symptoms are not well understood. Even though multiple theoretical models (e.g., Bongers et al., 1993; Faucett, 2005; Melin and Lundberg, 1997; Sauter and Swanson, 1996) articulate these mechanisms, research provides inconsistent support for the pathways these models propose (e.g., Kjellberg and Wadman, 2007; Larsman et al., 2011; Swanson and Sauter, 2006; Wadman and Kjellberg, 2007). Certain limitations in many of the studies in this area may have contributed to contradictory findings. First, although the stress process as conceptualized by the transactional job stress framework (e.g., DeLongis et al., 1988; Lazarus and Folkman, 1984) is relatively well accepted by stress researchers (Mark and Smith, 2008), few studies in the area of WRMSDs directly test the hypothesized pathway of stressor-strain-physical symptoms that this framework implies (for an exception, see Eatough et al., 2012). Instead, effects of stressors (e.g., qualitative job demands, role conflict, lack of control) are often examined in conjunction with those of strain (e.g., job dissatisfaction, negative mood, physical stress symptoms; e.g., Latza et al., 2002; Smith et al., 2004; Yip, 2002), making it difficult to evaluate their relative impact on employees' WRMSD symptoms. Likewise inconsistent with the transactional job stress framework, studies typically examine only the bivariate relationships between psychosocial factors and musculoskeletal symptoms, as opposed to hypothesizing more complex processes.

Second, many studies have used single-item measures written specifically for the study (e.g., Bigos et al., 1991; Smith et al., 2004; Swanson and Sauter, 2006) to assess psychosocial stressors or strain (see Davis and Heaney, 2000 for a review). The use of single-item measures can result in lower reliability, greater imprecision, and narrower scope than the use of established, multiple-item measures (Spector, 1992). Third, although physical job demands are a significant risk factor in the development of WRMSDs (Muggleton et al., 1999; NIOSH, 1997), studies sometimes fail to control for physical demands when examining the effects of psychosocial stressors (e.g., Kjellberg and Wadman, 2007; Larsman et al., 2011). Finally, a lot of studies that examined the effects of psychosocial factors on WRMSDs failed to consider potentially important individual difference variables (e.g., self-efficacy, optimism, hardiness) that may influence employees' responses to psychosocial stressors (e.g., Kjellberg and Wadman, 2007; Larsman et al., 2011). Thus, some of the inconsistency in findings could stem from not separating out the effects of stressors from those of strain, using measures with poor psychometric properties, failing to control for physical job demands, and not taking individual differences into consideration.

The current study provides a direct test of a model based on the transactional stress framework (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984), uses established measures of psychosocial stressors, strain, and WRMSD symptoms, controls for the effects of physical workload, and examines the role of an important individual difference variable in the stressor-strain-WRMSD symptoms process. The study aims to contribute to researchers' understanding of the mechanisms linking psychosocial stressors with WRMSD complaints. As shown in Fig. 1
                     , we propose that when employees perceive poor psychological safety climate, such perceptions may function as a psychosocial stressor and elicit frustration. Frustration, in turn, may be associated with increased reporting of WRMSDs. Moreover, we explore employees' psychological hardiness, an individual difference variable that characterizes how employees handle stressful situations, as a moderator of the effect of poor safety climate perceptions on WRMSD complaints via frustration.

In the paragraphs that follow, we provide an overview of the transactional job stress framework, explain how psychological safety could influence WRMSD complaints via frustration, and introduce psychological hardiness as a potential buffer of the effects of poor safety climate. We will present our hypotheses for this study, explain the methodology that was pursued, and summarize the findings. We will conclude the paper by discussing the implications and limitations of current findings, and providing a number of directions for future research.

The classic model of occupational stress postulates stress as the process describing how work-related factors contribute to decrements in psychological or physical health (Beehr, 1995). Stressors are the work-related factors that elicit the stress process, and strain represents psychological or physiological responses to stress (Hurrell et al., 1998). The transactional approach expands upon the static framework linking stressors to strains, and treats stress as a dynamic process where personal and environmental variables interact over time to cause stress (Hart and Cooper, 2001). Lazarus and colleagues' (e.g., DeLongis et al., 1988; Lazarus and Folkman, 1984) transactional stress framework proposes that individuals appraise the stressors in their environment, including these stressors' potential costs, and plan which behavioral, emotional, or social strategies they will use to cope. Coping strategies may be adaptive and reduce strain (Higgins and Endler, 1995), or maladaptive and actually increase strain (de Jong and Emmelkamp, 2000).

The transactional approach provides a framework for linking psychosocial stressors with WRMSD complaints. Various job demands and organizational constraints act as occupational stressors that threaten employees' ability to achieve desired work outcomes (Boswell et al., 2004). Because stressors, such as role ambiguity, role conflict, and negative perceptions of the organizational context (e.g., high perceived politics or bureaucracy), require employees to expend efforts to appraise and cope with the demands, they induce strain responses such as frustration, emotional exhaustion, and depression (Boswell et al., 2004; Lazarus and Folkman, 1984). These emotional strains, in turn, result in other attitudinal (e.g., low morale), behavioral (e.g., poor performance), or physical (e.g., muscle tension, hyperventilation) outcomes (Carter and Russell, 1979; Chang et al., 2009; LePine et al., 2005; Ley, 1999). In the current study, we view poor psychological safety climate as a psychosocial stressor that may be related to WRMSD symptoms through its association with employee emotional strain (in the form of frustration).

Unlike other models, which focus mainly on the role of job characteristics or environmental factors in the stress process (e.g., demands-control-support model, Karasek and Theorell, 1990; effort-reward imbalance model, Siegrist, 1996), the transactional approach to occupational stress explains why different individuals exposed to the same level of a stressor may experience different levels of emotional or physical strains (Mark and Smith, 2012). Specifically, individuals who differ in their dispositions are likely to appraise and respond to stressors differently. Psychological hardiness (e.g., Eschleman et al, 2010), self-efficacy (e.g., Jex and Bliese, 1999), optimism (e.g., Scheier and Carver, 1985), and conscientiousness (e.g., Watson and Hubbard, 1996) are examples of attributes that have been associated with more effective coping with stressors. Certain other attributes (e.g., neuroticism, Watson and Hubbard, 1996) have been associated with less effective coping. In the current study, we focus on psychological hardiness as a moderator of the negative effects of psychological safety climate on emotional strain and WRMSD complaints. We next elaborate on our predictions regarding psychological safety climate and frustration before proceeding to a more detailed discussion of psychological hardiness.

Safety climate refers to employees' perceptions of safety policies, procedures, and practices within their unit or organization (Zohar and Luria, 2005). Similar to other types of specific climates, safety climate may be considered at various levels within the organization (Hellriegel and Slocum, 1974; James and Jones, 1974; Zohar and Luria, 2005). Psychological safety climate refers to individual employees' own perceptions of their work environment concerning safety-related policies and practices, and is likely to be linked to individual-level outcomes. On the other hand, unit-level (e.g., work-team, organization) safety climate refers to the shared perceptions among employees of the same unit and is appropriate for unit-level analysis (Schulte et al, 2006). A recent meta-analysis demonstrated the importance of differentiating between psychological and unit-level safety climate (Beus et al., 2010). The current paper will focus on employees' individual perceptions of their work environment concerning policies and practices related to safety, as WRMSD symptoms are reported as an individual-level outcome.

Research has demonstrated the relevance of safety climate for various safety-related outcomes. Multiple meta-analyses have supported safety climate's negative associations with accidents and injuries (Beus et al., 2010; Christian et al., 2009), and its positive association with safety performance (Christian et al., 2009; Clarke, 2006; Nahrgang et al., 2011). Safety climate perceptions may predict WRMSD symptoms as well. Specifically, studies have linked poor safety climate with arm pain, and back pain and injuries (Hofmann and Mark, 2006; Waters et al., 2007). Based on these findings, we expect that psychological safety climate will be negatively related to WRMSD symptoms.

As mentioned above, stressors can induce strain responses such as frustration, emotional exhaustion, and depression (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984). In particular, inadequate organizational safety policies, poor safety training, and management's failure to model safety performance (e.g., wearing protective gear, maintaining protective equipment, adhering to safety procedures) can be stressful for employees in several ways. Such poor safety climate can generate ambiguity regarding appropriate safety behaviors, signal management's general indifference to workers' safety and well-being, and create conflicting demands for employees (e.g., follow formal safety policies and procedures designed to protect employees versus focus instead on production goals; Hemingway, 1999; Siu et al., 2004; Wallace and Chen, 2006).

Indeed, evidence supports poor psychological safety climate functioning as a stressor that elicits emotional strains. For example, Clarke et al. (2002) found that nurses who perceived their hospitals to provide inadequate safety training and scarce resources (e.g., low staffing, lack of knowledge for using safety equipment) for protecting nurses reported higher levels of emotional exhaustion and frustration. In addition, Siu et al. (2004) found that when employees perceived their peers and managers to have low safety attitudes and considered safety a low priority, they experienced higher levels of anxiety and dissatisfaction. Thus, we expect poor safety climate to function as a stressor that may induce emotional strain such as frustration.

According to Sauter and Swanson (1996), the physiological consequences of experiencing strain may partly explain the observed association between psychosocial stressors and WRMSD symptoms. For example, frustration may increase muscular tension (Carter and Russell, 1979), which may add to the biomechanical strain employees are under when performing physically demanding tasks and contribute to the development of WRMSDs (Krantz et al., 2004; Lundberg et al., 1994). Moreover, frustration may lead to increased physiological susceptibility to WRMSDs by affecting hormonal, circulatory, and respiratory responses. For example, frustration is often associated with hyperventilation (Ley, 1999), which disrupts the acid-based equilibrium in the blood stream and results in physiological reactions such as muscle spasms and tension (Schleifer et al, 2002). Frustration has also been found to decrease immune system response through activity inhibition (Schultheiss et al, 2009) and increase blood pressure (Landsbergis et al., 1994), which may increase employees' susceptibility to WRMSDs (Smith and Carayon, 1996). For example, the body's ability to repair tissue after microtrauma may be limited due to changes in individuals' physiobiological systems (Carayon et al., 1999).

In addition to physiological mechanisms, other explanations exist for the linkage between frustration and WRMSDs. Frustration is associated with risky behavior (e.g., over-exertion), which increases the risk for WRMSDs (Smith and Carayon, 1996). In addition, frustration is often associated with increased pain sensitivity and reduced efficacy for managing pain (Muris et al., 2007). It has also been related to the higher reporting of pain experiences (Craig and Brown, 1984). Thus, it is possible that employees who experience frustration as a result of poor safety climate may be more likely to develop and report (due to lower tolerance for discomfort and pain) WRMSD symptoms.

As discussed above, the transactional approach to occupational stress underscores the role of individual differences in the process of stress appraisal and coping (Mark and Smith, 2012). Psychological hardiness is one individual difference that has been examined in the context of the stress process (Eschleman et al, 2010). Psychological hardiness is a personality composite of three attributes that are important for how people experience and manage stressful circumstances (Cole et al., 2004; Kobasa, 1979). Specifically, Maddi and colleagues (Kobasa et al., 1982; Maddi et al., 2002) identified commitment, control, and challenge as characteristics that serve as buffers of the negative effects of stressors in organizational environments. Commitment refers to individuals' tendency to get deeply involved in whatever they do or encounter. Control refers to individuals' tendency to experience a sense of mastery over situations they encounter. Finally, challenge describes individuals' belief that change is normal and represents opportunities for growth and development (Kobasa et al., 1982). Commitment, control, and challenge are interrelated, but non-redundant constructs (Bartone et al., 1989) and together they form the higher order construct of hardiness that characterizes individuals' positivity and resiliency when facing situational demands or threats (Maddi and Khoshaba, 1994).

Hardiness influences how individuals experience and cope with stressful circumstances (Britt et al., 2001; Cole et al., 2004). Those who are high in hardiness may react more positively to stressors because they tend to interpret stressful events as opportunities, stay engaged in difficult situations, and feel more in control of such situations (Cole et al., 2004; Maddi, 1999). Supporting this perspective, primary studies have indicated that hardiness influences how people experience and interpret stressful circumstances, insulates them from the effects of stress, and predicts future well-being (Bartone, 1999; Cole et al., 2004; Kobasa, 1979; Rosen et al., 2006). A recent meta-analysis examined these types of effects in the existing literature and argued that hardiness is “one of the best dispositional predictors of well-being” (Eschleman et al, 2010, p. 303).

In this study, hardiness may insulate employees from the negative effects of poor safety climate. For example, highly hardy employees may remain committed to working safely even when their general environment is not supportive of their efforts. They may also feel a stronger sense of control over their safety at work. Finally, they may view poor safety climate as a challenge to conquer. As such, instead of experiencing frustration due to ambiguity and conflicting demands, psychologically hardy employees may actively engage in behaviors that can help improve the climate (e.g., form and get involved in safety committees to make management aware of safety-related issues). Thus, given that psychological hardiness has been shown to buffer the negative effects of stressors (Eschleman et al., 2010), we expect it to moderate the relationship between safety climate and frustration, and the indirect effects of safety climate on WRMSD symptoms.


                        
                           
                              Hypothesis 1
                              Psychological safety climate will be negatively related to WRMSD symptoms.

Psychological safety climate will be negatively related to frustration.

Frustration will be positively related to WRMSD symptoms.

Psychological hardiness will moderate the relationship between safety climate and frustration, such that the negative relationship between safety climate and frustration will be weaker for highly hardy employees.

Psychological hardiness will moderate the indirect effect of safety climate on WRMSD symptoms, such that the negative effect of safety climate on WRMSD symptoms will be weaker for highly hardy employees.

@&#METHODS@&#

Data were obtained from 464 full-time employees, who were recruited from working adults taking night and weekend classes in a large university in southeastern US. Of those who provided demographic data the majority were female (79.2%) and Caucasian (68.3%) or African American (10.8%). Their average age was 24.3 years (SD = 6.5). Participants had an average tenure of 33.9 months (SD = 39.5) in their present job and worked a minimum of 20 hours per week. The majority of participants worked in retail/service (42.2%; e.g., customer service representative) or professional (15%; e.g., nurse) industries. A small percentage of participants worked in education (7.7%; e.g., teacher), technical (3.2%; e.g., computer programmer), government (2.9%; military), or manufacturing (1.3%; e.g., construction worker) jobs. Participants completed a web-based survey and received a $5 gift card for their participation.

Participants responded to all measures (except demographic variables and WRMSD symptoms) on a five-point Likert scale ranging from Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (5). Physical job demands were assessed using the Job Content Questionnaire (Karasek et al., 1998) (α = 0.92). The 7-item scale assesses the extent of physical exertion and awkward positioning required by the job. A sample item is “My job requires lots of physical efforts”. Given that physical job demands are a significant risk factor in the development of WRMSDs (Muggleton et al., 1999; NIOSH, 1997) we followed others' recommendation to control for physical job demands (e.g., Bongers et al., 1993) when examining the effects of psychological safety climate on WRMSD symptoms.

Perceptions of safety climate were measured using the 9-item scale developed by Neal et al. (2000) (α = 0.75). The scale assesses the extent to which the management emphasizes safety, the adequacy of safety training and communication, and the availability of policies and procedures to guide safety practices. A sample item is “Management places a strong emphasis on workplace health and safety.”

The 3-item Frustration with Work scale (Peters et al., 1980) was used to assess participants' strain (α = 0.77). A sample item is “Trying to get this job done was a very frustrating experience.” Psychological hardiness was measured with Cole et al.’s (2004) 6-item scale (α = 0.84). The scale assesses individuals' commitment to accomplishing objectives and working hard, perceived control over resources and unforeseen problems, and the extent to which they enjoy facing challenges. A sample item is “Despite setbacks, I remain committed to accomplishing job tasks”.

Musculoskeletal complaints for the lower back, neck, shoulders, and upper back were measured via the standardized Nordic Musculoskeletal Questionnaire (Kuorinka et al., 1987). Individuals indicated whether they have had trouble with a particular body area in the past three months (no, yes). “No” responses were scored as 0 and no further questions were asked. Respondents who answered “Yes” were asked to indicate whether the discomfort prevented them from engaging in normal activities using a 4-point Likert scale ranging from Almost never (1) to Almost always (4). They also indicated whether they had trouble with the body area at any time during the last 7 days (no, yes). Using this method, each participant was given a score ranging from 0 (no trouble with this body part in the last three months) to 6 (1 was assigned for a “Yes” response to the first question; 1–4 was assigned depending on response to the second question; 1 was assigned for a “Yes” response to the third question). Responses with regard to the lower back were scored using the described method to compute a Lower Back Complaints variable. Responses with regard to the neck, shoulders, and upper back were averaged to create a Neck/Shoulder/Upper Back Region Complaints variable.

Sex, age, race, industry of employment, job tenure, and height and weight information to compute body mass index (BMI; product of 703 and weight in pounds divided by height in inches squared) were collected. Given that BMI is a potential risk factor for certain WRMSDs (NIOSH, 1997), we included it as a control variable in the analyses.

Prior to conducting the focal analysis, we first evaluated the measurement model (Anderson and Gerbing, 1988) for the focal variables by using items and creating multiple-item parcels (Hall et al., 1999) as indicators of the latent constructs. Specifically, the three items for frustration served as indicators for the construct. For physical demands, psychological safety climate, and psychological hardiness variables, we first conducted exploratory factor analysis (EFA) separately to evaluate the presence of a secondary factor. Following the isolated uniqueness strategy recommended by Hall et al. (1999), items that shared variance associated with the secondary factor (i.e., variance due to items involving negative wording or items with similar stems) were used to form multi-item parcels. This strategy guided us to form three parcels each for physical demands, safety climate, and hardiness.

Confirmatory factor and structural analyses were estimated using Mplus 6.0 (Muthén and Muthén, 2010) with maximum likelihood estimation. With the exception of the final mediated moderation model, measurement and structural model fit was assessed following Hu and Bentler’s (1999) recommended cutoff values: greater than 0.90 for the Comparative Fit (CFI) and Tucker–Lewis (TLI) indices, 0.06 or below for the root mean squared error of approximation (RMSEA), and 0.09 or below for the standardized root mean square residual (SRMR). Because these traditional fit indices are not available for assessing interactions between latent constructs with multiple indicators, we compared adjacent nested models using log-likelihood difference chi-square tests to assess the fit of the mediated moderation model (Muthén, 2004). This method evaluated whether the inclusion of a path from the interaction term between the predictor (i.e., psychological safety climate) and the moderator (i.e., psychological hardiness) to the mediator (i.e., frustration) significantly improved the model fit.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Means, standard deviations, coefficient alphas, and inter-correlations among the observed variables are reported in Table 1
                        .

The measurement model consisted of four latent constructs: physical job demands, psychological safety climate, frustration, and psychological hardiness, which were allowed to freely correlate. Results suggested that the measurement model had good fit for the data (χ
                        2
                        (48) = 87.29, CFI = 0.98, TLI = 0.98, RMSEA = 0.05, SRMR = 0.04) and all loadings of the measured parcels or items on their respective constructs were statistically significant at p < 0.001 and over 0.61. The average variance explained (AVE) values for physical demands, safety climate, frustration, and hardiness were 0.73, 0.65, 0.54, and 0.58, all of which met the 0.50 cutoff (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). Moreover, the AVE values for constructs were greater than the squared correlations among the constructs (0.14 > r
                        2 > 0.02). As such, the confirmatory factor analysis suggested that these constructs were distinct.

We tested two alternative models to examine the extent to which common method variance explained these factor loadings. The first alternative model included a method factor that loaded on all indicators in addition to the four latent factors. This model did not converge. This suggested that although responses were collected from the same person, the items did not share enough variance to warrant a “method” factor in the data structure. A second alternative model allowed all indicators to load on one single factor. This alternative model had significantly worse model fit than the four-factor measurement model (χ
                        2
                        (54) = 1447.25, CFI = 0.35, TLI = 0.20, RMSEA = 0.25, SRMR = 0.17; Δχ
                        2
                        (6) = 1359.96, p < 0.001). Taken together, these preliminary confirmatory factor analyses suggested that the observed relationships among focal variables could not be attributed solely to common method variance.

When bivariate relationships were examined (see Table 1), in contrast to Hypothesis 1, there were no significant relationships between safety climate and WRMSDs (r = −0.03 and r = −0.02 for neck/shoulders/upper back and lower back complaints, respectively). As hypothesized, however, psychological safety climate was significantly related to frustration (r = −0.28) and frustration was also significantly related to WRMSD complaints (r = 0.19 and r = 0.23 for neck/shoulders/upper back and lower back complaints, respectively). These results provide initial support for Hypotheses 2 and 3. As gender was significantly related to neck/shoulders/upper back complaints (r = −0.17; with women being more likely to report these complaints) and age was significantly related to both types of WRMSD complaints (r = 0.18 and r = 0.19 for neck/shoulders/upper back and lower back complaints, respectively), we control for gender and age in subsequent analyses.

To test Hypotheses 1, 2, and 3 in a model, we compared two nested structural models. The first model included paths from psychological safety climate to the two types of WRMSD complaints (Hypothesis 1) and frustration (Hypothesis 2), and paths from frustration to the WRMSD complaints (Hypothesis 3). Physical job demands, BMI, age, and gender were included in the model as control variables. This model had good fit with the data (χ
                        2
                        (95) = 193.89, CFI = 0.96, TLI = 0.94, RMSEA = 0.05, SRMR = 0.06). Similar to the bivariate correlations results, psychological safety climate had nonsignificant relationships with WRMSD complaints (g = 0.06 and g = 0.06 for neck/shoulders/upper back and lower back complaints, respectively). As such, Hypothesis 1 received no support. In support of Hypothesis 2, psychological safety climate had a significant, negative relationship with frustration (g = −0.35, p < 0.001). Hypothesis 3 was also supported, such that frustration had significant positive relationships with neck/shoulders/upper back complaints (g = 0.22, p < 0.001) and lower back complaints (g = 0.26, p < 0.001).

Because psychological safety climate had no significant direct relationships with WRMSD symptoms, we removed the two direct paths and retested the model. The more parsimonious model had comparable fit indices (χ
                        2
                        (97) = 195.48, CFI = 0.96, TLI = 0.94, RMSEA = 0.05, SRMR = 0.06; Δχ
                        2
                        (2) = 1.59, ns). As such, this full mediation model served as the base model for testing the proposed moderation effects of psychological hardiness. Based on this trimmed model, psychological safety climate had a significant, negative indirect effect on neck/shoulders/upper back WRMSD symptoms (g = −0.08, p < 0.01) and lower back WRMSD symptoms (g = −0.09, p < 0.001).


                        Hypotheses 4 and 5 were tested by including psychological hardiness and the interaction term between the latent factors of psychological safety climate and hardiness in the full mediation model. Specifically, paths from hardiness to frustration and to WRMSD symptoms, as well as from the interaction term to frustration and to WRMSD symptoms were allowed to be freely estimated. The same control variables (physical job demands, age, gender, and BMI) were also included in the model. As mentioned earlier, because the conventional model fit indices are not available for structural models that include interaction terms between latent factors, we followed the adjacent nested model testing procedure (Muthén, 2004) to examine whether inclusion of the interaction term in the model significantly improved the model fit. Results indicated that inclusion of the path from the interaction term to frustration significantly improved the model fit (Δχ
                        2
                        (1) = 7.02, p < 0.001), whereas including the path from the interaction term to either set of WRMSD symptoms did not significantly improve the model fit (Δχ
                        2
                        (1) = 0.04, ns and Δχ
                        2
                        (1) = 0.40, ns for neck/shoulders/upper back and lower back complaints, respectively). The final path estimates are reported in Fig. 2
                        , and the interaction effect between psychological safety climate and psychological hardiness is illustrated in Fig. 3
                        .

As shown in Fig. 2, both psychological safety climate (g = −0.22, p < 0.001) and psychological hardiness (g = −0.24, p < 0.001) had significant, negative relationships with frustration, which in turn had significant, positive relationships with neck/shoulders/upper back (g = 0.56, p < 0.001) and lower back (g = 0.70, p < 0.001) WRMSD complaints. Among the four control variables, physical job demands and BMI had nonsignificant relationships with WRMSD complaints, whereas age (g = 0.17, p < 0.01 and g = 0.15, p < 0.01 for neck/shoulders/upper back and lower back complaints, respectively), and gender (g = −0.18, p < 0.001 and g = −0.10, p < 0.07 for neck/shoulders/upper back and lower back complaints, respectively) were significant correlates of WRMSD symptoms. Thus, older individuals and women reported more WRMSD complaints. Overall, these predictors explained 13% of the variance in neck/shoulders/upper back and lower back WRMSD symptoms.

Hardiness significantly moderated the relationship between psychological climate and frustration (g = −0.18, p < 0.01). Unfortunately, the pattern shown in Fig. 3 is opposite of the effect predicted by Hypothesis 4. Specifically, rather than buffering the effect of poor safety climate, hardiness appeared to strengthen the negative relationship between psychological safety climate and frustration, such that the relationship was stronger when hardiness was high versus low. As such, although the interaction between psychological safety climate and hardiness was a significant predictor of frustration, Hypothesis 4 was not supported.

To further probe the mediated moderation effect, we followed Preacher et al.’s (2007) recommendation for testing Hypothesis 5 regarding the moderated indirect effect of psychological climate on WRMSD complaints via frustration. Specifically, we estimated the indirect effects of safety climate on WRMSD symptoms at high (one standard deviation above the mean) and low (one standard deviation below the mean) hardiness levels, and built confidence intervals for the conditional indirect effects using bias corrected bootstrapping methods (bootstrap samples = 5000). The results of the indirect effects are summarized in Table 2
                        . As mentioned earlier, psychological safety climate had significant, negative indirect main effects on both types of WRMSD symptoms. After hardiness was included as a moderator, safety climate had significant, negative indirect effects on neck/shoulders/upper back (B = −0.18, p < 0.01, bias corrected CI95%: −0.33 to −0.08) and lower back (B = −0.22, p < 0.01, bias corrected CI95%: −0.40 to −0.11) WRMSD symptoms when hardiness was high. On the other hand, the indirect effect of psychological safety climate on WRMSD symptoms via frustration was not significant when hardiness was low (B = −0.04, ns and B = −0.05, ns, respectively). Thus, similar to Hypothesis 4, although hardiness moderated the indirect effect of safety climate on WRMSD symptoms through frustration, the nature of the moderation is not consistent with Hypothesis 5.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The current study examined the relationships between psychological safety climate, frustration at work, and employees' WRMSD symptoms. Inconsistent with our predictions but nonetheless consistent with some other research (e.g., Larsman et al., 2012), we found no direct relationship between the psychosocial stressor in our study and WRMSD complaints. Instead, this relationship was indirect – results indicated that psychological safety climate was negatively related to frustration, which in turn was positively related to WRMSD symptoms. Unexpectedly, employees' psychological hardiness accentuated rather than attenuated the indirect effects of psychological safety climate on neck/shoulder/upper back and lower back WRMSD symptoms through frustration. The indirect effects were actually stronger for highly hardy employees relative to those low on hardiness. This is surprising given previous research showing the buffering effects of psychological hardiness on the effects of stressors (Eschleman et al., 2010).

The current study offers several theoretical implications. The study provided a direct test of the transactional job stress framework (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984) as the theoretical framework for the relationships between psychosocial stressors and WRMSD symptoms. In particular, we found that poor psychological safety climate is a stressor that elicits emotional strain (e.g., frustration) among employees. In addition, frustration serves as a mediator linking poor psychological safety climate with employees' WRMSD complaints in the neck/shoulder/upper back and lower back areas. As mentioned earlier, biophysiological (e.g., increased muscle tension, higher acidity in the blood, high blood pressure, reduced immune functioning), behavioral (e.g., risk-taking), and psychosomatic mechanisms (e.g., lower pain threshold) may explain the associations between frustration and WRMSD symptoms (e.g., Krantz et al., 2004; Landsbergis et al., 1994; Muris et al., 2007; Schleifer et al, 2002; Smith and Carayon, 1996). The finding that emotional strain can serve as a mediator linking a psychosocial stressor and WRMSD complaints is consistent with a number of existing studies (e.g., Eatough et al., 2012; Kjellberg and Wadman, 2007; Larsman et al., 2006, 2012). Our study contributes to this body of research by showing that similar to other psychosocial stressors (e.g., qualitative work demands), psychological safety climate is related to WRMSD symptoms via emotional strain. Furthermore, we demonstrate the role of an important individual difference in this process.

Importantly, we found that psychological hardiness moderated the indirect effect of psychological safety climate on WRMSD complaints. That an individual difference like hardiness should be implicated in the stress coping process is consistent with the transactional job stress framework and with meta-analytic findings (Eschleman et al, 2010). However, studies couched within the transactional job stress framework (e.g., Kjellberg and Wadman, 2007; Larsman et al., 2011, 2012) rarely consider the role of individual differences in the stress process. Our findings underscore the value of including individual difference variables like hardiness in such investigations.

Interestingly, the pattern of results for psychological hardiness was opposite of what we predicted. Instead of attenuating the relationship between psychological safety climate and WRMSD symptoms via frustration, hardiness enhanced the relationship. One possible reason for this may be the nature of psychological safety climate as a stressor. Meta-analytic findings indicate that associations between the use of a particular stress coping strategy and health outcomes can differ in strength and direction depending on the nature of the stressor (e.g., acute versus chronic) (Penley et al., 2002). Some research suggests that the active coping strategies hardy individuals are likely to use, such as trying to solve the problem (Eschleman et al, 2010), protect them from the negative effects of controllable stressors; but when stressors are not controllable, emotion-focused strategies such as trying to acknowledge, understand, and express emotional reactions to the situation, may be more adaptive (Folkman and Moskowitz, 2004; Terry and Hynes, 1998). It is possible that hardy individuals may be unable to convert poor safety climate into opportunities like they might do with other stressors; poor safety climate may be relatively uncontrollable. Hardy individuals' continuous efforts to enhance safety may not only go unrewarded, but even be reprimanded by the management. These individuals may be considered whistle blowers against the organization. In this case, employees with high hardiness may feel extra pressure due to their tendency to stay engaged in their pursuit for a safe work environment. As a result, they experience higher levels of frustration and more WRMSD symptoms than those with low hardiness.

Our results also indicated that employees who were low on hardiness reported similar levels of frustration regardless of their psychological safety climate perceptions. Moreover, their frustration levels were generally higher than those of hardy individuals. This suggests that individuals low on hardiness may have a low threshold for perceiving a situational stimulus as threatening and stressful. As such, they may be less sensitive to the varying levels of threat represented by these situational characteristics once these characteristics pass the threshold of being perceived as stressful. In this case, anything short of a “perfect” psychological safety climate may be interpreted as highly frustrating among employees with low hardiness and as such, their frustration levels were unrelated to psychological safety climate (see Gilliland et al., 1998 for a similar argument regarding organizational justice perceptions). Future research may study safety climate alongside other psychosocial stressors to examine the relative salience of varying levels of different stressors for employees who possess different amounts of psychological hardiness or vary on other similar individual difference variables (see Behson, 2002 for a similar approach).

The current study also has several practical implications. For organizations that intend to address issues associated with employee injuries and WRMSDs, it is important to consider psychological safety climate as a potential contributor to these issues. Increasing management commitment to safety, providing adequate policies and training, and making safety an obvious priority by modeling the desired safety behaviors may all enhance employees' perceptions of safety climate (Neal et al., 2000). This should be a particularly effective approach for helping highly hardy individuals, who demonstrate lower levels of frustration as safety climate improves. In addition, because frustration is related to WRMSD symptoms, employers should consider other approaches that will directly reduce employees' frustration levels. For example, ensuring the availability of sufficient resources for performing assigned work and removing bureaucratic red-tape may help reduce employees' general frustration (Hemingway, 1999), which may in turn help alleviate WRMSD complaints. This strategy of reducing frustration levels directly should be particularly effective for helping individuals low on hardiness, who are less responsive to changes in safety climate, but who report relatively high levels of frustration on average. Finally, our findings with regard to hardiness indicate that psychologically hardy individuals, who may deal well with controllable stressors in the workplace, may need extra support from the organization when they encounter less controllable stressors like poor safety climate. Organizations may support such individuals with stress management programs that raise awareness of different types of coping strategies and teach the value of emotion-focused coping for dealing with situations that are less amenable to control.

The current study has a number of limitations. We combined neck, shoulder, and upper back complaints into a composite index so as to include a larger number of people with WRMSD symptoms in the moderated mediation analyses. While it is common for investigations of the risk factors of WRMSDs to group together different body regions (particularly the neck and shoulders) (Hauke et al., 2011), it is important to note that the effects of stressors can vary across body regions (Nixon et al., 2011). Importantly, we found the same effects for both WRMSD outcomes, lending additional credence to the finding that a strain like frustration can act as a mediator of the effects of psychological safety climate on WRMSD symptoms, and that the effects of safety climate can be moderated by hardiness.

Another limitation of the current study is that all data were self-reported and collected from respondents at one point in time. This may have given rise to common method bias. Although common method bias is unlikely to produce spurious interactions (Evans, 1985; Siemsen et al., 2010), it would be prudent to reexamine the focal associations in this study using data collected from multiple sources or at different time points. Further, given the cross-sectional nature of this study, we cannot be certain that the relationships found are causal in nature. Future research should adopt a longitudinal study design and assess these variables at multiple time points to better understand the relationships among them. Interestingly, some theories about how WRMSDs are caused suggest the possibility of reciprocal relationships between WRMSD complaints, stressors, and strains (see Karsh, 2006 for a review). WRMSD complaints might feed back to change an employee's actual (e.g., workload reduction, redesign of work) or perceived work demands (e.g., higher perceived psychological workload) (e.g., Larsman et al., 2007) or his/her experience of strain (e.g., increased frustration due to WRMSD symptoms). Future research with a longitudinal design could examine the possibility of reciprocal relationships between psychological safety climate, emotional strain, and WRMSD complaints.

Despite its potential limitations, the present study is useful in that it provides additional support for the occupational stress-based model for understanding the mechanisms underlying WRMSDs and does so using established and reliable measures of psychosocial stressors, strain, and WRMSD symptoms. Given the unexpected finding that psychological hardiness did not enable employees to better cope with poor psychological safety climate, we believe that future research should continue to consider the potentially unique nature of this psychosocial stressor and its implications for employee stress and well-being.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study provided a direct test of the transaction job stress framework where employees' psychological safety climate, a psychosocial stressor, was associated with their WRMSD symptoms via frustration, a type of strain. It also examined the role of employee psychological hardiness, an individual difference variable that other research has shown to buffer the negative effects of stress. Given the unexpected findings that hardiness accentuated the direct effect of psychological safety climate on frustration and the indirect effects of psychological safety climate on WRMSD symptoms, future studies should further examine the potentially unique nature of psychological safety climate as an occupational stressor.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was partially funded by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH Training Grant No. T42 OH 008438) and was conducted as a part of a pilot project from the Sunshine Education and Research Center at the University of South Florida. An earlier version of the paper was presented at the 2012 annual meeting of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, San Diego, CA.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

