@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of mental workload on physiological and subjective responses during traffic density monitoring: A field study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study evaluated operators' MWL using physiological indices and the NASA-TLX in real working conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Increasing traffic density may affect operators' physiological responses and subjective experience of MWL.


                        
                        
                           
                           The shift work probably did not have any effect on physiological responses.


                        
                        
                           
                           Conducting an ergonomic program to manage mental health may be suitable for detecting at-risk operators.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Mental workload

ECG

EMG

NASA-TLX

Traffic control center

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study evaluated operators' mental workload while monitoring traffic density in a city traffic control center. To determine the mental workload, physiological signals (ECG, EMG) were recorded and the NASA-Task Load Index (TLX) was administered for 16 operators. The results showed that the operators experienced a larger mental workload during high traffic density than during low traffic density. The traffic control center stressors caused changes in heart rate variability features and EMG amplitude, although the average workload score was significantly higher in HTD conditions than in LTD conditions. The findings indicated that increasing traffic congestion had a significant effect on HR, RMSSD, SDNN, LF/HF ratio, and EMG amplitude. The results suggested that when operators' workload increases, their mental fatigue and stress level increase and their mental health deteriorate. Therefore, it maybe necessary to implement an ergonomic program to manage mental health. Furthermore, by evaluating mental workload, the traffic control center director can organize the center's traffic congestion operators to sustain the appropriate mental workload and improve traffic control management.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Because of the development of mechanization and automation, mental workload (MWL) is one of the most important issues in the area of work systems (Nachreiner, 1995). MWL or just workload “is the general term used to describe the mental cost of accomplishing task requirements” (Hart and Wickens, 1990). A workload can be either physical or mental, although these are always connected and cannot be completely separated when a subject performs a particular task (Lean and Shan, 2012). Human operators are vital components of various systems, maintaining their performance at an appropriate level. Thus they are commonly found in control workplaces, often working there for several years (Balfe et al., 2015). The more demanding and complex the task, the more the operators must work to accomplish the task (Vidulich and Tsang, 2014). In such situations, MWL increases and the operators may demonstrate delayed information processing or even fail to react at all to the received information because the amount of information outstrips their capacity to process it. In contrast, when their MWL decreases from a suitable level, they feel bored and tend to make errors (Ryu and Myung, 2005). Increased demand on available resources can cause human operator overload (Dadashi et al., 2013). In such cases, the operator experiences an extensive level of MWL in his or her daily work without enough time to rest, and health problems such as chronic stress, depression, or burnout can occur (Cinaz et al., 2013), which can influence the worker's performance and well-being (Johnson and Widyanti, 2011). Van Daalen et al. (2009) indicated that a mismatch between task demand and the capabilities of the worker can cause work-related stress. The impact of MWL on cardiovascular indices has been widely studied during the performance of laboratory tasks (Backs and Seljos, 1994; Veltman and Gaillard, 1996), simulated work (Brookings et al., 1996; Veltman and Gaillard, 1998; De Rivecourt et al., 2008; Dijksterhuis et al., 2011), and real work conditions (Wilson, 1992; Roscoe, 1992). Furthermore, optimizing the MWL experienced by a system operator could reduce the possibility of human errors and the cost of training, improve systems' safety and performance, and achieve operator satisfaction (Jo et al., 2012; Mitchell, 2000; Lebiere, 2001; Di Stasi et al., 2011).

Several studies have used performance-based (e.g., dual-task), physiological (e.g., heart-rate variability or HRV) and subjective (e.g., rating scale) methods to evaluate MWL (Johnson and Widyanti, 2011). The subjective rating scale is an important tool that can be applied globally to evaluate the MWL of a system's operators (Rubio et al., 2004). Nygren (1991) explained that the most extensively used subjective rating scales that have received significant attention are the subjective workload assessment technique, or SWAT (Reid and Nygren, 1988), and the NASA-Task Load Index (TLX) (Hart and Staveland, 1988). Psychophysiological measures allow for a more objective workload assessment and can provide “real time” evaluation, thus allowing the system designer to quickly and accurately identify usability problems as they occur (Tran et al., 2007). Heart rate or HRV acquired from an electrocardiogram (ECG) is widely used and has a long history in the evaluation of MWL (Jorna, 1992, 1993; Roscoe, 1992, 1993). HRV is measured in terms of both time and frequency (Goldstein et al., 2011). The HRV technique is very popular because the ECG signal recording is noninvasive and safe, causing no injuries or pain to humans (Reyes del Paso et al., 2013). There is limited information on muscle fatigability, with tasks consisting of concurrent physical work and MWL (Mehta and Agnew, 2012). Electromyography (EMG) has been suggested as a measure of physical work and MWL, because increased muscular tension has been shown to be related to both kinds of workload (O'Donnell and Eggemeier, 1986). EMG is the most frequently used method to measure muscle activation and fatigue (Zadry et al., 2011). Changes in EMG activity (a decrease in mean power frequency, MPF, and/or an increase in EMG amplitude) during standardized voluntary contractions have been widely employed as indicators of muscle fatigue (Madeleine et al., 2002; Dimitrova and Dimitrov, 2003).

Researchers have developed most of these methods and tools in laboratory-based studies and then applied their findings to performance response in real working conditions. If the scientific assessment tools and methods are used in field research, their findings may be more valuable than research conducted in a laboratory. MWL is an issue that affects work performance (Oron-Gilad et al., 2008); therefore, the field evaluation of MWL is important. The operators of control centers perform basic activities, such as monitoring the functioning of the substation, in which it is essential to make decisions and process information continuously (Vitório et al., 2012).

The city of Mashhad is one of the 163 most populated cities in the world. Due to the accelerated growth of its urban population (2.63 million citizens in 2007), an increasing number of cars, and the attraction of more than 32 million pilgrims and tourists each year (as the second largest holy city in the world), Mashhad faces traffic problems (Azari and Arintono, 2012). To solve these problems, the city implemented an Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), which can be defined as “the application of computing, information, and communications technologies to the real-time management of vehicles and networks including the movement of people, goods, and services.” The ITS consists of a wide range of electronic technology, and wired and wireless communications based information. It includes a major subsystem called the Advanced Traffic Management System (ATMS). The ATMS can control traffic density in real time, and it aims to minimize traffic load while the movement of people and goods increase, to improve traffic density, and to focus on and manage travel demand (Samadi et al., 2012). To reach these goals, operators of traffic control centers (TCCs) often face difficult task conditions when non-recurrent, non-predictable traffic density occurs (e.g., due to an incident or unexpected weather conditions). In these cases, in addition to local measures, an intervention at the network level is usually necessary to manage traffic density and return to a normal traffic situation. This involves the TCC operators redirecting traffic density in a larger part of the network to decrease the effects of traffic density. The operator has to assess the severity of the traffic density, predict the most probable evolution of the state of the network, and select the most appropriate actions. This complex task requires particular knowledge and a great deal of experience, so each operator usually requires extensive training. Therefore, operators at TCCs continuously monitor traffic densities which are unstructured and generally different (Hegyi et al., 2001). Usually, operators managing complex work environments are exposed to different stressors, which can present risks to safety, performance, and well-being, as well as pose long-term consequences for their health (Saueret al. 2013). Thus it is important to evaluate MWL in real working conditions to understand how to prevent mental disorders and maintain mental health; however, most research has evaluated different levels of MWL in laboratory conditions (Cinaz et al., 2013). The ECG and EMG measurements can be carried out during real work tasks, at least in jobs where most work is performed at a computer in an office-like environment. One critical area involves operators that work in TCCs, as early identification of their MWL is important. This information can be used to promote a good work environment and ergonomics to optimize work demand levels so that the risk of mental disorders and human errors decreases. In this study, which aimed to make recommendations to prevent mental disorders and to promote the mental health of operators, we used a subjective workload assessment (NASA-TLX) and physiological measures (e.g.HR, HRV and EMG) to evaluate operators' MWL during real working conditions at a city TCC to understand and quantify the MWL value.

@&#METHODS@&#

Sixteen healthy male operators (mean age 29.4 ± 2.61 years) participated in the study. They were paid for their participation in the experiment. They were right-handed with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and hearing, and they had no diseases. All operators read and signed a consent form before the experiment. The experiment was designed to investigate MWL in resting, low traffic density (LTD), high traffic density (HTD) and recovery conditions.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The TCC (Fig. 1
                        ) operates 24 h a day, Saturday to Friday, with an on-call team available 24 h a day, 7 days a week. The operators almost constantly monitor the traffic density of intersections from morning to night, including weekends, and if an accident or special event occurs, they try to reestablish a normal traffic pattern in the city. There is a hierarchical environment at this TCC. During each shift, at the first level, four operators with less work experience perform the monitoring task. Three operators with more work experience work at the second level, and the third level is allocated to the shift supervisor, who usually has the most experience. Therefore, the supervisor usually manages the activities of seven operators in each work shift. The supervisor superintends car accidents/incidents and camera and sensor failures at intersections. In the TCC, 28 large LED monitors continuously indicate traffic load at the main intersections, highways and ring roads of the city. Furthermore, during his work shift, each operator uses two monitors at his desk and continuously monitors video images of at least 30 cameras at the intersections. Using such a system, the operator will be able to manage traffic signal timing and phasing for each intersection. He continuously moderates the signal timing to reduce traffic density and diminish delays. The operators usually have to resolve problems individually and without assistance. Such problems might be detected by the system itself or reported by the public or even local maintenance crews; all must be solved as soon as possible. The cameras are located at the most critical intersections in the city of Mashhad. Currently, 200 intersections are equipped with traffic cameras, with additional cameras being installed on a continuous basis. The traffic cameras can pan, tilt, and zoom, and when special events occur the operators can observe video images of traffic conditions for all approach directions, adjacent intersections, and corridors.

In the center we studied, 23 operators worked for 12 h in two shifts, continuously. There was a morning shift from 6:00–18:00, and a night shift from 18:00–6:00. Each operator worked for 12 h and rested for 24 h (Work-rest schedule: 12–24 h). So, the interval between shifts was 24 h, and all operators worked both morning and night shifts. For example, when operators A and B worked for 12 h on the day shift (6:00–18:00), they then rested for 24 h (18:00–18:00), and when they came back to the TCC, they worked the night shift. Similarly, when operators C and D worked for 12 h on the night shift (18:00–6:00), they then rested for 24 h (6:00–6:00), and when they came back to the TCC, they worked the day shift (Fig. 2
                        ). We interviewed the operators and supervisors and asked them to characterize their real working conditions. We recognized that they experienced two different conditions during each work shift: situations with low traffic density, and situations with high traffic density in the city. Based on their statements, both LTD and HTD occur during both morning and night shifts, particularly on Saturdays, Wednesdays and Tuesdays. Based on this information, measurements related to traffic conditions were conducted between 9:00–14:00 and 18:00–23:00. Environmental conditions such as workplace lighting and temperature were suitable in the TCC. The average background noise levels during the morning and night work shifts were 48 dB and 43 dB respectively. Furthermore, there were no accidents or severe changes in climate that would have evoked rapid MWL change during the experiment. The experimenter specified a day with LTD and HTD conditions for each operator, during which the following steps were performed:
                           
                              1
                              Before implementation of the experiment, each operator was provided with the necessary information and descriptions, mainly about the ECG and EMG measurements, and how to complete the NASA-TLX questionnaire. Operators' dominant working posture was a sedentary one, in that they had to continuously monitor the traffic density of their assigned intersections. To prevent errors and failure during the measurement procedure, the experimenter asked the operators to make the least possible number of movements and avoid talking to his colleagues while physiological indices were recorded.

ECG and EMG electrodes were installed.

For each operator, ECG and EMG signals were recorded for five minutes in a resting condition with open eyes in a quiet room. For those five minutes, the operator's colleagues carried out his traffic monitoring for him.

For each operator, while he monitored the LTD (or HTD) condition, ECG and EMG signals were recorded for one hour. After that, the experimenter asked each operator to complete the NASA-TLX questionnaire.

For each operator, while he monitored the HTD (or LTD) condition, ECG and EMG signals were recorded for one hour. Then, the experimenter asked each operator to complete the NASA-TLX questionnaire.

For each operator, ECG and EMG signals were recorded for five minutes at the end of the shift with open eyes in a quiet room.

The NASA-TLX (Hart and Staveland, 1988) was used to evaluate the operators' subjective workload. The experimenter asked each operator to self-report his MWL after monitoring LTD and HTD conditions. The NASA-TLX technique includes six sub-scales (MD, mental demand; PD, physical demand; TD, temporal demand; OP, own performance; EF, effort; and FR, frustration). The mean (RTLX, raw TLX) and weighted mean (WWL, weighted workload) of these six sub-scales were calculated using paired comparisons.

A NeXus-4 from Mind Media B.V. was used for data collection. The NeXus-4 is a four-channel psychophysiological monitoring and biofeedback platform that utilizes Bluetooth technology 1.1 class two wireless communication and flash memory techniques. This system allowed for the acquisition of signals, including raw EEG, ECG, EMG, EOG, etc. The acquired signals were wirelessly transmitted, using Bluetooth wireless communication, for online monitoring and data storage. Online graphic presentations of the physiological parameters and retrieval of database, data processing, digital filtering, report of trends and statistical analysis functions were provided by compatible software (BioTrace + software®, Mind Media BV, Roermond-Herten, The Netherlands). Two physiological parameters, heart rate (ECG) and muscle tension (EMG) were recorded for this study, using channels operating at a sample frequency of 1024 Hz. Muscle activity was recorded using EMG for shoulder muscles (upper-trapezius) on both sides of the shoulder using a bipolar recording montage. Root mean square (RMS) amplitude calculation was used to quantify the muscle activity in the signal. The RMS data were calculated on the fly by the program software (Biotrace + software). The digital EMG band pass filter was set to 20–500 Hz.

Biotrace + uses the ECG signal from the NeXus mostly to measure HR and HRV. The ECG was recorded using three Ag–AgCl electrodes. Electrodes were placed at the distal part of sternum and at the sixth rib in the left axilla. HRV, which refers to the beat-to-beat alterations in HR, was evaluated on the basis of ECG recordings during all four conditions. We split the one hour data from the HRV recordings of LTD and HTD conditions into five-minute segments, and the averages of twelve five-minute measurements were used for statistical analysis. Analysis of HRV was carried out on the following frequency bands: low frequency (LF) (0.05–0.15 Hz), reflecting sympathetic activity with vagal modulation, and high frequency (HF) (0.16–0.40 Hz), reflecting parasympathetic activity, as suggested by the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology (Cardiology and Cardiology, 1996). From the recorded ECG signals, the following features were calculated: the mean value of the HR (Mean HR), the standard deviation of the RR intervals (SDNN), the root mean square of the successive difference of the RR intervals (RMSSD), the percentage of the number of successive RR intervals varying more than 50 ms from the previous interval (pNN50), and the ratio of the LF over the HF (LF/HF).

The difference between subjective responses at LTD and HTD conditions during morning and night shifts for all sub-scales and overall workload of the NASA-TLX were analyzed using two-way repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). All physiological parameters were analyzed by applying a two-way (2×4) repeated measures ANOVA to examine the differences between shifts (morning and night) and interactions with measuring conditions (resting, LTD, HTD, and recovery). The Greenhouse–Geisser correction was applied. The factor of shift included the factor between subjects. The effect size index (ƒ) was reported, and the Bonferroni multiple comparison method was used. The statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS software, version 21.0. A 5% significance level was adopted in all tests.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The average age and work experience of the operators were 29.44 ± 2.61 (SD) and 3.37 ± 2.28 (SD) years, respectively. The results of the subjective ratings of workload measured by NASA–TLX across LTD and HTD conditions are summarized in Table 1
                        . The NASA–TLX scores ranged from 0, representing no demand, to 100, representing maximum demand. The operators reported progressively higher task demands across the two different conditions of TCC tasks. The results showed that, from the subjects' perspective, the degree of difficulty varied based on traffic density for each condition. In both the LTD and HTD conditions, based on the operators' point of view, the overall means for PD were the lowest. In the LTD condition, OP, EF, and MD were highest, and in the HTD condition, MD, EF, and TD were highest. The results of the ANOVA indicated significant differences for the means of the NASA-TLX and its dimensions between LTD and HTD conditions, except for PD (Table 1).

The results of the subjective ratings of MWL measured by NASA–TLX during LTD and HTD conditions are summarized based on shift work in Table 2
                        . During both morning and night shift work, the operators reported high task demands across the two different conditions of TCC tasks. For the LTD condition during both morning and night shift work, the overall means for PD were lower than other sub-scales. For the LTD condition during both morning and night shift work, operators stated that their OP, EF and MD had the highest importance, respectively. For the HTD condition during morning and night shift work, the overall means for PD were lower than other dimensions. Furthermore, for the HTD condition in the morning and at night, operators self-reported that MD, EF and TD had the highest importance, respectively. The average score for PD in LTD and HTD conditions during night shift work was lower than during morning shift work. Changes in NASA-TLX scores between shifts across the two traffic densities have been plotted in Fig. 3
                        .

The two-way ANOVA analysis of the six dimensions of NASA-TLX, except for PD (p = 0.258), revealed a significantly higher MD (p < 0.001) and TD (p < 0.001), and a poorer OP (p = 0.013), EF (p < 0.001), FR (p < 0.001) and WWL (p < 0.001) at HTD, compared to the LTD condition (Table 1). Furthermore, significant shift-MWL interactions were not found for the all sub-scales of NASA-TLX (Table 2).

The mean values, including the standard errors of all operators' physiological indices for the four conditions, are illustrated in Table 3
                        . The results showed that in the recovery condition, the means of HR, pNN50, LF/HF ratio and EMG amplitude were higher than in the resting condition. Furthermore, it was observed that as traffic density increased, operators' HR increased. The results of the 2 × 4 repeated measures ANOVA indicated that increasing traffic density or MWL had a significant main effect on the following features: HR, SDNN, RMSSD, LF/HF ratio and EMG amplitude.

A 2×4 repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of MWL on HR (F (2.132, 31.98) = 11.124, ε = 0.711, ƒ = 0.426, p < 0.001). A Bonferroni post-hoc test showed that there was a significant difference for mean HR between rest and LTD (p = 0.005), rest and HTD (p = 0.001), and HTD and recovery (p = 0.011). Furthermore, significant differences were not observed between rest and recovery (p = 0.550), LTD and HTD (p = 0.800), and LTD and recovery (p = 0.344). A 2 × 4 repeated measures ANOVA showed a significant main effect of MWL on SDNN (F (1.578, 23.677) = 7.055, ε = 0.526, ƒ = 0.320, p = 0.006). Bonferroni post-hoc comparison revealed no significant difference for mean SDNN between rest and LTD (p = 0.675). There was a significant difference between rest and HTD (p = 0.014), LTD and HTD (p = 0.018), and HTD and recovery (p = 0.012). A 2 × 4 repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of MWL on RMSSD (F (1.294, 19.417) = 16.99, ε = 0.431, ƒ = 0.531, p < 0.001). A Bonferroni post-hoc test indicated a significant difference for mean RMSSD between rest and LTD (p = 0.027), rest and HTD (p = 0.001), and LTD and HTD (p = 0.038). No significant difference for mean RMSSD between LTD and recovery (p = 0.084) was observed. A 2 × 4 repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of MWL on LF/HF ratio (F (1.493, 22.389) = 6.454, ε = 0.498, ƒ = 0.301, p = 0.01). A Bonferroni post-hoc showed no significant difference for mean LF/HF ratio between rest and recovery (p = 0.209), or LTD and recovery (p = 0.372). There was a significant difference between rest and HTD (p < 0.001) and LTD and HTD (p = 0.002). A 2 × 4 repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of MWL on EMG amplitude (F (1.415, 21.220) = 70.069, ε = 0.472, ƒ = 0.824, p < 0.001). A Bonferroni post-hoc showed no significant difference for mean EMG amplitude between LTD and recovery (p = 0.091). There was a significant difference between rest and LTD (p = 0.001), LTD and HTD (p < 0.001), and LTD and recovery (p < 0.001). A 2 × 4 repeated measures ANOVA revealed no significant main effect of MWL on pNN50 (1.33, 19.948) = 2.116, ε = 0.443, ƒ = 0.124, p = 0.158).

Changes in physiological indices among TCC operators between shifts are plotted in Fig. 4
                        . We investigated the effect of shift work on physiological indices. The mean values, including standard errors, of all variables and results of statistical analysis in the resting, LTD, HTD, and recovery conditions are illustrated for both morning and night shift work in Table 4
                        . The results showed that shift work did not have any effect on the following features:HR, SDNN, RMSSD, pNN50 and EMG amplitude. Thus, the main effect of shift-MWL interaction, except for the LF/HF ratio (F (1.634, 22.882) = 3.702, ε = 0.545, ƒ = 0.209, p = 0.048), did not reach the significance level for the mentioned variables during the four conditions (Table 4). A Bonferroni post-hoc test revealed significant differences in the mean LF/HF ratio between rest and HTD (p < 0.001) and LTD and HTD (p = 0.004) for both morning and night shifts. Furthermore, there was no significant difference between rest and LTD (p = 0.752), LTD and recovery (p = 0.160), or rest and recovery (p = 0.066).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This is one of the first research studies that have been conducted to evaluate the MWL of operators in a city TCC while they were monitoring traffic congestion. The present study investigates the cardiovascular indices, shoulder muscle activity, and subjective responses of operators to their MWL in a TCC. It is necessary to mention that the instructions to operators may have affected subjective parameters such as NASA-TLX. Therefore, it is almost impossible to reject such an effect on subjective measures. Thus, besides NASA-TLX, we used physiological measures to evaluate MWL.

Using NASA-TLX, the operators stated that the task demands of the HTD condition were higher than those of the LTD condition. In the LTD condition, OP was most important, and in the HTD condition, MD was most important. This means that operators tried to maintain their performance at the highest level in the LTD condition, and when traffic density increased, MD increased as well. The high the average mental requirement, the more the operator felt that his job was demanding. Furthermore, in the LTD condition during both morning and night shift work, OP had the highest importance. But in the HTD condition during both morning and night shift work, MD had the highest importance. It seems that when traffic density increased, operators working at night experienced more mental stress, which could lead to mental disorders under these circumstances. It was observed that the demand for physical effort was indeed very small, especially during the night shift, since the operators were usually sitting; they stood only in certain situations to talk to their supervisors. Because of good OP in the LTD condition, operators had low levels of FR, and in this way they may have experienced lower stress. However, during the HTD condition in the morning and at night, MD and the level of FR increased with an increase in traffic load, which may have caused operators to experience more stress while performing their work. Teh et al. (2014) indicated that there is a linear upward trend in driver MWLwith increasing traffic density, up to moderate traffic load levels.

In this study, MWL had a marked influence on the physiological indices with increasing traffic density during work sessions, namely during LTD and HTD conditions compared with resting and recovery conditions. Moreover, the shift from LTD to HTD was clearly reflected in these HRV features: SDNN, RMSSD, pNN50, HR, LF/HF ratio, and EMG amplitude. The results of the HRV analysis showed a clear relationship between increasing traffic density (increasing MWL) and LTD, HTD and HRV. A statistically significant difference was observed for the features SDNN and RMSSD. Cinaz et al. (2013) demonstrated that the features RMSSD and pNN50 decrease significantly with increased MWL. In contrast, a statistically significant difference was observed for HR, LF/HF ratio, and EMG amplitude. Despite this LF/HF ratio result, Miyake et al. (2009) mentioned that LF/HF ratio might not be a good index of MWL. Cinaz et al. (2013) indicated that the LF/HF ratio significantly increases with increased MWL. Reimer and Mehler (2011) monitored HR during actual highway driving in response to systematically increased levels of MWL using an auditory delayed digit recall task. The pattern of change in HR with increased MWL was highly consistent between field and simulator conditions. Hwang et al. (2008) demonstrated that by increasing task complexity, HR and LF/HF ratio increased and HRV decreased for most subjects. Widyanti et al. (2013) compared the subjective workload ratings, HR and HRV, of Dutch and Indonesian participants under single- and dual-task conditions. Indonesians used a narrower range of subjective workload ratings than did the Dutch. Dutch participants showed a decrease in HRV an increase in HR during task performance compared with the rest period. Knaepenet al. (2015) assessed MWL through psychophysiological responses during symmetrical, asymmetrical, and dual-task walking. They indicated that HR significantly increased and HRV significantly decreased with increasing MWL during walking. Shi et al. (2015) compared the effects of time pressure workload during computer tasks on HR and time domain and frequency domain indices of HRV among five computer tasks and two rest periods. Faster HR and decreased standard deviation of R–R interval were noted in response to computer tasks performed under time pressure. Mental arithmetic tasks were found to significantly increase HR (Zhang et al., 2010). Our results were consistent with the results of the above mentioned studies. The HRV indices of parasympathetic nervous system activity were sensitive indicators of MWL during traffic density monitoring; this main finding was consistent with a number of other studies using either prolonged (Miyake, 1997; Bernardi et al., 2000) or short-term exposure to psychosocial stressors (De Geus et al., 1990; Sloan et al., 1991). Ryu and Myung (2005) showed a clear correlation between the difficulty of the tracking task and HRV indices. In another study, which evaluated the demands of dynamic monitoring and fault diagnosis for flight engineer trainees, the HRV power spectrum systematically decreased as MWL in the flight phase increased (Tattersall and Hockey, 1995). Measures of resting and recovery conditions showed a difference in both HRV features and EMG amplitude. In the recovery condition, the means of HR, pNN50, LF/HF ratio and EMG amplitude were higher than in the rest condition. On the other hand, the values measured in the recovery condition did not return to resting level values, measured before the beginning of daily work. In the recovery condition, the LF/HF ratio during the night shift was lower than during the morning shift. Billman (2013) argued that the LF/HF ratio is an appropriate tool to evaluate cardiovascular autonomic regulation, where increases in LF/HF are assumed to reflect a shift to “sympathetic dominance” and decreases in this index correspond to “parasympathetic dominance.” It seems that working the night shift while monitoring traffic density probably has a significant effect on physiological indices such as the LF/HF ratio. This may indicate that psychosocial stressors may prevent the individual from shutting off their physiological activation, and that returning from a recovery condition to a resting situation, in terms of the HRV features and EMG amplitude, takes a long time. Laboratory research from Garde et al. (2002) reported baseline HRV values quite similar to the HRV values observed during rest periods. This study result was not in accordance with our results.

However, there have been no studies on the effect of an increasing MWL due to traffic density on shoulder muscle fatigue. Indications of muscle fatigue include an increase in EMG amplitude. In this study, the EMG amplitude of shoulder muscle activity was lower during the LTD condition than during the HTD condition. This indicates that the HTD condition requires more shoulder muscle activity than the LTD condition. On the other hand, the EMG amplitude of the muscles tends to increase with time for both the LTD and HTD conditions. This could be a sign of muscle fatigue. Thus, this study indicates that the TCC stressors led to changes in HRV features and a sustained increase in EMG amplitude; however, significant differences were observed for subjective experience of MWL. In this study, we were unable to measure body movement/hand manipulation by a technique such as motion analysis. Thus, it is suggested that operators' body movement/hand manipulation was more active in HTD than LTD conditions when monitoring traffic density.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Some limitations of this study should be mentioned. All operators in the TCC were men, and their mean age was less than 30 years. Thus the study did not address the effects of gender, nor did it report any gender differences while quantifying the effects of traffic congestion on physiological responses. Future research should try to evaluate the MWL of operators in workplaces with both men and women with a mean age of more than 30 years. It should apply more psychophysiological indices simultaneously. Experimenters found that shift work probably did not have any effect on physiological response; the limited number of operators working each shift might explain this. Thus we suggest that investigating the MWL of a larger number of operators in each shift may produce better results. Measuring physiological indices in workplaces in which operators experience different MWL levels for eight hours during shift work may help in improving the design of ergonomic interventions, such as task and workstation design, to reduce mental stress.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Many studies have been conducted in laboratory settings in which subjects performed mental tasks to evaluate or classify different levels of MWL. The findings of such studies cannot necessarily be applied to actual workplaces. For this reason, we conducted this study in a TCC during real working conditions. Our experiment showed that HTD does lead to an increase in MWL compared to LTD, and that this increase occurs in both subjective and some physiological responses such as HR, LF/HF ratio, and EMG amplitude. In addition, OP was highest and most consistent when working with LTD, while it was diminished with HTD. MD as measured by NASA-TLX was highest and most consistent when working with HTD. Increasing traffic density (and thus mental demand) has a significant effect on physiological variables, although shift work probably did not have any effect on these variables. In this TCC, the mean age and work experience of the operators were 29.4 and 3.3 years, respectively. We can expect that with increasing work experience, mental fatigue and stress will increase and the mental health of traffic control operators will probably deteriorate. Because all operators experience both HTD and LTD conditions during both the morning and night shifts, it might be necessary to maintain OP and MD at acceptable levels to manage the mental health of operators. We proposed to the TCC director an ergonomic program for managing mental health among operators in the future. For example, we suggested decreasing the number of intersections monitored by each operator from 30 to 20. To do this, it might be necessary to recruit three new operators for the TCC. The findings reported in this paper may be generalizable to other control room operators but some of the findings are likely to be due to the characteristics of this TCC as well as the ITS type and city traffic density. Finally, through evaluating MWL, the TCC director can organize the human resources for each traffic density condition to sustain the appropriate MWL as well as improve city traffic control management.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to thank the operators of traffic control center for their time and engagement with this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

