@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The influence of officer equipment and protection on short sprinting performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined officer equipment weight and a lateral focal point influences on a short sprint.


                        
                        
                           
                           The belt averaged 11.47 ± 1.64% of subject body mass.


                        
                        
                           
                           Significant decreases in velocity and acceleration were found for all weight belt trials.


                        
                        
                           
                           No performance decreases were observed with a focal point.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Law enforcement officers

Sprinting performance

Equipment belt

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  As advances in protective equipment are made, it has been observed that the weight law enforcement officers must carry every day is greatly increasing. Many investigations have noted the health risks of these increases, yet none have looked at its effects on officer mobility. The primary purpose of this study was to examine the influence of both the weight of officer safety equipment, as well as a lateral focal point (FP), on the stride length, stride velocity, and acceleration of the first six strides of a short sprint. Twenty male law enforcement students performed two maximal effort sprint trials, in the participating college's gymnasium, from each of four starting positions: forwards (control position), backwards, 90° left, and 90° right. Subjects placed in the FP group (n = 9) were required to maintain focus on lateral FP during the 90° left and 90° right trials, and a forwards FP during the backwards trials. On a second testing date, subjects repeated the sprint tests while wearing a 9.07 kg weight belt, simulating officer equipment and protective gear. The belt averaged 11.47 ± 1.64% of subject body mass. A significant main effect of weight belt trials was found (F = 20.494, p < 0.01), in which significant decreases were found for velocity and acceleration. No other significant effects were found as a result of starting position or focal point and no significant interactions were found between independent variables. Conclusively, the results of this study show the increasing weights of duty gear and protective equipment have detrimental effects on officer velocity and acceleration, impeding their mobility, which may be dangerous in use of force or threatening situations.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In comparison to previous years, law enforcement officers, internationally, are beginning to carry more weight in equipment and protective clothing due to the addition of non-lethal capabilities (i.e. tasers) and improvements in body armor. Studies examining the musculoskeletal health and performance of officers have reported the combined weight of an officer's duty belt and safety vest may range from 7.65 kg to over 9.07 kg (17 to 20+ lbs) (Dempsey et al., 2013). Although these increases in weight offer additional protection and equipment to help officers on a daily basis, the amount of resistance placed on their bodies has begun to reach a point where mobility and health are suffering. Many studies have examined the influence of officer gear on musculoskeletal health (Adams et al., 2010; Burton et al., 1996; Czarnecki and Janowitz, 2003; Holmes et al., 2013), but only one known study has observed the effects of gear on officer movement (Dempsey et al., 2013).

Competitive athletes tested while wearing resistant belts or vests, often weighing less than the average officer's protection and equipment, have been noted to experience decreases in stride length, flight time, speed, and acceleration, as well as increases in ground contact time and forward trunk lean (Alcaraz et al., 2008; Letzelter et al., 1995; Lockie et al., 2003; Myers and Steudel, 1985). These performance decreases are observed with resistive weight as little as 7–8% of an athlete's body mass and substantial detriments have been noted with resistance greater than 10% of an athlete's body mass (Letzelter et al., 1995; Lockie et al., 2003). One study examining the biomechanical changes in running patterns noted that with a 10% decrease in performance (stride length and velocity) athletes begin to alter their running form drastically to compensate for the excess weight (Lockie et al., 2003). Military research also has demonstrated that carrying excess weight over extended periods of time, primarily in the form of body armor and equipment, decreases performance and results in greater physiological demands (Cheuvront et al., 2008; DeMaio et al., 2009; Hasselquist et al., 2008; Larsen et al., 2011; Myers and Steudel, 1985).

A recent study, specific to officer mobility, examined the amount of performance reduction New Zealand officers experienced while wearing their protective vest and a weighted belt (7.65 kg; ranging from 7% to 11% subject body mass), in comparison to only athletic clothing (Dempsey et al., 2013). Subjects were tested on their balance, acceleration out of a “vehicle”, upper body strength, grappling, tactical mobility, and endurance, based on previous police job task analyses (Bonneau and Brown, 1995; Hooper, 1999). Researchers found officer mobility task performances were decreased significantly for all tasks (Dempsey et al., 2013). Another recent study examining officer performance, reported 94 American law enforcement officers, of a wide range of ranking, to have average body mass of 92.43 ± 17.44 kg (Lewinski et al., 2013). This general demographic data implies that officers carrying the U.S. average 9.1 kg in protection and equipment are wearing over 8–12% of their body mass – resistances greater than what competitive athletes are recommended to train at (Alcaraz et al., 2008; Bosco et al., 1986; Young et al., 2001). Pivoting, or lateral movement, and acceleration are two defensive components officers regularly use and are likely to be affected by this excessive weight carried by officers.

When necessary, officers are trained to take cover behind the closest and most effective “shield”, as quickly as possible (Adams et al., 1980; Garner, 2005; Johnson, 2007; Rayburn, 2001). One example of this is while officers perform a traffic stop from standing at the driver's window, cover behind the suspect's vehicle is usually only 4–6 m away; thus an officer's speed in their first six strides is critical gaining protection (Dysterheft et al., 2013; Lewinski and Redmann, 2009). In a recent study observing officer movement at a simulated roadside traffic stop, officers faced with a gunman took an average of less than 2.12 s to take cover in a safe zone, most often located behind the vehicle (Lewinski et al., 2013). However, in the same amount of time, a suspect in the driver's seat was able to first draw, aim, and fire his weapon within 0.53 s and, according to previous research, would be able to fire an additional 4–6 rounds, depending upon their weapon choice (Lewinski et al., 2013; Lewinski, 2000).

In addition to maneuvering to cover, officers performing roadside duties, most often traffic stops, face the threat of being struck by an oncoming vehicle. In total, from 2001 to 2012, 205 officers were killed by oncoming motor vehicles while conducting traffic stops, directing traffic, or other roadside duties, while it is estimated that thousands more were injured (The Federal Bureau of Investigation [FBI], 2001, 2002, 2013; The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration [NHTSA], 2011). Although evading the path of an approaching vehicle may only take a few strides, given the average standard vehicle width is 2 m (NHTSA, 1999), officers must react and move rapidly to escape the path of the approaching vehicle, as to avoid injury or death. It is estimated that an officer has less than 2 s to escape the path of an oncoming vehicle accelerating from a stationary position, 6 m (20 ft) away (Ashley and Aveni, 2005), and even less time when vehicles are already traveling at highway speeds. Although the average person can complete nearly six strides in 2 s, moving well out of the path of an oncoming vehicle, the time it takes officers to react and initiate movement with their equipment reduces that time frame immensely, especially when factoring in a startle response and the limits of information processing (Dysterheft et al., 2013; Lewinski et al., 2013; Marois and Ivanoff, 2005; Pashler, 1994; Sime, 1985).

A final aspect of officer performance that is likely influenced by excess weight is movement during close contact encounters. Whether an officer is attacked by or in pursuit of a suspect on foot, movement forwards and laterally, or backwards, is import for both offensive and defense maneuvers. When confronted with an armed suspect in too close of proximity to draw their weapon, officers are trained to evade attacking suspects, or put distance between them, by sidestepping, or moving laterally and/or forward, in either a “J” or “L” shape (McKenna, 2013; Calibre Press, 1988). This movement gives officers additional time to draw their weapon for defensive purposes and put additional distance in between them and the suspect (Calibre Press, 1988; Remsberg, 1986). In contrast, offensive moments in close contact rapidly close the gap between officers and suspects, often in an attempt to disarm suspects and neutralize the threat (McKenna, 2013; Remsberg, 1986). These require officers to either move forwards, laterally, or change direction quickly, often in a “sweeping and disengaging” motion (Calibre Press, 1988).

Overall, performance of these law enforcement defenses is important for officer safety and survival; however, little research has been published examining the effects of excess weight on officer movement performance. The primary purpose of this study was to examine the influence of officer duty belts and vests on short sprint acceleration and turning ability. Because previous literature has observed significant decreases in performance when an individual maintains eye contact with a focal point (Dysterheft et al., 2013), for example an officer watching a suspect for movement or an oncoming vehicle, a secondary component was added to make the results as realistic as possible. Therefore, a secondary purpose of this study was to examine the influence of a lateral focal point while sprinting to simulate officers maintaining focus on a suspect, threat, or oncoming vehicle.

@&#METHODS@&#

A total of 23 law enforcement students volunteered for the study. Following data collection, three of the students were removed due to inability to complete study requirements, unrelated to the intervention, resulting in a sample size of 20 male, law enforcement students. Sixteen of the subjects reported previous high school training in athletics (i.e. track & field, football, swimming, etc.). A majority (n = 19) of the subjects reported right hand dominance and one subject reported left hand dominance. No control for limb dominance was used due to a lack of supporting evidence demonstrating an influence on lower body strength or power (Demura et al., 2001).

Subjects were assessed for percentage body fat (BF) using bioelectric impedance (Omron HBF-306C, Shelton, CT) and average, maximum vertical jump (VJ) height in order to more accurately describe the sample. Prior to data collection, subjects completed an informed consent form, a health screening, for risk stratification, and a fitness level questionnaire (range 0–10) (George et al., 1997), in which maximum oxygen uptake (VO2max) was estimated through the use of a regression equation (Ross and Jackson, 1990). Athletic training experience and VO2max estimations were also used to gain a more accurate description of the sample. Subject demographics are as follows: age: 21.25 ± 2.61 years; mass: 80.74 ± 11.79 kg; BF%: 11.98 ± 5.87%; VJ: 0.54 ± 0.10 m; and VO2max: 53.02 ± 4.72 ml−1 kg−1 min−1. All subjects were informed that the primary purpose of the study was to observe sprint acceleration mechanics in officers. Procedures were pre-approved from the sponsoring institutional review board for the protection of human subjects.

All trials were completed in a gymnasium at the participating college and, prior to the testing date, students were asked to wear training uniforms (shirt, pants, and boots similar to police uniforms) to each testing session. During the second testing session, subjects were also given 9.07 kg weight belt to wear during the experimental sprint trials to simulate officer duty belts. The sprint area start line and finish line (approximately 9.1 m apart to allow for sufficient room for all subjects to complete six strides) were marked with both tape on the ground and cones for visual reference. Additionally, two focal points, used to simulate officers maintaining focus on a suspect or oncoming vehicle, were positioned at a height of 0.94 m laterally and in front of the sprint area (for equipment positioning, see Fig. 1
                        ).

All trials were videotaped using a tripod-mounted video camera (Flip Video Ultra HD, Flip Technology, Irvine, CA, USA), filmed at a rate of 30 Hz. The camera was positioned 17 m from the sprint trials to allow an additional meter on each side of the start and finish line to be visible and ensure all movements prior to the sprint start, as well as all six strides, were captured. A marked meter stick was placed alongside the running path to allow for pixel-to-meter calibration during digital analysis. Subject videos were digitized on a frame-by-frame basis using commercial software (Dartfish Prosuite 6.0, Dartfish, Alpharetta, GA, USA). For data analysis, the video times for the initial body movement and 5th metatarsal (midfoot) landing strikes of both the left and right shoes were recorded. The stride length (reported in m) was measured as the distance from the midfoot landing strike of one foot to the midfoot landing strike of the opposing foot, aiding in the calculation of velocity (reported in m s−1) and acceleration (m s−2).

Subjects were asked to come to the gymnasium on two separate occasions (separated by one week). For the first testing session, subjects wore their training uniform and boots, similar to law enforcement officers' uniforms and on the second, subjects also wore 9.07 kg diver weight belt, simulating the weight of an officer's protective vest and duty belt.

For both sessions, subjects arrived at the gymnasium and were taken through the sprint trials in pairs. Initially, as subject arrived, they were informed that they would be completing a total of eight short, maximal effort sprints with a 1-min recovery following each trial (while one subject recovered, the second would complete their sprint trial). Subjects were instructed they were going to begin from four various starting positions (forwards, backwards, 90° turn to the left (90°L), and 90° turn to the right (90°R)) in a randomized order and would complete two trials from each position (see Fig. 2
                        a–d).

A researcher demonstrated to subjects how they were to stand before initiating each sprint (feet parallel, shoulder width apart, and with their hands resting at their sides). All subjects self-initiated the sprint, after they received a ready signal, given by researchers. When beginning from the forwards starting position, subjects stood at the right end of the sprint area with their left shoulder facing the camera and hips aligned with the tape at the start line (Fig. 2a). For the backwards starting position, subjects began on the left side of the sprint trial area with their left shoulder facing the camera and their back to the finish line (Fig. 2b). Subjects were informed that during the backwards trial, they must begin and remain in a backwards position for the entirety of the sprint. Similar to the backwards position, the 90°L position began on the left side of the sprint area; however subjects were instructed to face the camera with their left foot on the start line and turn into a forwards sprint (Fig. 2c). Much like the 90°L position, the 90°R position began with subjects facing the camera, but with their right foot on the start line and positioned at the right side of the sprint area (Fig. 2d). During the sprint instructions, it was emphasized that subjects should sprint at a maximal effort and completely past the cone marking the finish line to avoid deceleration prior to the end of the sprint length. For natural observation purposes, subjects were given no specific instructions on how they should initiate the sprints or turn during the 90°L and 90°R trials.

Upon their arrival to the gymnasium, subjects were randomly issued numbers to divide them into either the control (n = 11) or focal point (FP) (n = 9) groups. Subjects placed into the FP group were asked to maintain focus on a specified FP during the backwards, 90°L, and 90°R sprint trials. Subjects in the FP group were asking to keep eye contact with an FP either directly in front of them (backwards position) or lateral to the (90°L and 90°R positions) for the entire sprint (see Fig. 1 for FP locations). For a control trial, no FP was used during the forwards sprint trials. Subjects in the control group were instructed to ignore the FPs and look forwards, or where they would naturally look during a sprint (Palmieri, 1993; Patel, 2010; Plisk, 2000). If requested by subjects in the control group, FPs were removed. For direct comparative purposes of stride changes for all positions and to minimize a possible learning effect with many trials, participants were kept to only focal point usage or no focal point usage for testing.

The variables measured for analysis were changes in VJ, stride length, velocity, and acceleration with the focal point and/or weight belt. All focal point comparisons were made against the forwards control trials and all weight belt comparisons were made against the non-weight belt trials. All results are reported as change (Δ) measured. No comparisons between backwards and forwards trials were made due to previous research demonstrating the differences (Arata, 2000). Within-subject reliability for test–retest stride velocity and inter-rater reliability (25% of subject data) were assessed using intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) and coefficient of variation (CV) (Hopkins, 2000). All individual changes between subjects were analyzed using paired samples t-tests and interaction effects were analyzed using a mixed methods, repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni adjusted post-hoc testing (SPSS, IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA). The criterion to reject the null hypothesis was p < 0.05. All descriptive statistics are reported as mean ± standard deviation.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Subject inter-trial reliability for stride velocity was strong (ICC = 0.95, CV = 1.3%), while inter-rater reliability for velocity was extremely strong (ICC = 0.94, CV = 0.08%). The weight belts worn by subjects were an average of 11.47 ± 1.64% of subject body mass. Mean subject VJ height decreased from 0.54 ± 0.10 m to 0.45 ± 0.08 m (p < 0.01). All descriptive data for stride length, stride velocity, step time, and overall acceleration are reported in Table 1
                     . Results of the repeated measures ANOVA demonstrated no effect of position on stride length or velocity (F = 0.57, p < 0.57). Specifically, paired t-tests revealed significant decreases in stride length were found for only the first two strides of both the 90°L and 90°R trials (no WB) without a focal point (p < 0.01). No other significant differences were found for stride length, stride velocity, or acceleration between the forwards, 90°L, and 90°R trials (no WB) without a focal point.

The repeated measures ANOVA results showed a significant main effect of the weight belt for all trials (F = 22.79, p < 0.01) (see Fig. 3
                     a–d). No significant decrease in stride length was found for various starting positions during the weight belt trials, except in the backwards starting position (forwards: t(19) = 0.441, Δ = −0.01 m, p = 0.66; backwards: t(19) = 2.59, Δ = −0.04 m, p = 0.02; 90°L: t(19) = 3.02, Δ = −0.05 m, p = 0.07; 90°R: t(19) = 2.03, Δ = −0.05 m, p = 0.06). Significant decreases in average velocity were found for all weight belt trials (forwards: t(19) = 5.36, Δ = −0.21 m s−1, p < 0.01; backwards: t(19) = 3.69, Δ = −0.10 m s−1, p < 0.01; 90°L: t(19) = 6.94, Δ = −0.20 m s−1, p < 0.01; 90°R: t(19) = 4.20, Δ = −0.23 m s−1, p < 0.01). Additionally, acceleration was decreased for all starting positions during the weight belt trials (forwards: t(19) = 3.30, Δ = −0.48 m s−2, p < 0.01; backwards: t(19) = 2.29, Δ = −0.15 m s−2, p = 0.03; 90°L: t(19) = 5.80, Δ = −0.23 m s−2, p < 0.01; 90°R: t(19) = 4.67, Δ = −0.34 m s−2, p < 0.01). No significant effect was found for FP on the sprinting trials (F = 1.29, p < 0.26) and no significant interactions between FP, weight belt, or position were found (F < 1.00, p > 0.05).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The primary purpose of this study was to examine the effects of excess weight, specifically caused by protective gear and equipment, on officer sprinting performance during the first six strides. Additionally, researchers examined the influence of a lateral focal point on officer sprinting ability to simulate realistic attentional focus on suspects or deadly threats, such as oncoming vehicles. The average data collected on stride length, velocity, and step time are similar to that of previous research (Arata, 2000; Dysterheft et al., 2013; Lewinski and Redmann, 2009; see Table 1).

As demonstrated by previous research, weight belts and resistance sleds weighing more than 10% body mass result in severe detriments to running form and performance in trained athletes (Lockie et al., 2003). The subjects in this study wore a 9.07 kg weight belt, equaling 11.47 ± 1.64% of their body mass. Although maximal effort VJ was collected for description purposes, it was noted that subjects experienced a 17% decrease in VJ performance while wearing the weight belt.

The primary finding of the study was that the excess weight carried by subjects caused significant detriments to sprinting stride velocity (see Fig. 3b–d). These results demonstrate an overall performance decrease of 5% for stride velocity (see Table 1 for data). However, unlike stride velocity, stride length was not affected by the excess weight, except when subjects performed the backwards sprint trials (Fig. 3a). This observation supports the findings of cited studies in which resistance belts or sleds increase ground contact time, but have little to no influence on stride length (Alcaraz et al., 2008; Letzelter et al., 1995; Lockie et al., 2003). This added time on the ground is attributed to increased eccentric loading, which in-turn overloads the muscles during the stretch–shorten cycle. Because of this vertical overload, athletes, or in this case officers, need a greater amount of time to reverse the downward motion and propel the body forwards by pushing off of the ground (Cronin and Hansen, 2006; Lockie et al., 2003; Young et al., 2001). The excess weight also is noted to increase the necessary muscular force required for forward propulsion, but not until greater velocity is developed later in the sprint (Cronin and Hansen, 2006). Although stride length was not decreased during the weight belt trials, the increase in ground contact time is the likely cause for the decrease in velocity and acceleration (Alcaraz et al., 2008; Lockie et al., 2003).

In contrast to researcher expectations, the use of a focal point did not have an influence on subjects' sprinting performance. Although previous research (Dysterheft et al., 2013) has demonstrated significant deficits to stride length, stride velocity, and acceleration with the use of a lateral focal point, the findings of this study did not have similar results. One possible cause for this could be a learning, or practice, effect (Hopkins, 2000; Wragg et al., 2000), in which subjects adapted to the use of a focal point throughout the trials and steadily increased their performance. Therefore, it is suggested further examination into whether the use of a focal point decreases sprinting performance. Examiners should also consider fewer trials and study the possibility of a learning effect.

The results of this study demonstrate that even in young, healthy law enforcement students, stride velocity and acceleration are negatively affected by the weight of a duty belt. It is suggested by researchers that this information be used to better prepare officers, through training and fitness, for the detriments they are likely to face when wearing their duty belts and full protective gear. As the subject group can be considered much younger and more fit than the average law enforcement officer (see Lewinski et al., 2013 or Bissett et al., 2012 for large group demographic data on law enforcement officers) it should be noted that less aerobically fit populations are expected to experience much greater decreases in performance that those observed in this study. Therefore, average officers, as previously mentioned, are likely to experience greater contact time with the ground, resulting in slowed velocity and acceleration. Because use of force situations escalate within a fraction of a second (see Lewinski, 2000; Lewinski et al., 2013; Lewinski and Redmann, 2009), slowed mobility of officers, even within the initial few steps to cover, may have dangerous risks to an officer's health and life.

To combat these effects, researchers suggest lower body strength and power training and maintenance, as well as agility training should be used (Dicks, 2014; Lockie et al., 2003). While it is unknown whether a change in weight distribution or equipment location may help to decrease the measured effects, for the safety of officers, it is not suggested that less equipment be carried; however further research is strongly suggested.

Additionally, researchers now have more empirical support and knowledge of the progression of stride length and velocity, as well as acceleration, in healthy, untrained individuals; this is also true for the changes incurred by individuals while wearing weighted equipment. Both of these measures may play a direct role in the analysis of police defensive maneuvers, such as their movements laterally, turning, and short accelerations, and use of force situations, such as the acceleration analysis of suspects or threats towards an officer. This data can aid in the stride-by-stride movement analysis of officers in close contact situations, as well as other professions such as military policing, firefighters, and special operations teams. While it is understood that the equipment carried by each professional may vary, this data has begun to show the mobility changes individuals experience when carrying excess weight in protective equipment or gear.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Researchers feel it is important to note that while the subject group was considered to be average in their VJ scores without a weight belt (Arkinstall et al., 2010), their VO2max averages placed them above the 90 percentile in ranking for fitness (Thompson et al., 2009); however, as previously mentioned the average officer is likely to experience greater decreases in performance than those measured in this study. As for the lack of female data, it is recommended further research be performed to examine gender differences and possible greater detriments experienced by female officers (Alcaraz et al., 2008). Additionally, researchers observed that a majority of subjects completed an initial step backwards, in the opposite direction of the sprint, similar to observations made in previous studies (Dysterheft et al., 2013). This backwards step, although beneficial in pre-loading the muscle to increase force production, resulted overall in a longer duration of time for subjects to take the first step towards the finish line; however, a backwards step has been concluded to increase velocity and acceleration in short sprint distances (Dysterheft et al., 2013; Frost et al., 2008; Kraan et al., 2001). While no effect was found for position or focal point, it is important to emphasize that these variables have been observed to influence sprinting performance in the past and should be further investigated for their effect on officer mobility in short distances.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The movement ability of police officers wearing large amounts of equipment and protection is decreased, not only in tactical mobility, as demonstrated by Dempsey et al. (2013), but in velocity and acceleration as well. This research suggests that officers wearing heavy amount of equipment and protect are likely to struggle with some of the more important movements for survival purposes in very close contact encounters. As it was observed that when an officer continues to accelerate and gain velocity, they begin to see greater detriments to their sprinting performance when wearing a duty belt (see Table 1). Considering the first three strides are the most important, officers should consider choosing the shortest distance to cover or protection when under threat. Realistically, these results support the need for officers to escape from the path of an assault or capture someone as quickly as possible. Researchers suggest that officers would greatly benefit from strength and power resistance training, as well as agility training, to improve rate of force development, or their ability to accelerate. While it is unknown whether a change in the location of equipment may aid in these performance decreases, researchers do not suggest officers reduce the amount of equipment they carry for safety and defensive purposes. Furthermore, although no decreases in performance were found with the use of a focal point for this particular study, further investigation is suggested for possible training improvements.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

