@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#River and fish pollution in Malaysia: A green ergonomics perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Human factors increase heavy metal concentrations in river water in Malaysia.


                        
                        
                           
                           The bioaccumulation of toxic metals in the food chain impacts social wellness.


                        
                        
                           
                           There is limited awareness of the dangers of high heavy metal concentrations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Policy interventions can address human factors (e.g., enhancing awareness).


                        
                        
                           
                           More collaboration between stakeholders can enhance policy effectiveness.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Green ergonomics

Human factors

Heavy metal pollution

Sustainable development

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Human activities, such as industrial, agricultural, and domestic pursuits, discharge effluents into riverine ecological systems that contains aquatic resources, such as fish, which are also used by humans. We conducted case studies in Malaysia to investigate the impacts of these human activities on water and fish resources, as well as on human well-being from an ergonomics perspective. This research shows that a green ergonomics approach can provide us with useful insights into sustainable relationships between humans and ecology in facilitating human well-being in consideration of the overall performance of the social-ecological system. Heavy metal concentrations contained in the effluents pollute river water and contaminate fish, eventually creating significant health risks and economic costs for residents, including the polluters. The study suggests a number of policy interventions to change human behavior and achieve greater collaboration between various levels of government, academia, civil society, and businesses to help establish sustainable relationships between humans and ecology in Malaysia.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Ergonomics (or human factors) deals with the study of relationships between humans and other elements of a system they interact with in a workplace and applies relevant theories, principles, data and methods to optimize the performance of the system while maximizing human well-being (IEA, 2015). The ergonomics discipline primarily emerged to address challenges with relationships between humans and the machines/equipment they operate and interact with in a workplace. Several scholars have attempted over the past three decades to broaden the discipline's narrow scope to accommodate natural and ecological environment by exploring designs for optimizing relationships between humans that degrade the natural environment (or ecology) and the natural environment that in turn reduces human well-being. As a part of this effort, new concepts such as “green ergonomics” (Hanson, 2010, 2013; Thatcher, 2013) and “ergoecology” (García-Acosta et al., 2014) have been developed.

It is in this broader context of ergonomics that we examine how humans in the agriculture, industry and household sectors generate pollutants that move beyond the boundaries of their workplaces and degrade river water quality and fish health, causing a deterioration in the overall human well-being in Malaysia. In this regard, we conducted case studies to examine the impacts of human activities on river water and fish resources, as well as possible impacts of these phenomena on human well-being. We collected and analyzed water and fish samples from two rivers in Malaysia, the Langat and Klang rivers, and interviewed residents living in the river basin areas. Our findings reveal that heavy metals, such as mercury and arsenic, enter into the river water and contaminate water and fish, posing significant health risks and economic costs for residents, which in turn disrupts the performance of the social-ecological system. A green ergonomics approach can help explain sustainable relationships between humans and ecology in facilitating human well-being in terms of the performance of the social-ecological system performance.

Given that the scope of ergonomics was confined to the relationships between humans and equipment in a workplace, Moray (1993) has emphasized the potential of ergonomics to include issues of water and food shortages, inefficient energy usage, pollution and waste. Furthermore, Moray (1995) argued that the role of ergonomics “is to design a lifestyle support system that elicits the behavior required to reduce the severity of the global problems.” Helander (1997) was more specific and stated that ergonomists should address “global environmental and social problems, such as the pollution of the big cities.” Sauer et al. (2004), arguing along similar lines, noted that ergonomics should focus on pro-environmental considerations, which are becoming increasingly important in recent years in various parts of the world.


                     Zink (2006) proposed the human factors and ergonomics (HFE) approach to sustainable development, requiring a complex balance between economic, social, and natural capital. Additionally, Steimle and Zink (2006) argued that with reference to sustainable development, HFE needs to focus on both social and environmental capital. From the social perspective, Docherty et al. (2002) earlier argued that sustainable initiatives are those that are within the physical, physiological, and psychological limits of human functioning that allow adequate rejuvenation opportunities (i.e., recreation and rest).

Adopting the perspective of human-nature connections, Hanson (2010) used the term “green ergonomics” to focus specifically on how ergonomics can assist in reducing environmental impact by considering production methods that use less energy. Drawing on Hanson's work (2010; 2013), Thatcher (2013) further redefined the term as the reciprocal interdependent relationship of human and natural systems, pushing the traditional boundary of ergonomics to accommodate environmental concerns. This includes human interactions with the environment causing pollution of natural resources and corresponding consequences for the environment, conservation, and sustainable development (see also García-Acosta et al., 2014; Haslam and Waterson, 2013; Lange-Morales et al., 2014; Pilczuk and Barefield, 2014; Radjiyev et al., 2015; Saravia-Pinilla et al., 2016; Thatcher et al., 2013).

The degradation of the natural environment can increase the incidence of cancers, respiratory problems and birth defects. Ergonomics interventions have focused on economics (eco-efficiency and socio-efficiency) and social factors (socio-efficiency and socio-effectiveness) but have largely ignored the impact on natural systems (Thatcher, 2013). The emerging green ergonomics promotes the understanding of the role of human-nature connections in meeting the goals of ergonomics. Humans are inextricably connected to the natural system (natural capital) and strains on that system can have significant negative implications for human health, safety, efficiency and effectiveness which ergonomics attempts to optimize (Pimentel et al., 2007).


                     Lange-Morales et al. (2014) have proposed the inclusion of sustainable development in ergonomics and human factors discipline. Following Thatcher and Yeow (2015), sustainability refers to not only sustaining human development, but also interactively sustaining the ecosphere that supports human habitation. Sustainable development and human factors embody a complex balancing of economic capital, social capital and natural capital, called the Triple Bottom Line (TBL) approach (Dyllick and Hockerts, 2002). The need for balance between these three forms of capital is guided by the assumption that poverty exacerbates negative environmental effects through over-exploitation of scarce resources (e.g. overgrazing, overirrigation, deforestation, poor agricultural methods, the use of outdated industrial machinery and polluting limited water supplies).

This work focuses on an ergonomic evaluation of heavy metal pollution in rivers of Malaysia. Water pollution has been of major importance in Malaysia as it affects the quality of river water (Department of Statistics, 2013). According to the Department of the Environment (2010), Malaysian industry produced a total of 1.88 million metric tons (MT) of scheduled waste in 2010, compared with 1.71 million MT in 2009. Human factors, including industrial practices, contaminate river water, exposing other people to metals such as arsenic, chromium, mercury, lead, and cadmium, which are extremely toxic in high concentrations. These metals can enter the food chain, affecting safety and public health and the well-being of society (Sany et al., 2013; Mokhtar et al., 2011). These effects can undermine the ecosystem values of rivers.

This research investigates how human activities cause pollution in river water. Specifically, this study aims to (i) identify heavy metal pollution in the Langat River and the Klang River in Malaysia, (ii) identify the human activities causing and exacerbating the effects of pollution, (iii) establish health impacts of polluted water in rural areas in Malaysia, and (iv) identify policy interventions to address human factors in order to reduce and mitigate ergonomic effects of pollution.

This research is important to Malaysia because a degraded riverine environment cannot provide the resources needed to promote health and well-being. The relationship between green ergonomics and river pollution has not yet been properly investigated in the country. The Malaysian government has not included heavy metal content in river water as a parameter in the Malaysian water quality index (Department of Statistics Malaysia, 2013). Further, Malaysia's capacity for and research on HFE is limited. The green ergonomics approach to examine river pollution and human factors in Malaysia is a novel extension of the ergonomics literature.

The contribution of this study is three-fold. First, this study provides insights on the usefulness of the HFE framework to understand river pollution and the implications for the future. Second, this study extends and adds to the repertoire of ergonomic studies in Malaysia. Third, while most studies of water and air pollution in Malaysia have been carried out in the immediate vicinity of the industries, industrial water pollution may have impacts far away from the immediate location of the industry. In order to adequately explain river pollution, a comprehensive understanding of the physical, economic, political, institutional and social dimensions is essential.

Ergonomics focuses on wellness at work and contributes to an understanding of employment practices, design of sustainability-oriented products, and more efficient work systems to ensure the safe operation of complex systems (Steimle and Zink, 2006). Human activities and river systems are embedded in complex socio-ecological systems (SES) with multiple subsystems. Interventions include designing eco-efficient systems and ensuring system health, safety, and socio-efficiency, as well as the usability of systems by people in a socially effective manner (Thatcher, 2013). In particular, there has been little focus on interventions that support eco-effectiveness and sufficiency. Steimle and Zink (2006) and Zink et al. (2008) called for a balance between the three dimensions of sustainable development. Dekker et al. (2013) argued that sustainability needs to embrace complexity and emergence in resolving HFE problems, and Thatcher and Yeow (2015) further argued that a shift of paradigm that moves from a local context (i.e., the linear model) to a larger variety of distributed systems is needed to support a more sustainable future.

The integration of sustainability with ergonomics occurred slowly (see Hendrick, 1996). McDonough and Braungart (2002) have noted that a focus on eco-efficiency and socio-efficiency might actually exacerbate eco-effectiveness problems. Scott (2008) further extends areas of application, urging ergonomic interventions to consider the uplifting of entire communities and societies. Thatcher's (2013) green ergonomics concept extended the boundaries of ergonomics to integrate social and environmental aspects within a bidirectional relationship. Responsible human behavior can optimize this relationship by enhancing nature conservation and a variety of ecosystem services such as food, recreation and aesthetic benefits.

Irresponsible human behavior causes pollution of river water and affects other natural resources (i.e., fish depletion). The accumulation of a variety of chemicals and heavy metals can adversely affect human well-being. Therefore, we require a comprehensive ergonomic approach, which integrates the micro-ergonomics, through meso-ergonomics, to macro-ergonomic intervention (Dul et al., 2012) that involve ecological, socio-economic, institutional and political sub-systems. At the micro-ergonomics level, HFE considers sustainability interventions that focus on improved technological interfaces in factories to reduce resources depletion. At the meso-ergonomics level, interventions that facilitate multiple stakeholders and distributed organizations in supporting waste reduction strategies to enable the river system to remain socially and environmentally viable, and facilitate social equity. At the macro-ergonomics level, sustainability interventions focus on entire communities, with respect to ecological, socio-economic, institutional legal, and political sub-systems.


                     Fig. 2
                     
                      provides a diagrammatic framework of the above-mentioned concepts. We include not only Thatcher's (2013) environmental and social elements, but also the political and institutional elements that must be integrated for a holistic analysis. The political element is essential because of the prerogative of the political process to intervene in optimizing the relationships between other elements. The environmental sub-system (i.e., natural resource system), the socio-economic sub-system (i.e., people and society), the institutional sub-system (i.e., local and indigenous rules), and the political sub-system (i.e., environmental policy) are inter-linked in complex ways through a multitude of second level variables, which affect interactions and final outputs (i.e., manufactured products, air and water). The four elements are not independent and are interactively related (Ostrom, 1990). We need to understand these specific interactions and how they are interrelated. The features of the four sub-systems and their interactions are briefly discussed below.

Natural capital includes the natural resource system, that is, the physical and biological resources used to optimize human needs. Water, air and land are used in mining activities, agriculture, manufacturing, etc. Sustainable management of human activity is a major challenge because of scarcity of these resources and a rapidly declining natural resource base. Changes within the natural resource system affect other sub-systems. For example, water scarcity may result in reduced industrial production and income loss, creating socio-economic problems.

The socio-economic sub-system is an integral element in human activity because human socio-economic characteristics affect the adoption and outcomes of various production systems. Socio-economic differences exist within any system and these have major impacts on the exploitation of natural resources and on production outcomes. For example, poor unskilled workers who form the majority of the work force in mining and manufacturing activities can adversely affect human health and well-being. Heavy groundwater abstraction can increase heavy metals such as arsenic that can have adverse health effects (Käkönen, 2008). The need to recognize human factors in the socio-economic sub-system and their interaction with other sub-systems are critical to providing an insightful ergonomic representation of human activity and interactions with nature (e.g., how humans create pollution and how pollution affects humans).

Many studies have provided evidence that institutional variables affect the success and sustainability of human activity. Institutions are the regularized practices structured by the rules and norms of society. Power relations are embedded within institutional forms, and contestation over institutional practices, rules, and norms is thus always significant (Scoones, 1999). Human activities are guided by these social norms. Analysis of the institutions of governance included in the institutional sub-system and of interactions with other sub-systems is thus critical. The resilience of productive human activities depends on rules matching the attributes of the resource system and of the socio-economic system. Many institutional variables interact in a complex non-linear fashion. For example, the use of sand in a cement factory may cause immense pollution owing to the production of dust and may need new relevant institutional arrangements, such as monitoring groups to avoid pollution and minimize impacts on human health.

The political system, along with the three sub-systems discussed above, can affect human activity and the nature of outputs and the accompanying impacts on human health. In Malaysia, vertical integration of environmental policy is observable in sectoral policies, such as the Third National Agricultural Policy to promote renewable energy, municipal waste, and cleaner production in industry. Environmental objectives have also been incorporated into the structures of non-environmental agencies and organizations (Shahrizaila et al., 2003). Environmental policies are delegated to three levels, namely the federal, regional, and local, which are closely interrelated. The major theme motivating Malaysia's environmental policy since the 1980s has been the drive for sustainability, following the Brundtland Commission (Mebratu, 1998). This has led to crisscrossing and overlapping jurisdictions, creating much uncertainty. These attempts at “vertical” integration were mainly expressions of policy formulation. As these intentions are translated into programs, careful examination is needed as to the effectiveness of policy implementation in meeting the sustainability objectives (Dovers, 2005a; 2005b). However, policy has not been coherent, exhaustive, or integrated. The important interrelationship among the different sub-systems to achieve a holistic view of sustainable development is absent although necessary. For example, in Malaysia, heavy metal pollution is totally absent from priority setting and water quality indices. It is therefore relevant to question the extent to which ergonomics framework has been integrated into policy.


                        Fig. 2 depicts the integration of the environmental, socio-economic, institutional, and political sub-systems. These can be related in a multidirectional fashion. The left-hand side of Fig. 2 shows that flow of human activities on natural capital generate toxic residues, such as polluted water, toxic metals, and polluted air, which adversely affect workers' health as reflected in the socio-economic system (bottom box of Fig. 2). The generation of pollutants can also be affected by the institutional system, such as local rules governing pollution, as shown on the right hand side of Fig. 2. The right hand side of Fig. 2 also shows the political process, notably government's role in managing pollution and quantity of pollutants emitted by industry. Human health will be affected if there are excessive pollutants and toxic metals in the environment and a delicate balance is therefore needed across the four sub-systems to ensure the productive potential of the earth for future generations. The nature and intensity of impact depends on the interaction between socio-economic and other characteristics of producers and consumers, and the natural, economic, social and institutional, and political characteristics of the total system.

There is strong evidence of the impact of heavy metal concentrations on health. In Bangladesh, 35% of deep wells contain arsenic (Smith et al., 2000) and drinking from these has been prohibited (MEA, 2005). More than 20,000 individuals (mainly rice farmers) from the dry zone of Sri Lanka have died over the last ten years due to chronic kidney disease (CKD) caused by toxic metals from deep well water (Bandarage, 2013; CBSNEWS, 2015; International Committee of the Fourth International, 2013). Although the cause of CKD in Sri Lanka remains controversial, some scientists attribute this to heavy metals from fertilizers and agrochemicals entering the human body through the food chain (Chandrajith et al., 2010). High arsenic content in water has also had dermatological manifestations and has caused arsenicosis in India (Mazumder, 2008). During the 1980s, endemic arsenicosis was also found in many provinces of mainland China, with the arsenic concentration in groundwater reported to be in the range of 220–2000 μg/l (Mandal and Suzuki, 2002). Heavy metals have accumulated in agricultural soils in South China, especially in mining areas polluted by manganese (Li et al., 2007), lead (Wong et al., 2002), and cadmium (Li et al., 2007; Wong et al., 2002). In addition, the accumulation of contaminants in sediments, with increasing content of lead and zinc, has also posed serious environmental problems (Li et al., 2000). In Central Java, Indonesia, it was reported that significant differences were found in the concentrations of metals (particularly lead and zinc) in aquatic biota (Widianarko et al., 2000). Meanwhile, heavy metal contamination in freshwater fish from the border region between Norway and Russia has manifested itself in increasing contents of cadmium and nickel in fish tissue with increasing proximity to smelters (Amundsen et al., 1997).

The political process influences the structure, priorities, and implementation of water resources management policy. From 1971, the Federal Government of Malaysia began to play a key role in environmental issues but had difficulty in coordinating policy, because states had been granted some degree of independence to determine their own environmental policy by the Constitution. The effectiveness of the Department of Environment (DOE) of Malaysia in enforcing policy is also limited, given its limited operational budget (Hezri and Hasan, 2006).

From 1977 onwards, the Environmental Quality Act (EQA) of 1974 was amended to regulate prevalent pollutants, and to impose discharge fees; in 1978, it was further modified to address water pollution from palm oil mills (Panayotou, 1994). Regulation remained the main policy instrument under the EQA, amplified with scheduled toxic wastes in 1989 and marine pollution in 1993. However, the effectiveness of the EQA remained low due to a limited budget, limited human and technical resources, and poor support from outside bureaucracy. Conflicts arose because standards were set by the federal government and water quality monitoring was conducted by the DOE, while enforcement was mostly left to the states (Lowry and Carpenter, 1985).

In 2010, the DOE of Malaysia developed a River Water Quality Index (WQI). River water is classified into three categories, based on the WQI: clean (81–100); slightly polluted (60–80); and polluted (0–59) (Department of Statistics Malaysia, 2012). The WQI is assessed using six pollutant parameters, namely: (1) biochemical oxygen demand for periods of five days (BOD5)
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           BOD5 refers to the amount of dissolved oxygen required for the bacterial decomposition of organic waste in water samples.
                        ; 2) ammoniacal nitrogen; 3) suspended solids; 4) chemical oxygen demand; 5) pH value; and 6) dissolved oxygen. Heavy metal concentrations are not included in WQI measurements. In 1987, Malaysia turned its focus to sustainable development and introduced administrative changes and legal authorities, establishing a national environmental agency and a Ministry for the Environment and National Environmental Law. However, the success of Malaysia's sustainable development initiatives with respect to environmental quality, in the pursuit of environmental, social and economic goals, has been limited (Hezri and Hasan, 2006).

According to the Department of Statistics Malaysia (2012; 2013), a total of 140 river basins were monitored, and it appears that the percentage of clean rivers in Malaysia has decreased remarkably, from 63.6% in 2007–52.8% in 2012. The percentage of slightly polluted and polluted river basins increased over this same time period, from 31.5% to 38.6% and from 4.9% to 8.6%, respectively (Department of Statistics Malaysia (2012), 2013). The number of river basins in which water contained high levels of BOD5 increased almost five-fold, from 12 cases in 2007 to 59 cases in 2012. This increase in BOD5 in river basins was caused by untreated sewage. Palm oil mill waste constitutes the highest proportion of annual discharge of industrial solid wastes in Malaysia (Embrandiri et al., 2012). Increased use of chemical fertilizers in oil palm plantation areas has caused water contamination through seepage. Meanwhile, there has been an increase over the last five years in the percentage of rivers polluted with ammoniacal nitrogen from 36% in 2007 to 38% in 2012 (Department of Statistics, 2012; 2013).

Studies of water pollution in Malaysia have largely focused on the effect of human activities on water pollution but not on human activities per se and/or on health risks from polluted water and contaminated fish resources (e.g., Adnan et al., 2012; Mokhtar et al., 2009, 2011; Othman et al., 2002; Taweel et al., 2011; Shazili et al., 2006). Studies on the west coast of peninsular Malaysia reported no acute toxicities of heavy metal concentrations (cadmium, copper, lead, and zinc) in the green-lipped mussel 
                           Perna viridis
                         (Linnaeus), with these lower than permissible limits for human consumption (Yap et al., 2004). Nevertheless, if such toxic pollutants accumulate over time and enter the human food chain through contaminated water, this may affect human health in future.

The above review shows that Malaysia (i) has no explicit guidelines for including heavy metal pollution of rivers in the WQI, (ii) lacks adequate information about and awareness of heavy metal pollution of river water and impacts on fish populations, and (iii) has only very few studies on heavy metal concentrations and household impacts of polluted water. Furthermore, there has been no specific effort by Malaysian authorities to focus on the ergonomic issues of human health related to river pollution and health risks. This empirical study was initiated against this background to investigate heavy metal concentrations in Malaysian rivers and the potential ergonomic impacts of such pollution.

The Malaysian government introduced the Occupational Safety and Health (Use and Standards of Exposure of Chemicals Hazardous to Health, {USECHH}) Regulations 2000. More than 600 hazardous chemicals and their permissible exposure limits are listed in Schedule 1, with 34 hazardous chemicals, mainly heavy metals and solvents, indicated as requiring medical surveillance based on the Chemical Health Risk Assessment (CHRA) (Hansso, 1998). In Malaysia, the 1999 threshold limit values were adopted as the permissible exposure limits for the majority of the chemicals in the USECHH Regulations. A CHRA is performed by a trained professional to make decisions on appropriate control measures, induction and training of employees, and health surveillance for employees exposed to hazardous chemicals (Rampal and Nizam, 2006). Actions to be taken by the employer include medical surveillance that needs to be conducted by registered Occupational Health Doctors.

This empirical study was conducted in the Langat River Basin (LRB) and in the Klang River Basin (KRB), both located in Selangor State, Malaysia. The total length of the LRB is 78 km, with a catchment area of 2350 km2. It originates in the Titiwangsa Range at Mount Nuang and there are 39 tributaries draining into the river (Toriman et al., 2012), with the major ones being the Langat River, Semenyih River, and Labu River. The main tributary, the Langat River, flows from the northeast (Hulu Langat District) towards the west (Kuala Langat District), before draining into the Straits of Malacca (See Fig. 1 for a map locating rivers, communities and places where water and fish samples were taken).

The KRB is approximately 120 km long and its basin area is nearly 1288 km2. It flows through the heavily populated Klang Valley districts (Kuala Lumpur and Selangor states) before flowing into the Straits of Malacca. The river is joined by 11 main tributaries, and it is located in heavily urbanized and residential areas, with 5.28 million people in Selangor State alone, equivalent to 18.3% of the entire national population. The adverse impacts of anthropogenic disturbances on sustainable development are already evident in these two rivers from other studies and anecdotal evidence, as explained in the next section. These rivers were thus very useful research sites to evaluate our research framework in an empirical setting.

There have been several significant instances of pollutant discharges into rivers that disrupted water supply along the LRB. For instance, in September 2010, the Sungai Semenyih Water Treatment Plant was shut down due to ammonia contamination. This incident left 1.2 million consumers in four Selangor districts
                           2
                        
                        
                           2
                           See Bernama.com (Malaysia National News Agency) Malaysian Paying The Cost For Polluted Water, January 18, 2011, at http://www.bernama.com/bernama/v3/printable.php?id=557485.
                         without water. The Salak Tinggi Water Treatment Plant
                           3
                        
                        
                           3
                           The Salak Tinggi water treatment plan draws its supply from Sungai Labu and has a design capacity of 10.8 Mld (million liters per day).
                         in Kampung Ginching, located in the Sepang District, has been closed since July 6, 2012 after high ammonia levels were detected at the Sungai Labu raw water intake point. In 2013, over one million consumers in seven districts were affected by water disruptions due to the closure of the Selangor River following a diesel tanker spillage 10 km from the intake area of a water plant. Consequently, four treatment plants were closed. These four plants produce 2.67 billion liters of water daily, meeting 57% of water demand in Selangor, Kuala Lumpur, and Putrajaya (The Star, 2013). Meanwhile, the Klang River is polluted by sewage, sullage, and discharge from septic tanks and industrial activities. The Langat and Klang Rivers thus provide two ideal research sites to examine heavy metal-contaminated waters that endanger water, fish, and the health security of stakeholders (Department of Statistics, 2012;
                        2013).

@&#METHOD@&#

In this research, samples of river water and fish were collected from the KRB and LRB. Water and fish were collected from three stretches of the LRB, located in upstream (Hulu Langat District), midstream (Sepang District), and downstream (Kuala Langat District) sections.
                              4
                           
                           
                              4
                              The villages who were visited along the LRB were as follows: Upstream (Hulu Langat District - Kuala Pansoon Village, Batu 13 Hulu Langat Village, Sungai Machang Village etc); Midstream (Sepang District - Sungai Purun Village, Sungai Sekamat Village etc), and Downstream (Kuala Langat District - Labohan Dagang Village, Sungai Lang Tengah Village, Teluk Panglima Garang Village etc).
                            A total of 38 river water samples were collected from the LRB, 20 from upstream, 13 from midstream, and 5 from downstream. Another 38 river water samples were collected from the KRB, 10 from upstream, 17 from midstream, and 11 from downstream sections.
                              5
                           
                           
                              5
                              10 samples from upstream [Kampung Sungai Machang (1), Taman Melawati (2), Au, Ulu Klang (2), Kampung Melayu Ampang (1), Taman Lembah Keramat (1), Taman Kosas (1), Lembah Jaya Selatan (1), Ampang Waterfront (1)]. 17 samples from Midstream [Kampung Sri Aman Luar (1), Kampung Kenangan (1), Kampung Seri Langkas (2), Kampung Seri Andalas (1), Jalan Sultan Hishamudin (1), Medan Pasar Besar (1), Leboh Pasar Besar (1), Jalan Tun Sambanthan (2), Kg Seri Aman Hilir (1), Kg Seri Aman (1), Kg Seri Aman Luar (2), Taman Puchong Tekali (1), Kg Bersatu, Puchong (1), USJ16, Subang Jaya (1)]. 11 samples from Downstream [Kampung Kebun Bunga (1), Kampung Bukit Jati (1), Kampung Sri Pandan (1), Jalan Bawang (1), Jalan Lembaga Bandaran (1), Lalan Jambatan Kota (1), Lebuh Sultan Abdul Samad (3), Kampung Sungai Sireh (1), Kampung Delek (1)].
                            Water samples were collected in labeled bottles that had been thoroughly rinsed with distilled water to prevent contamination. A number of physical water parameters, such as electrical conductivity (EC), pH, and temperature, were recorded onsite.

Fish samples were collected from three aquatic species, namely ikan keli (
                              Clarias batrachus
                           ), ikan tilapia (
                              Oreochromis niloticus
                           ), and ikan patin (
                              Pangasius sutchi
                           ). These fishes are the most widely caught fish species consumed by local communities. A total of 23 fish samples were collected from along the LRB (i.e., 12 ikan keli and 11 ikan tilapia), with 8 collected from downstream, 9 from midstream, and 6 from upstream areas of the river. The research team also collected 32 freshwater fish samples from the length of the KRB in October 2013 (i.e., 13 ikan keli/patin and 19 ikan tilapia), with 10 collected from upstream, 12 from midstream, and 10 from downstream areas of the river.

River water and fish samples were tested by Actlabs (Canada) and ALS Technichem (M) Sdn. Bhd. (Malaysia) to establish heavy metal contamination and concentration levels, in order to determine whether there was any risk to public health. Samples were tested for concentrations of eleven heavy metals: arsenic (As), chromium (Cr), cadmium (Cd), cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), iron (Fe), lead (Pb), mercury (Hg), nickel (Ni), selenium (Se), and zinc (Zn).

The fish samples were measured, with their net weight recorded. Fish muscles were separated from the abdominal areas and were tested for heavy metal concentration using an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICPMS), with the US-EPA6020A method. The ICPMS technique provides better detection limits than other testing methods. The sample was ionized with inductively coupled plasma and a mass spectrometer was used to quantify metal ions. The sample was weighed and digested in a nitric acid (35%) and hydrogen peroxide mixture using a hot block digester for 1 h. Distilled water was added to the acid-digest, and the diluted sample was analyzed using the ICPMS.

@&#RESULTS@&#

As shown in Table 1
                        , Malaysian rivers are affected by heavy metal pollution. Arsenic (As) was present in all samples from the entire river length of both the LRB and KRB. The most serious arsenic contamination was recorded downstream in the KRB (76 μg/L). As content exceeded permissible national standards (3 μg/L) (Department of Statistics Malaysia, 2013), and some of the readings exceeded international standards (5 μg/L) (Canadian Water Quality Guidelines for the Protection of Aquatic Life - CWQGS, 2002). Heavy metal concentrations were higher in the KRB than in the LRB, with results indicating the potential of serious health risks for both residents and the environment. Ingestion of arsenic over a long period of time causes skin ulcerations, cancer, neurotoxicity, and cardiovascular diseases in humans (New South Wales Health Department, 2001). The main cause of this heavy metal pollution is discharge of inadequately treated wastewater from industry into river water. Rivers are polluted by sewage, septic tanks, and discharges from oil palm mills, logging, food processing, and semi-conductor and chemical factories in the vicinity.

The waters of the LRB are also contaminated with mercury (Hg) and selenium (Se). Readings of 2 μg/L for Hg and Se were recorded in downstream areas of the LRB, with these exceeding international allowable standards of 1 μg/L and 0.026 μg/L for Hg and Se, respectively (CWQGS, 2002). Hg can accumulate and pose a serious health risk to populations unless controlled. Should this pollution trend continue, long-term sustainability will be threatened, because Hg is toxic to both humans and aquatic life. Hg may cause cardiovascular disease and affect the central nervous system (Azevedo et al., 2012; Choi and Grandjean, 2008), inducing alterations in the normal development of infant brains; at higher levels, it may induce neurological changes in adults. Similarly, selenium causes thyroid hormone problems (Vinceti et al., 2001) and high selenium intake increases the risk of diabetes (Steinbrenner et al., 2011).

Along the upstream and downstream portions of the KRB, iron (Fe) was detected above 300 μg/L, exceeding the international allowable standard (CWQGS, 2002). Excess iron concentrations can cause severe toxicity and death (Corbett, 1995). Other heavy metals such as zinc (Zn) and copper (Cu) were detected in the LRB, but levels of these were below allowable standards (Table 1). Our results show that river water was not contaminated by cadmium (Cd), as previously claimed by Sarmani (1989) and Shazili et al. (2006).

Edible fish that are contaminated with heavy metals can affect human health and cause chronic diseases (Zyadah and Abdel-Baky, 2000). Contaminated fish could thus pose a serious threat to sustainability and health in the long term. Table 2
                         presents information on heavy metal contamination in fish from the two rivers. The concentration of heavy metals (e.g., Pb and As) in muscles of fish samples from the KRB were above the maximum permitted levels approved by the New South Wales Health Department (2001) and by the European Communities Commission (ECC) (2001). The concentration of lead (Pb) was higher in the KRB for both fish species, exceeding the limit of 0.2 mg/kg, the maximum lead level permitted by the ECC (2001). Lead absorption may pose a serious risk to public health, since it may lead to lessened cognitive development and intellectual performance in children and may increase blood pressure (Alghasham et al., 2011), cardiovascular diseases in adults (Navas-Acien et al., 2007), and brain cancer (Steenland and Boffetta, 2000; Wijngaarden and Dosemeci, 2006). The highest As values of 8.2 mg/kg net weight were found in the muscles of the keli/patin fish collected from downstream areas of the KRB. According to the guidelines of the New South Wales Health Department (2001), the maximum As level permitted in fish is 1 mg/kg. The highest Se level was detected in the downstream area of the KRB (1.2 ± 0.4 mg/kg net weight). Heavy metal concentrations are likely to cause diseases such as cancer, adversely affecting the health of both present and future generations. Health impacts may thus affect the population, in particular poorer groups, exacerbating social equity issues and threatening social sustainability.

The concentration of iron (Fe) in fish muscle was approximately 2.5 times higher in the LRB than in the KRB. Iron can accumulate in the liver, spleen, heart, bone marrow, pituitary gland, pancreas, and the central nervous system, causing damage to these organs (Gujia et al., 2010). Iron-contaminated fish can cause overload cardiomyopathy, which can be a serious threat to human health and to sustainability in the long term.

The concentration level of cadmium (Cd) in fish samples was very low, and at 0.01 mg/kg, was below the maximum permissible value established by the ECC (2001) (0.05 mg/kg). However, even low levels of exposure to Cd may result in significant accumulation in human kidneys (WHO, 1989). Cd is a highly toxic metal and it is exceptionally persistent in humans. Cadmium absorption also constitutes a risk to humans, since it may induce kidney dysfunction, skeletal damage and reproductive deficiencies (Jarup, 2003). Concentrations of other heavy metal (Ni, Co, Cu, Hg, and Cr) in the muscles of fish collected from the sites were within the permissible levels established in international standards proposed by the ECC (2001) and New South Wales Health Department (2001).

Field visits were conducted in the current study to get insights into past and present safety and health concerns particularly regarding the ergonomics of water pollution and toxins in rivers.

Some villagers consume fish from these rivers and we hence considered it important to examine the health risk of fish contamination. As a preliminary effort, a socio-economic survey was conducted in parallel with the water and fish quality study. For this purpose, a survey was conducted in villages to identify perceptions of health issues among rural villagers, their health and food security concerns, and their vulnerability to change, as well as perceived threats from river water pollution. A secondary aim of the survey was to determine the extent to which those living in the river basin are affected by heavy metal contamination.

A sample of villagers from both the LRB and KRB were interviewed using a detailed semi-structured questionnaire. Primary survey data was collected from along the LRB by interviewing 41 households (14 from downstream, 15 from midstream, and 12 from upstream). Using the same semi-structured questionnaire, primary survey data was collected from along the KRB by interviewing 45 households (15 each from downstream, midstream, and upstream sections of the river). The interview surveys were conducted in October 2012 and May 2013 along the LRB, and in October 2013 along the KRB.

Prior to the survey, the project team consulted officers from the National Water Services Commission and the Malaysian Water Association, local community groups, local rural villagers, and village leaders. A four-part pretested survey questionnaire was used. The first part of the questionnaire collected socio-economic information on respondents’ gender, age, education level, occupation, length of stay in the village, monthly income, and expenditure, as well as some aspects related to a basic health check of the household conditions. The second part of the questionnaire focused on the perceptions of respondents regarding environmental quality exposure, and knowledge of environmental issues and of the impact of environmental degradation on human health and the community. The third part of the questionnaire elicited information on sanitation and hygiene practices, trash disposal methods, and available water supply sources. The fourth part of the questionnaire was related to perceptions of water and river fish from the river. In order to better represent the project outcome, a package of visual aids was developed, such as pictures of different fish species, and pictures of vegetables and maps; in the case of villagers who were illiterate, material was translated verbally into Bahasa.

The information obtained can have significant implications for environmental policy. Such information helps in the development of a better understanding of ecosystem sustainability and aids ergonomics in designing socially optimal policies to mitigate water pollution. Fig. 3
                         summarizes specific heavy metal contamination in water and fish samples for each stream along the LRB and KRB. We precisely identified specific heavy metals that exceeded allowable limits established by both international and national standards. We also identified human factors antecedents, their consequences, and how they influence the meso system as a whole.

The demographic features of the sample were as follows: 76% of respondents were male and majority of respondents were between 50 and 59 years old; 20% were >60 years old. Nearly 63% had a household size of 5–7 members. More than half (58%) of the respondents had no tertiary education. Nearly 68% of respondents were lower income earners, earning a monthly salary of < RM 2000 per month, and had been living in the village for >40 years; only one-quarter had been living there for <10 years. Many respondents held multiple roles as farmers, fishermen, carpenters, and cement mixers in the construction sector. About 70% of respondents had flush toilet facilities and 44% had septic tanks in their homes. About 23.3% of respondents claimed that they had accessed a health facility within the previous 30 days.

Mountain water from upstream areas of the Hulu Langat District is very clean, as there is no significant human activity in the vicinity, and villagers use this water for fruit farming. However, as water from the mountains flows downhill, and is channeled to the villages via several pipelines, water quality deteriorates downstream, as households disposed of their liquid and wet-trash waste (such as leftover food, wet wipes, cooking oil, and personal hygiene articles) at the riverbank. This has resulted in water contamination. All respondents were aware of potential water contamination in the LRB and a minority (2% of the population in the LRB and 4% of the population in the KRB) drank and cooked using ground water directly (Table 3
                        ). From the socio-economic survey, we found that both industrial and household wastes are potential causes of river water contamination. Water is polluted by discharges from manufacturing facilities (such as paper mills, electronics, plastics, tires, aluminum, and steel plants) and agricultural activities (such as palm oil mills, rubber, and wood cultivation), which are channeling chemical waste into the river.

The socio-economic survey showed that some residents suffer from chronic illnesses, such as heart disease, asthma and cancer. Poor hygiene was a root cause of disease. Even though the majority (90%) were aware that exposure to toxins could affect their health, only 5% of respondents from the LRB agreed that heavy metals had polluted river water (Table 4
                        ). Many of the tributaries of the LRB are treated as longkang (drainage), and most of these are shallow, making it easier for water to stagnate. Furthermore, household and industrial garbage blocks the passage of water, creating an ideal breeding ground for Aedes mosquitoes, leading to dengue hemorrhage disease. The majority of respondents burned their garbage in the open air (66%); while 37% had their garbage collected by trash workers; many households (46%) also deposit household waste and sullage into the river. The handling of trash and garbage disposal by illiterate villagers evidently demonstrates that hygiene awareness is low, and that respondents are unaware of the impact of their actions on the dynamics of the river ecosystem and on pollutant distribution.

Only few villagers (2%) had heard warnings that fish were contaminated with high concentrations of heavy metals (Table 3). Many villagers (56%) consumed arsenic-poisoned fish from the Langat River (as compared to only 11% from the Klang River). Only 7% of respondents did not consume fish from the river. Cancer and pulmonary diseases were reported by respondents from the LRB. It is erroneous to link the incidence of cancer and pulmonary disease to heavy metal pollution of rivers; however, it is reasonable to suspect that there may be a degree of impact from the latter. While there are many factors that may cause cancers, with these being beyond the scope of this study, there are studies that report that arsenic exposure through fish consumption may cause the disease (Martinez et al., 2011; Mazumder et al., 2000; Smith et al., 1992; Tseng et al., 2003). At a minimum, many residents are unaware that there are serious illnesses related to the consumption of contaminated river fish.

Tap water samples were also collected from households to test for heavy metal contamination, with results showing no significant heavy metal contamination. Most villagers (80%) used pipe-borne water facilities for their daily activities. Only a small proportion of the population drinks from ground/well water. This was confirmed during the socio-economic survey data we carried out. Despite regular improvements in overall water quality in the Langat area, and although water quality was compliant with the National Drinking Water Quality Standards issued by the Ministry of Health Malaysia (2004), respondents claimed that treated water was light yellow in color. 90% of villagers boiled pipe-borne water before drinking, and 49% of villagers spent approximately RM 2,000 (approximately US$500) to install a water filter at home, to avoid problems from water-borne pollution (Table 3).

A total of 58% of respondents were female and more than half of the interviewees (54%) were >40 years old. A total of 55% of the interviewees had been staying in villages for <10 years. On average, there were 5–7 family members per household. About 30% of respondents had a tertiary level of education and 30% were lower income earners (monthly income ≤ RM 2000 per month). Many respondents were homemakers, retirees, carpenters, small businessmen, and factory workers. About 70% of respondents had flush toilet facilities and >60% had septic tanks in their homes (Table 4). From the socio-economic household survey, we found that some respondents suffered from chronic illnesses, such as high blood pressure (22.2%), diabetes (17.7%), and asthma (2%). About 35% of respondents claimed that they had accessed a health facility in the previous 30 days. The water from upstream areas of the KRB (i.e., the Klang Gate dam area) is clean. A water channel brings water from upstream to the village, with this then used for plantations. The villagers do not use river water for drinking, cooking, and eating purposes; many households use filtered water for drinking purposes (53%), while others (84%) boil the pipe-borne water before drinking (Table 3).

Nevertheless, more than half of respondents said that they were exposed to smoke/dust in the environment that could affect their health (Table 4). Only 23% were aware that their exposure to chemicals (e.g., pesticides, fertilizers, animal waste, and agricultural waste) could cause health problems. However, none of these were aware that heavy metals are harmful toxicants that could affect their health, again clearly illustrating that villagers’ levels of knowledge regarding exposure to pollutants and toxicants from river water were rather weak. The handling of trash and the disposal of garbage was similar across all villages of the KRB, with the majority using services of a garbage collector (87%); nevertheless, 27% disposed of household waste in the river.

It is clear from this study that there is heavy metal pollution in Malaysian rivers. River water is contaminated with unsafe levels of arsenic, iron, and mercury. The rivers are polluted mainly by household waste, disposal of industrial waste, and agricultural chemical discharges. However, Malaysian environmental policies have failed to adequately focus on heavy metal pollution in rivers and related human factors. The current status of toxicity in the LRB and KRB and the potential health impacts on the community also reflect the poor implementation of water pollution policies. The minority of households in Selangor without access to treated piped-water supply may be more vulnerable to health impacts induced by water pollution. Since >50% of respondents eat fish from the LRB, there is a high probability of health impacts and significant medical expenses in the long term. This is a challenge to the achievement of sustainable development objectives and the Millennium Development goals. Human activities causing river pollution and associated health problems therefore have to be properly addressed.

A number of policy relevant observations can be made on the basis of this research. First, discharges of industrial waste into rivers could be due to the absence of appropriate waste disposal methods, poor work-place practices, weak enforcement of environmental policies and inappropriate consumer behavior. Malaysian policy makers should accept the centrality of heavy metal pollution in river water quality by incorporating it in the computation of the water quality index. The government could specify safe minimum standards for heavy metal concentrations in water and regularly monitor river water standards.

The government could encourage new innovations and work practices in industry that are environmentally benign and reduce water pollution. Regular interactions by policy makers with industry to highlight ergonomic issues may encourage industry to modify the technologies and work practices adopted to reduce the potential of river pollution.

Societies must be encouraged and made sensitive to water pollution to ensure proper consumer behavior in disposal of waste. Involvement of society in maintaining river health is important as rivers are a common property and correct individual behavior cannot be achieved without society-wide efforts. Concomitantly, greater power for such policies should be delegated to local and regional players, for these to pay closer attention to river pollution. Dialogue between opinion leaders, policy makers, scientists, and resident populations, and monitoring and research by multidisciplinary teams and non-governmental organizations could also enhance policy effectiveness.

Household disposal of wet-trash waste, such as leftover food, wet wipes, cooking oil, personal hygiene articles, and garbage into the river should be minimized by effective garbage collection services in rural areas. The state authority could allocate an operating budget to improve garbage collection systems.

Third, literacy of residents should be improved by educating rural villagers who presently consume polluted fish. Raising awareness of water pollution emanating from human activities and related health impacts could enhance water quality. Government should increase awareness among the resident population about the dangers of consuming contaminated fish and water. Education should be extended to industrial and agricultural workers. It is essential to educate and encourage appropriate behavioral changes for sustainability.

Interventions should form part of a well-formulated strategy to avoid any long-term health problems due to river water pollution. Education and greater awareness can reduce consumption of contaminated food; however, in the longer term, it will be necessary to address the total work environment and human factors, especially the link between humans and natural systems.

This is one of the first significant and extensive studies of Malaysian river pollution, creating an opportunity for a conceptual extension to the study of river pollution and human activities in Malaysia. However, this study has several limitations. It is confined to two rivers in Malaysia; therefore future research should focus on a broader sample from across the country, within an integrated framework, to yield more refined results. The socio-economic study was also limited to questionnaire surveys. Any future study may more intensively measure ergonomic features and involve relevant studies so that the link between pollution and human activities can be more thoroughly investigated. It is only through cumulative studies of this nature that the generality of the above findings can be firmly established.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This study received financial support from the Research Institute for Humanity and Nature (RIHN), Kyoto, Japan [R-06 Food Risk Project (2011-14)] and Monash University Malaysia Seed Grant (project number B-4-12). The Socio Economic Transformation of Asia (SETA) Multidisciplinary Research Platform, Monash University, Malaysia provided research assistant support. Paul Yeow provided extremely valuable comments and suggestions on the earlier version of this manuscript. Thanks go to Saeka Tsuwa for data arrangement and research assistance.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

