@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A comparison of linear and logarithmic auditory tones in pulse oximeters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Pulse oximeters are used throughout medicine but pitch-to-value mappings are not consistent.


                        
                        
                           
                           Logarithmic mappings led to both more accurate estimations of saturation, and more accurate estimations of saturation rate change.


                        
                        
                           
                           Use of logarithmic tone scales, for example a semitone scale, could be used more extensively in practice.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Pulse oximetry

Patient monitoring

Patient safety

Auditory perception

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study compared the ability of forty anaesthetists to judge absolute levels of oxygen saturation, direction of change, and size of change in saturation using auditory pitch and pitch difference in two laboratory-based studies that compared a linear pitch scale with a logarithmic scale. In the former the differences in saturation become perceptually closer as the oxygenation level becomes higher whereas in the latter the pitch differences are perceptually equivalent across the whole range of values. The results show that anaesthetist participants produce significantly more accurate judgements of both absolute oxygenation values and size of oxygenation level difference when a logarithmic, rather than a linear, scale is used. The line of best fit for the logarithmic function was also closer to x = y than for the linear function. The results of these studies can inform the development and standardisation of pulse oximetry tones in order to improve patient safety.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Pulse oxmietry is widely used in medicine. Pulse oximeters monitor arterial oxygen saturation, which is the percentage of arterial haemoglobin that is fully saturated with oxygen (SpO2), by transmitting red and infrared light through the finger, where it is sensed. When the SpO2 is high, haemoglobin is saturated with oxygen, whereas a low SpO2 refers to the converse. Oxygenation in the patient is a function of baseline oxygenation, metabolic requirement for oxygen (increased in critical illness), ability to utilize oxygen (mitochondrial impairment in sepsis), and cardiac output (the ability for the heart to pump blood throughout the body). Pulse oximetry is an important tool for the anaesthetist as it aids rapid identification of decreased oxygen saturation within a patient, and may reduce critical events in patients undergoing general anaesthesia (Cote et al., 1988; Morris and Montano, 1996; Runciman et al., 1993).

The oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve stipulates the oxygen saturation of haemoglobin at a given arterial partial pressure of oxygen. Variables that affect the rightward or leftward shift of this curve include, but are not limited to: temperature, pH, and 2,3-diphosphoglycerate. The sigmoidal shape of the curve possesses the steepest portion of the curve at 90% oxygen-haemoglobin saturation (Cain, 1986; Wang et al., 2011). Thus, a practitioner first noticing that the SpO2 is 90% and falling forces reactive instead of proactive clinical practice. In the absence of reasons for baseline hypoxemia, such as intrinsic or obstructive lung disease, practitioners are classically taught to take notice when the SpO2 is between 92 and 94% to follow the trend (ideally) towards 98–100% or to respond to ameliorate the deleterious effects of hypoxemia such as cardiac arrest. However, there is a time lag for the pulse oximeter to detect hypoxemia. Since blood is oxygenated (or not oxygenated, for that matter) in the lungs, it takes time for oxygen-depleted blood to reach the finger where the pulse oximetry probe is placed. The time is a function of cardiac output (heart rate multiplied by stroke volume [the amount of blood systemically pumped with every left ventricular systolic contraction]) and the vasomotor tone of the peripheral vasculature (Cain, 1986; Wang et al., 2011; Wright, 1992). This time lag, worsened in low cardiac output states, can cause late detection of hypoxemic events and cause practitioners to doubt if an endotracheal tube is correctly placed in the trachea, or incorrectly placed in the oesophagus. Therefore, co-monitoring with capnography (carbon dioxide) detection is used by practitioners.

Because hypoxemia can have irreversible and deleterious neurological outcomes, a practitioner must form a differential diagnosis and respond quickly and accurately. Practitioners assess hypoxemia by working from “patient-to wall” or from “wall-to-patient.” It is imperative to assess the oxygen supply to the patient including, but not limited to: pipeline pressure supply, oxygen availability, functioning inspiratory and expiratory valves, and oxygen sensor (Cain, 1986; Pierson, 2000). Then, the practitioner will assess the delivery method to the patient via facemask or advanced airway device to ensure that inspired oxygen is being delivered in the trachea. Finally, the practitioner will assess patient reasons for hypoxemia including, but not limited to: pneumonia, pulmonary embolus, anaemia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, interstitial lung disease, pneumothorax, pulmonary oedema, and sleep apnoea. These clinical entities may be acute, chronic, acute-on-chronic, and may or may not have actionable intervention implications for the practitioner. Thus, the practitioner is usually fairly busy when acting upon an adverse, or potentially adverse, SpO2 reading.

The use of a simple sonification (turning data into sound in a meaningful manner), where the pitch of the auditory tone changes with the level of oxygen saturation, was a relatively early design advance in pulse oximetry initially introduced by the Nellcor Corporation in 1983. The principle of this sonification is that, as oxygen saturation rises, so does the frequency of the tone used to indicate a change in saturation level. Subsequent research on variable pitch pulse oximeters indicated that most users were able to perceive this pitch change, and that the speed of response of the anaesthetist was reduced in comparison with a fixed-tone oximeter (Schulte and Block, 1992; Craven and McIndoe, 1999). Since trainees in anaesthesiology learn to monitor patients with variable pitch pulse oximetry, trainees develop a reflexive response when “beep” turns to “boop; ” that is during the transition of oxygen-haemoglobin desaturation. The variable tone pulse oximeter has set itself apart by allowing for unisensory auditory clinical information in the form of heart rate (tempo), oxygen-haemoglobin saturation (pitch), rhythmicity of the heart (regular or irregular tone), and even blood pressure (distal perfusion Is required to generate an output signal). Sonification beyond simple pulse oximetry has also been demonstrated to be useful in the anaesthesia environment (Watson and Sanderson, 2004, 2007).

Given the apparent usefulness of the variable-tone pulse oximeter, it is interesting that the nature of the variability in tone, and indeed the tones themselves, vary enormously across devices. A review of some extensively-used pulse oximeters (Chandra et al., 2006) demonstrated that change in saturation levels was universally indicated by a change in tone, but there the similarity ended. Chandra et al. found that some were louder than others, some produced a greater loudness range, and analysis of the spectrum revealed considerable variation in the harmonic content and complexity of the tones used. They also found variation both in the absolute pitch of the tones used and the way pitch varied as a result of changes in saturation. For example, the pitches of the tones indicating 85% saturation ranged from 375 to 844Hz, 90% from 422 to 938Hz and 99% from 469 to 1078Hz. Other studies have revealed similar variation (Santamore and Cleaver, 2004). Both Chandra et al. and Santamore and Cleaver suggest that this variation is likely to cause problems for anaesthetists when moving from one pulse oximeter to another.

Studies which have surveyed the audible tones used in pulse oximetry also highlight the fact that the degree and nature of the frequency change with change in saturation varies across oximeters. Santamore and Cleaver's study showed that the change in frequency per degree of saturation ranged from 4 to 21Hz, and that the difference between 95% and 100% saturation levels in some cases covers a pitch range of a single semitone, which is the smallest unit of difference on a piano (for example, between a white key and the nearest black key). Whilst we know that the smallest perceptible difference between tones necessary in order to hear a difference in pitch is about 1/12 of a semitone (the Just Noticeable Difference (JND) (Weber, 1834)) this level of discrimination is recorded from laboratory experiments, in quiet conditions, and where the listener is neither stressed nor carrying out a secondary task, none of which is true of the working environment in which pulse oximetry tones will typically be heard. Indeed, Schulte and Block's finding (1992) suggest that the direction of change is typically detectable only about 2/3 of the time by anaesthetists using oximeters which use these small frequency changes.

Another important issue concerning the relationship between the audible tones used and the saturation levels which they represent is that, for the majority of pulse oximeters, the mapping between saturation change and frequency change is linear (Santamore and Cleaver, 2004). For example, some of the Datex oximeters showed a change of approximately ten hertz per degree of saturation, regardless of the saturation value being represented. The problem with using linear mappings between saturation change and frequency change is that pitch perception, which is the psychological correlate of the physical entity of frequency, is logarithmic rather than linear in nature. Differences in pitch which sound equivalent to the listener are based on fixed proportions rather than fixed numbers. For a difference in pitch between any two tones to be judged as equivalent, the increase in frequency must be the same proportion of the two frequencies. For example, for three octaves to be regarded as being successive octaves apart their frequencies (if the first one was 200Hz) would be 200Hz, 400Hz and 800Hz (doubling the frequency for each octave in the ratios 1:2:4) rather than 200, 400 and 600Hz (ratios of 1:2:3). For the semitone, which is the smallest unit of pitch difference typically used in music (represented by two adjacent piano keys) the change in frequency from one tone to another a semitone higher is approximately equivalent to {(first frequency)*twelfth root of two} (Helmholtz, 2009). Thus, the higher the first tone, the greater the change in Hz required to produce a tone which is perceptually a semitone higher. This means that the higher the oxygen saturation, the smaller becomes the difference in pitch between similar percentage changes.


                     Morris and Mohacsi (2005) played the tones used in a Datex AS/3 pulse oximeter to anaesthetists and found that while anaesthetists were generally able to judge lower saturation levels as being lower than higher ones, the estimates of the actual saturation level represented by the tones was very compressed, so that the median perceived estimates for 70% saturation was 89%. Estimates for 80% saturation were 93%, but correct for 94%. Morris & Mohacsi also played anaesthetists pairs of tones and asked them to estimate the difference in saturation represented by those tones and found that the median estimate of difference between two tones representing a 20% change in saturation was 5%. They also found that as the difference between the two tones was reduced, the ability of anaesthetists to accurately record the direction of change (up or down) declined, with only 70% of direction judgements being correct for the smallest saturation difference presented, 2%. Morris and Mohacsi's data therefore suggests that a linear scale with small frequency differences leads to overestimation at the bottom end of the saturation scale, and underestimation of saturation change when two tones are presented in close temporal proximity, as well as lack of clarity of direction change with smaller saturation differences.

Morris and Mohacsi suggest that the use of a non-linear scale, such as a semitone scale, may prove more effective and should be tested. This paper presents that test. There are many reasons as to why a semitone scale might be more effective in representing saturation levels. The first is that the mapping between saturation levels and frequency change will be logarithmic, rather than linear, and thus the perceived pitch difference between two adjacent saturation levels (for example, a 2% change) will be perceptually constant. A second reason is that if the semitone is used as the basic unit of change between adjacent saturation levels (again say 2%) then the difference between two close saturation levels will be represented by a much larger pitch change than is typically found in pulse oximeters, which should improve accuracy both in the detection of a direction change in saturation and the magnitude of the difference between two saturation levels. Thirdly, the semitone scale is used throughout western music and there is ample evidence to suggest that the extensive exposure to this scale, which is familiar to almost all listeners, leads to the establishment of mental templates, schemas and representations for pitch perception (Cross, 1997; Deutsch and Feroe, 1981; Krumhansl, 1990). In this paper we examine the relative efficacy of linear and logarithmic (semitone) scales as representations of pulse oximetry saturation levels.

Morris and Mohacsi presented anaesthetists who regularly used the oximeter from which the test tones were recorded (Datex AS/3) with each of the tones representing 70% through to 98% saturation and found that they severely overestimated the saturation level associated with the lower-value tones. In our first study we use a similar linear set of tones but compare it with a set of semitones. In one condition saturation values from 70% to 100% are mapped to tones similar to those tested by Morris and Mohacsi. In the other, a set of adjacent semitones are mapped to the values from 70% to 100%. In both cases, the tones are mapped in 2% saturation intervals as the commercially-available instrument from which the linear tones were derived only changes tone with every 2% change in saturation. Inevitably, the semitone scale covers a larger range of frequencies than does the commercially-available linear scale, but we considered the usefulness of comparing a range covered by a commonly-used piece of medical equipment with an overlearned and known musical scale to be the most pragmatic and potentially applicable study to carry out in this first set of tests. We took the decision to make the highest, rather than the lowest, pitch approximately the same for both scales. We also presented the entire range of tones to the participant before beginning the experiment, in order to enable them to more readily anchor their judgements. We also provided the middle tone, representing 86% saturation, before each of the tones was presented. This allows the participants a much greater chance of producing accurate responses than the procedure used by Morris and Mohacsi.

@&#METHOD@&#

Two sets of tones were designed, one a replica of those use by the Datex-Ohmeda AS/3 monitor (a linear scale) and one using a logarithmic semitone scale. The linear scale consisted of 16 tones representing saturation values between 70% and 100% in 2% increments. The tone assigned to 70% saturation was 620Hz, and each tone representing successively higher values was achieved by increasing the frequency in steps of 20Hz with every 2% increase in saturation. Thus 100% saturation was represented by a 920Hz tone.

The logarithmic scale also represented saturation values from 70% to 100%, with the relationship between successive levels represented by a change of a semitone (an increase in Hz from one step to the next equivalent to the 12th root of 2 (Helmholtz, 2009)). The lowest saturation level, 70%, was represented by a tone of 390Hz and the highest, 100%, was represented by a value of 930Hz. Thus the value of the highest point was approximately equivalent for both scales, but the lowest point was lower for the logarithmic scale. Table 1
                            shows the frequency values representing each of the saturation levels tested. The waveform used for both scales was a square wave tone lasting 0.2 s followed by a 0.6 s pause, repeated three times. The total stimulus length was 2.6 s.

Forty anaesthetists from a range of professional grades, with different levels of experience, participated in the study. Each participant underwent a pure-tone audiogram to check for any hearing problems (none were revealed). Tone presentation and data collection was automated using custom-written software on a personal computer. The tones were presented at a loudness level of approximately 75 dB (A). Participants entered their responses using the computer keyboard. The experiment was conducted in a quiet room, with all participants undertaking experiment one, then experiment two directly after. Total experiment time for each participant was approximately 45 min.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Once participants' hearing had been screened and they were seated at the computer with the headphones on, they were presented with one of the two sets of tones (either the linear or the logarithmic set, counterbalanced across participants). The tones were presented in both an ascending and descending order from 70% to 100% back to 70% (in 2% increments), which was then repeated. During this familiarisation, the saturation value represented by each of the tones was shown on the computer screen. The experiment then began. In each trial, participants were presented with two tones. The first was always the tone representing 86% saturation (with participants being aware of this). The second tone was one of the values from 70% to 100% saturation. Participants were required to judge the saturation level represented by the second tone by typing in the value they thought that the tone represented. Each participant heard each of the tones representing 70%–100% in a different random order, once. Once the participants had completed the task for the first scale used, they were given a short break. The whole procedure was then repeated, using the remaining scale. This included both familiarisation with the scale and the presentation of 16 trials, as before.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Fig. 1
                         shows the mean percentage saturation values estimated for the second tone across the two sets of tones for 40 participants, together with the (y = mx + c) line of best fit equation for each scale. When performance is completely accurate, y = x.

The equation for the linear scale regression line is y = 0.7956x+17.319 and the equation for the logarithmic regression line is y = 0.9777x+1.4688. Thus the logarithmic line is much closer to y = x, the line of identity, meaning that the estimates of saturation were more accurate for the logarithmic scale than for the linear scale. The larger constant value associated with the linear scale (>17) suggests that saturation values are overestimated at lower saturation levels for the linear scale.

A two-way scale (linear vs logarithmic) x percentage value (70%–100%) within-subjects ANOVA on the percentage error scores (the difference between the actual value of the tone and the estimate given) showed that there was a main effect for scale (F = 23.95, df = 1, p < 0.001) with mean errors being 2.4% for the linear and 1.63% for the logarithmic scale. There was also a main effect for percentage (F = 16.82, df = 15, p < 0.001) whereby participants' errors across the two scales tended to be smaller in the mid-region than at the extremes of saturation value. There was also an interaction between scale and percentage value (F = 3.98, df = 1, 15, p < 0.001) whereby the percentage error at the extremes of the scales was higher for the linear than the logarithmic scale (Fig. 2
                        ).

The main effect for scale indicated that the accuracy of estimates was higher for the logarithmic, semitone scale than for the linear scale. Mean errors in estimation were 2.4% for the linear scale and 1.63% for the logarithmic scale. The main effect for percentage indicated that, for both scales, estimates were more accurate in the middle of the scale. We might expect this on the basis that the tone representing the middle saturation level, 86%, was presented before the tone to be guessed in each trial. However, the interaction between scale and percentage shows that accuracy at the extreme values was less good in general for the linear scale than for the logarithmic scale (Fig. 2). Interestingly, for both scales, but particularly for the logarithmic scale, performance was more accurate at the 70% level, suggesting that participants had some awareness of the pitch values at the end of the scale and were using them as anchors, making it easier to make these judgements. The familiarity of the semitone scale may also have helped with this anchoring. Although in reality performance tends to be critical around the 86% mark, we cannot assume that because performance was relatively accurate in our study it would be in real practice, for a number of reasons but most importantly that this value was given as an anchor in each trial, thus making it easier for participants to learn and remember this specific value.

The line of best fit equations indicate that estimates were also more compressed for the linear than the logarithmic scale. The line of best fit for the linear scale was y = 0.7956x+17.319, suggesting that participants overestimated at the lower end and underestimated at the higher end. The line of best fit for the logarithmic scale was y = 0.9777x+1.4688, which is most closer to x = y, indicating that estimates more closely mirrored the actual saturation values presented, a finding also borne out by the ANOVA. In fact, the mean error in response to the logarithmic scale was about 30% less than in the case of the linear scale.

Our results are similar to those of Morris and Mohacsi (2005) in that they demonstrate that saturation estimates are both inaccurate and compressed for linear scales. The linear tones tested in this study were from the same instrument as that tested by Morris and Mohacsi. Errors are however much smaller in our study. This is likely to be because we presented the range of pitches used before the experiment proper began, allowing the listener to form a frame of reference and to establish anchors. Judgements at the extreme ends of saturation suggest that these anchors were useful for the listener, as their judgements were somewhat more accurate for the top and bottom saturation values in comparison with those values immediately surrounding them. Secondly, we presented listeners with an anchoring tone (the 86% saturation tone) prior to the tone-to-be-judged, which would also have helped improve the accuracy of responses. This improvement in responses to the existing linear scale is useful to note in itself as it suggests some simple practices such as familiarising the user with the scale and giving an anchor would be useful practices in the working environment.

In the second experiment, we investigated the effect that the two different scales might have on anaesthetists' ability to estimate the difference between two tones presented one after another, simulating the situation where saturation values change. Morris and Mohacsi (2005) performed a similar study using only a linear scale, and demonstrated that participants typically considerably underestimated the degree of saturation change. Anaesthetists became more accurate in detecting the direction of change as the percentage change increased, but significantly underestimated the amount of saturation change for both small and large saturation changes. The median estimate for a 20% change in saturation was 5%.

In our second experiment we presented the same listeners with thirty pairs of tones where the saturation change was 2, 6 or 10% downwards or upwards. The first tone was always within the range of 86%–100% as these values represent higher-than-critical values, with changes downwards representing potentially clinically-relevant changes (Welch, 2011).

@&#METHOD@&#

Forty anaesthetist participants took part in this study. They had all previously participated in Experiment 1.

Two scales, one logarithmic and one linear, were used as in Experiment 1 (Table 1).

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants were presented with either the linear or the logarithmic tones first, with half hearing the linear tones first and half hearing the logarithmic tones first, as in Experiment 1. Prior to the start of the experiment each participant was played each of the tones from 86% to 100% twice, once ascending and once descending, with the appropriate saturation level appearing on the screen as the tone was played. The experiment proper then began. In each trial, participants heard a tone from the 86%–100% saturation level range and were asked to estimate the percentage saturation represented by that tone. After a short pause, they were presented with a second tone that could be any of the saturation levels from 70% to 100% other than the tone they had just heard (so there were no trials in which the first and second saturation levels were the same). They were asked to estimate the direction (drop or rise) and the percentage change in saturation represented by the difference between the first and second tone, which they entered into the computer. Participants heard thirty pairs of saturation tones for the scale in total. Fourteen of the changes were 2% changes in saturation, seven up and seven down; ten were 6% changes in saturation (five up and five down); and six of the changes were of 10% (three up and three down). Once the 30 trials had been completed, the procedure was completed in full for the other scale.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The accuracy of the responses to the first of the two tones in the pair is useful for replication and comparison purposes with Experiment 1. Second, the results consider the ability of participants to indicate the direction of change. Thirdly, we consider their accuracy in estimating the degree of saturation change between the first and the second tone.


                           Fig. 3
                            shows the mean saturation estimate for each tone in each of the two scales.

The equation for the linear scale regression line is y = 0.5954x+37.252 and the equation for the logarithmic scale regression line is y = 0.7708x+20.924. Again the logarithmic scale is closer to y = x, the line of identity. For both scales the lower values were overestimated and the higher values underestimated, but this was more pronounced for the linear than for the logarithmic scale. Performance is overall not as accurate as in Experiment 1.

A two-way scale x percentage within-subjects ANOVA on the mean error percentage estimates (as in Experiment 1) showed a main effect for scale (F = 55.55, df = 1, p < 0.001). The mean estimation errors were higher for the linear scale (2.46%) compared with the logarithmic scale (1.75%). Again these results are similar to those obtained for Experiment 1, where mean errors were also higher for the linear than for the logarithmic scale.

There was no effect for percentage. A significant interaction was obtained between tone and percentage (F = 2.7, df = 1, 7, p < 0.05). As for Experiment 1, performance was less accurate at the extreme values for the linear scale but was relatively consistent for the logarithmic scale (Fig. 4
                           ), even though in this study we used only the upper half of the scale.


                           Table 2
                            shows the percentage accuracy in judging the direction of saturation change from first to second tone for each of the scales (higher or lower). Performance was very high for each of the scales, but higher for the logarithmic than for the linear scale.


                           Table 3
                            shows the mean error in estimates of saturation change as a function of the value of the first tone. A two-way scale x percentage (first value) ANOVA gave a significant effect for scale (F = 61.27, df = 1, p < 0.001). Performance was more accurate using the logarithmic scale than the linear scale, with mean errors of 1.47% and 2.1% respectively. A significant effect for percentage was obtained (F = 16.27, df = 7, p < 0.001) whereby performance was worst at the ends of the scales and more accurate in the middle. There was no interaction between scale and percentage.

In terms of overall accuracy of the estimation of the saturation level represented by the first tone, performance was again better for the logarithmic scale than for the linear scale, with the logarithmic line of best fit again being closer to y = x than the linear scale. The decline in performance from Experiment 1 to Experiment 2 can be attributed either to fatigue (Experiment 2 always followed Experiment 2, in the same session) or, more likely, because participants were given an anchor value (86%) for each of the trials in Experiment 1 whereas they were not in Experiment 2. In Experiment 2 they were simply given the scale before the experiment started. This turns the task of recognising the percentage value of the first tone into one of recognising an absolute pitch value rather than making a relative pitch judgement and therefore makes it more similar to the procedure used by Morris and Mohacsi. Performance is still far superior to that found by Morris and Mohacsi, however.

That the size of the pitch differences were well above listeners' JNDs is demonstrated by the very high levels of correct direction detection shown for both of the scales (the results are also much higher than those demonstrated by Schulte and Block, 1992).

Experiment 2 also demonstrates that not only are absolute judgements better for the logarithmic scale, but that relative judgements are also better (the difference between the first and second tones), as Morris and Mohacsi predicted. The differences between the actual values of the saturation change and the guessed value are also significantly better for the logarithmic scale than for the linear scale. Given that the maximum change in value was 10% saturation, the differences are notable in that the error differences are approaching 1% between the two scales for some values. Overall, the mean error in response to the logarithmic scale was again about 30% more accurate than in the case of the linear scale.

Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrate that the use of a logarithmic, semitone scale produces lower mean error estimates both of absolute values of saturation and percentage change estimate errors when compared with a linear (and smaller) scale. In terms of absolute estimates of saturation value, performance was better (errors in estimation were about 30% lower throughout) when using the logarithmic, rather than the linear, scale. In terms of the mapping of actual value to estimated value, the logarithmic scale performed better than the linear scale. Our results also show that anaesthetists' estimates of percentage change in saturation level are more accurate when using a logarithmic scale than using a linear scale. Thus our results confirm the intuition that a perceptually-spaced logarithmic frequency scale would lead to better performance. Because we wanted to compare a commercially-available set of pitch values (the Datex-Ohmeda AS/3) with the well-known and over-learned semitone scale, the range of values tested are higher for the logarithmic than for the linear scale, which may have also affected the results (though the values represented even by the linear scale are way above JND levels). A future experiment might compare a linear and a logarithmic scale covering the same range in order to make a more direct comparison between linear versus logarithmic mappings. However, the advantage of the semitone scale is that listeners are already familiar with it and this might give the semitone scale (as opposed to other logarithmic scales) a built-in advantage. Listeners vary enormously in auditory abilities and it is important to cater for poor listeners, as the good listeners will perform well anyway. For example, there are gender differences in hearing and listening abilities that might need to be factored in to designs (Hodges and McBride, 2012). Some types of medical alarm are more readily learned by medical practitioners with some musical training than those without (Wee and Sanderson, 2008). The more a sound design makes is easy for the listener to judge, the more effectively it will be perceptible by poor as well as good listeners. Edworthy et al. (2014) demonstrate how learnability of alarms can be influenced by the type of sound used, with some styles of alarm being easily learned by everyone. Thus the easier sounds are to learn and respond to, the easier it will make it for the poorer listeners, as well as the better listeners, to react appropriately to those sounds.

It is also worth noting that performance in our study appears to be better than the performance obtained in earlier studies that have considered anaesthetists' estimations of SpO2 values and changes (Morris and Mohacsi, 2005; Schulte and Block, 1992). Our interpretation of this is that the exposure of the participants to the scale used, and the use of an anchor or reference point, improves performance considerably and might be used as a simple way of improving performance in the working environment.

An important question in relation to our findings is the degree to which the superior performance in the logarithmic scale really matters in practice. Bearing in mind that our procedures elicited superior performance to previous studies because of the paradigm we used, it is worthy of note that the semitone scale still significantly outperformed the linear scale. Our data (unlike Morris and Mohacsi, and Schulte and Block) demonstrate, at least, that anaesthetists are almost always able to detect the direction of change, but are less accurate with more detailed judgements, even with a lot of help from the experimental paradigm. Whilst the differences may be small, they are significant, and the lines of best fit are much better for the logarithmic than for the linear scale. This means that there are errors in the extremes of the order of 4%, which could indeed be important in some instances. It is notable too that the difference in magnitude of errors between the two scales is of the order of 30%, whichever type of judgements are being taken. More importantly, we need to note that the conditions under which this experiment was conducted probably represent the best possible scenario in terms of conditions conducive to accurate response. Participants were given anchors, the listening conditions were quiet, headphones were used, and they were not required to work under stress, or to conduct a secondary or tertiary task. All of those circumstances would likely degrade performance. It may be the case that one or other of the scales is more resilient to degradation when the anaesthetist has to do the task under working conditions, but this remains to be tested. For example, it has been shown more recently that anaesthesiologists are quite good at detecting subtle pitch changes when there are no distracting tasks. However, the same anaesthesiologists show up to a 17% decline in performance in detecting these subtle pitch changes when they must complete a unisensory visual distracting task (Stevenson et al., 2013). The laboratory based unisensory visual distracting task itself would certainly underestimate the performance decrement in a high stakes environment such as the operating theatre, intensive care unit, or high dependency unit. Thus the next steps in our research would be to move towards a more realistic work scenario through combining tasks based on our scales with tasks such as the unisensory visual distracting task, and then more realistic simulation.

The issue is not so much the ability to discriminate the pitch, as practitioners are typically able to detect subtle pitch differences without distraction, as we have demonstrated here. The problem is pitch discrimination with high attentional load conditions, the conditions that practitioners are subjected to in the healthcare environment (Schlesinger et al., 2014; Seagull and Sanderson, 2001). One of the overlooked facets is the ability of the practitioner to parse out multisensory information into relevant and irrelevant. Schlesinger et al. (2014) found that through multisensory training (NOT aural training), practitioners had improved attentional and cognitive demand processing and improved performance with subtle pitch discrimination in high attentional load (distracting) environments. The studies presented here provide a baseline comparison of the two scales, and as a next step it would be very interesting to compare the two scales used here in Schlesinger's paradigm, thus moving us closer to the conditions under which anaesthetists work in the clinical environment. The issue as to which of the scales might degrade more quickly would be of considerable interest under these circumstances. We would expect the linear scale to degrade more rapidly because firstly the steps and smaller and linear, and secondly the semitone scale has a massive advantage in that it is typically overlearned by Western listeners and should therefore be easier to both anchor and to estimate differences.

Another fundamental issue that patient safety would likely be improved if pulse oximetry tones were standardised. Not all pulse oximeters use a linear scale, or even the same linear scale. A logarithmic scale appears to outperform a linear scale on every judgement that clinicians might need to make and so it could be argued that if standardisation of pulse oximetry was to occur, then the introduction of a logarithmic scale would further improve the reliability of this vital piece of equipment for patient safety.

Anaesthetists rely on hearing changes in the pulse oximeter tone to focus their attention to the monitor and thereby to changes in their patient's physiological state. In some clinical situations, the anaesthetist can be undertaking more than one task at once and not concentrating solely on the patient's physiology. In other situations, the anaesthetist may be unable to see the patient and so depend entirely on the monitoring, in particular the pulse oximeter for information on how the patient is. Any changes in a patient's oxygen level need to be managed quickly and effectively to prevent harm. While hypoxemic events may be detected, they may be detected during precipitous oxygen-haemoglobin desaturation. While mortality may be averted, patient morbidity may result. Subtle consequences of hypoxemia are not always detected or followed over time, but patient safety and avoidance of harm should undergo a paradigm shift from focussing on rare mortality to common neuropsychological outcomes.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Our studies demonstrate a clear and consistently higher performance level (error rates of 30% smaller) for pulse oximetry auditory tones which are based on a logarithmic semitone scale, when compared with the linear tones typically used in pulse oximetry and specifically the tones used in the Datex-Ohmeda AS/3. Our results also demonstrate that performance in comparable tasks was much higher for the linear scale in comparison with earlier studies. This may be accounted for by our use of an anchor tone and pre-exposure to the scale used. These adaptations could themselves be used in practice in order to improve performance. Our results suggest throughout that a logarithmic, semitone scale produces greater accuracy in predicting both the current level of oxygen saturation, and change in level of saturation. Our experiments were conducted in quiet laboratory conditions and participants were not required to carry out any secondary tasks. Our next steps would be to conduct a similar study using an already-tested laboratory simulation paradigm (such as that by Schlesinger et al., 2014), testing other potential scales, and developing tests that can be carried out in situ.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

