@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Validity and inter-observer reliability of subjective hand-arm vibration assessments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           An easily applicable subjective hand-arm vibration assessment tool was presented.


                        
                        
                           
                           The assessment tool was developed for occupational safety and health practitioners.


                        
                        
                           
                           The tool is found to be fairly reliable among observers and moderately valid.


                        
                        
                           
                           The tool can be of use in future research and in field-based ergonomic assessments.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Hand-arm vibration

Risk assessment

Validity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Exposure to mechanical vibrations at work (e.g., due to handling powered tools) is a potential occupational risk as it may cause upper extremity complaints. However, reliable and valid assessment methods for vibration exposure at work are lacking. Measuring hand-arm vibration objectively is often difficult and expensive, while often used information provided by manufacturers lacks detail. Therefore, a subjective hand-arm vibration assessment method was tested on validity and inter-observer reliability.
                  In an experimental protocol, sixteen tasks handling powered tools were executed by two workers. Hand-arm vibration was assessed subjectively by 16 observers according to the proposed subjective assessment method. As a gold standard reference, hand-arm vibration was measured objectively using a vibration measurement device. Weighted κ's were calculated to assess validity, intra-class-correlation coefficients (ICCs) were calculated to assess inter-observer reliability.
                  Inter-observer reliability of the subjective assessments depicting the agreement among observers can be expressed by an ICC of 0.708 (0.511–0.873). The validity of the subjective assessments as compared to the gold-standard reference can be expressed by a weighted κ of 0.535 (0.285–0.785). Besides, the percentage of exact agreement of the subjective assessment compared to the objective measurement was relatively low (i.e., 52% of all tasks). This study shows that subjectively assessed hand-arm vibrations are fairly reliable among observers and moderately valid. This assessment method is a first attempt to use subjective risk assessments of hand-arm vibration. Although, this assessment method can benefit from some future improvement, it can be of use in future studies and in field-based ergonomic assessments.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Exposure to mechanical vibrations at the workplace, such as hand-transmitted vibrations, can arise in numerous labors (e.g., in construction or manufacturing industries), for example when manually handling powered tools. These hand-transmitted vibrations are associated with a variety of signs and symptoms including vascular and neurological disorders (Griffin and Bovenzi, 2002). More specifically, it has been shown in several reviews that hand-transmitted vibrations are associated with upper extremity complaints (Hagberg, 2002; Kittusamy and Buchholz, 2004; Punnett, 2004); for example, shoulder pain (van der Windt et al., 2000) and specific pathologies like tenosynovitis and epicondylitis (Palmer et al., 2007; Shiri and Viikari-Juntura, 2011). Although evidence is slightly inconsistent as there are also studies reporting weak evidence for the association of hand-arm vibration and upper-extremity complaints (da Costa and Vieira, 2010; Schweigert, 2002; van Rijn et al., 2010), it is generally accepted that hand-arm vibrations are an occupational risk.

As a result of these potential occupational hazards, in 2002, European directives were communicated providing workers' exposure limits for whole-body and hand-arm vibrations (2002/44/EC). These directives, that are based on health and safety requirements, specify the maximum intensity of vibrations a worker can be exposed to, considering the duration of this specific vibration. Assessment of hand-arm vibrations is therefore based on both the duration and the intensity of the exposure. This approach is supported by several studies showing that vibration, in which the exposure is a multiplication of duration and intensity of the hand-arm vibration, is associated with upper extremity disorders (Bovenzi, 2012; Griffin, 2004; Sauni et al., 2009). Therefore, duration as well as intensity of vibration should be considered to quantify the potential risk of musculoskeletal disorders of hand-arm vibrations.

Objectively measuring hand-arm vibrations at work is laborious and challenging as highly specific and expensive equipment is needed. Occupational safety and health practitioners in general lack knowledge on how to perform these measurements (OSHA, 2008). Therefore, instead of objectively measuring hand-arm vibrations, assessments are often based on self-reports, guides, standardized technical reports and information provided by manufacturers. However, these sources can contain substantial errors. One reason might be that the actual exposure highly depends on the circumstances in which a task is executed, the tools that are used, the material that is processed and individual worker's characteristics. Another reason might be that such vibration assessments are often expressed in crude, qualitative metrics. Although validity of workers' self-reports of vibration of handheld powered tools were shown to be good to excellent (Stock et al., 2005), these estimates often systematically overestimate the actual vibration (Akesson et al., 2001; Palmer et al., 2000). Moreover, despite it has been shown that exposure to vibration should be expressed as a multiplication of the duration and the intensity of the vibration, only duration is addressed in the abovementioned studies. Therefore, reliable and valid assessment methods measuring vibration exposure in an easily applicable way at the workplace are scarce.

The hand-arm risk assessment method (HARM) was developed (Douwes and de Kraker, 2009, 2014). In this assessment method, which was developed for occupational safety and health practitioners, jobs are classified according to their risk of arm, neck and or shoulder symptoms. Among other factors, such as awkward postures and duration and frequency of force exertions, HARM takes the exposure to hand-arm vibrations into account. The HARM assessment method as a whole was tested elaborately and its predictive validity has been proven for arm, neck and shoulder pain (Douwes et al., 2014; Douwes and de Kraker, 2014). However, the quality of the subjective assessment of hand-arm vibrations which is part of the HARM assessment is largely unknown. During this particular subjective assessment of hand-arm vibrations, observers classify the intensity of the vibration into one of four vibration categories (Table 1
                     ), based on the European directives on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding vibration (2002/44/EC). Therefore a simple alternative was developed that is potentially more applicable than complicated and expensive objective measurements and more accurate than self-reports or the often used data provided by the manufacturers. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the inter-observer reliability and the concurrent validity of this subjectively assessed hand-arm vibrations (as used in HARM). In this study we hypothesize that our subjective assessment method provides a valid and reliable alternative for expensive objective assessments. Furthermore, we hypothesize that subjectively assessed vibration intensity is more accurate and reliable than (the often used) information provided by manufacturers as it is supposed that the intensity depends largely on the task performed. Eventually, we suspect that the subjective assessment method proposed here provides a suitable and easily applicable method that can be used in ergonomic practice.

@&#METHODS@&#

In a lab setting, 16 tasks with powered tools were executed by two different workers, eight tasks by each worker. Therefore, two facility assistants (both male, 37 and 56 years of age respectively) with large knowledge and experience on handling tools were recruited to execute the tasks. A broad variation of tasks was selected (Table 3
                        
                        ), in which tasks were ideally equally distributed among the four HARM vibration categories (Table 1). All tasks, consisting of the handling of several powered tools and processing several materials were executed in random order during which an objective as well as a subjective assessment of the hand-arm vibration was performed. These tasks were subjectively assessed by 16 observers, according to a mixed-design experimental protocol (Table 2). In this protocol, each of the 16 tasks were executed by one of the workers and were observed by four of the 16 observers leading to a total of 64 tasks that were observed. Observers were recruited from students and employees of the VU University, Faculty of Human Movement Sciences and TNO Healthy Living. These observers had substantial knowledge on human kinematics and ergonomic risk assessments. However, they did not have specific experience on performing assessments concerning hand-arm vibrations. Ten observers (62%) were female and the observers were on average 30.2 (12.1) years of age. All observers received written and verbal instructions on the subjective hand-arm vibration assessment. The instructions involved similar instructions to the instructions potential users of HARM receive. All participants to this study (workers and observers) signed a written consent prior to the measurements.

Hand-arm vibration was assessed subjectively using the vibration module within the HARM assessment, using the HARM vibration categories (Table 1). The vibration levels that should be distinguished were defined based on European directives (2002/44/EC) on health and safety requirements regarding vibration (0–2.5 m/s2; 2.5–5 m/s2, 5–10 m/s2 and ≥10 m/s2). The observers subjectively assessed each task by choosing one of these categories. To do so, observers performed visual inspection and felt the worker's hands and arms (Fig. 1
                        ). After the worker executed the task, observers had the possibility to question the worker on perceived vibration. The observers were blinded to the result of the objective measurement as well as to the result of the assessments of their fellow observers.

Next to the subjective vibration assessment, as a gold standard reference, hand-arm vibration was objectively measured during each trail using a Castle Pro-DX EXCIEO (GA2005) vibration-meter. In accordance with the standardized protocols (ISO 5349-1; ISO 5349-2), the probe of the measurement device was mounted. To do so, the transducer (a tri-axial accelerometer) was taped rigidly at the surface using a mounting block as supplied by the manufacturer, as close to the point where the vibration enters the body, according to international standards (ISO 5349-2). Real time vibration intensity during the course of the task were assessed in three directions of an orthogonal coordinate system with its origin as close to the center of the gripping zone of the machine, tool or work piece. Vibrations during each trial (using the vector sum of vibration of the three orthogonal axes) at the instant of peak (ahv(peak), expressed in m/s2) were collected according to international directives (ISO 5349-1) and were used for further analyses.

In addition, vibration values of the powered tools as specified by the manufacturer (i.e., the numbers provided in the manuals of the hand held power tools) were collected. These numbers are often used in occupational risk assessments of hand-arm vibrations (OSHA, 2008; Palmer et al., 1998).

Objective measurements were categorized into the four HARM vibration categories (Table 1). To test the validity of the subjective assessments, the agreement between all subjective assessments and the objective measurement reference were expressed calculating an intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) and 95% confidence interval. As a comparison, a second ICC (and 95% confidence interval) was calculated assessing the agreement of the vibration values of the powered tools as specified in the manuals provided by the manufacturer, compared to the objectively measured vibrations (in absolute values) during our protocol. To test for inter-observer reliability, the agreement of the subjective assessments within tasks and among observers was assessed calculating a weighted Cohen's κ (and 95% confidence interval). For all tests, coefficient of agreement (both ICCs and κ) >0.60 were considered good, coefficients in the range of 0.40–0.60 were considered to agree moderately and values <0.40 were considered to have limited agreement.

As an additional test, to test for a learning effect, the percentage of agreement between subjective assessment and objective measurements in the first two tasks was compared to those of the lasts two tasks. Furthermore, of the tasks in which the subjective and objective measurement differed one or more categories, deviation of the objective measurement from the category boundary was calculated to clarify the source of inaccuracy. As an example, when a task is subjectively classified into vibration category 2.5–5 m/s2, but was objectively assessed to be 6 m/s2, the deviation from the category boundary would be 1 m/s2. Similarly, also when this task would have been objectively assessed as 1.5 m/s2, the deviation from the category boundary would be 1 m/s2. Data processing was performed using Matlab (version 7.0.0) whereas statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS (version 18.0.0).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Inter-observer reliability, depicting the agreement between workers on subjectively assessing hand-arm vibration categories, can be expressed by an ICC of 0.708 (0.511–0.873). The concurrent validity of subjective hand-arm vibration assessment in comparison to the objective measurement can be expressed by a weighted κ of 0.535 (0.285–0.785); (Fig. 2
                     , Table 4
                     ). As a comparison, the ICC depicting the validity of the vibration values provided by the manufacturers as compared to the objectively measured vibrations was calculated 0.505 (0.364–0.706).

Exact agreement of the subjective assessment compared to the objective measurement occurred in 52% of the assessed tasks (diagonal lines in Table 4; 33 out of all 64 tasks). In the other tasks in which the subjective assessment did not match the objective measurement, a difference in subjective assessment compared to the objective measurement of more than 1 category occurred in 4% (2) of all tasks (i.e., measured objectively in category 1, while subjectively assessed in category 3, respectively, Table 4). Furthermore, of these inaccurately assessed tasks, deviation from the boundary of the category was 1.92 m/s2 on average, showing that in the tasks falsely assessed, objective exposure deviates substantially from the category boundaries. The additional analysis to investigate a possible learning effect showed 44% agreement of the subjective and objective assessment during the first two tasks of each observer while there was 59% agreement during the last two tasks.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study we aimed to evaluate the inter-observer reliability of subjective hand-arm vibration assessments and to assess the validity of these subjective assessments when compared to objectively measured vibrations. Subjective assessments are easily applicable in the work field and cheap, in contrast to highly valid but complex and expensive objective measurements using vibration measurement devices. The subjective assessment method considered to be more feasible to use by occupational practitioners. Another simple alternative that is often used in practice are vibration values of tools provided by manufacturers (OSHA, 2008; Palmer et al., 1998). However, as vibration intensity can vary largely over person, specific job task and execution (Dong et al., 2005), manufacturers' information can be inaccurate as it does not take into account these differences. According to the results presented in our study, the subjective hand-arm vibration assessment within HARM provides an alternative to these metrics, showing good inter-rater reliability (ICCs > 0.60). However, although higher agreement than the vibration intensities of the powered tools provided by the manufacturers was shown, the validity of our method was moderate, leaving room for improvement of the assessment tool. Subjective assessments can be executed in a relatively short time period (i.e., less than a minute per task) with minor recourses and background knowledge. Therefore, it can be concluded that observers without knowledge on hand-arm vibrations are able to perform an acceptable assessment of hand-arm vibrations in work situations in general. The current method can potentially be of use in risk assessments of hand-arm vibrations during industrial tasks. As can be obtained from earlier studies, potential risk of musculoskeletal complaints due to hand-arm vibrations is affected by the intensity as well as the duration of the vibration (Bovenzi, 2012; Griffin, 2004; Sauni et al., 2009). Subjective assessment of duration of hand-arm vibrations, both by self-reports and workplace observations, have been shown to be reasonable accurate before (McCallig et al., 2010; Stock et al., 2005). We add information on the validity and inter-observer reliability of subjective hand-arm vibration intensity to this knowledge.

The observers that assessed hand-arm vibrations had no specific experience in performing these kinds of assessments. We want our method to be easily applicable without extensive training. It can be concluded that our method is fairly applicable by observers with minor knowledge or training on the matter. However, improvement in results over time indicates a possible learning effect for the subjective assessment that apparently can be reached within a small period of time. Training of the observers may therefore improve the validity of the subjective hand-arm vibrations assessment method. Whether results found in our study would differ from data obtained in a group of trained or experienced observers cannot be concluded from our data. However, it is likely that the accuracy of subjective assessments would improve in such situations.

As can be obtained from Fig. 2 and Table 4, observers had mainly difficulties to assess tasks in the second and third hand-arm vibration categories. Apparently, vibrations within these categories are difficult to distinguish. Whether these difficulties are caused by the nature of the tasks or by the description of the HARM categories cannot be concluded from the present results. A possible explanation for the abovementioned phenomenon may be a ‘floor and ceiling’ effect. As the relatively low and high vibration tasks are more likely to be assessed correctly since first and fourth category respectively, no under or overestimation is possible. However, as only two of the tasks (i.e., task 5 and 13, Table 3) show substantial high and low vibrations respectively, this effect does not seem to be of high influence on our results. Another explanation may be that the subjective assessment is difficult to perform when handling certain type of tools. Although this theory cannot be supported when comparing objectively and subjectively vibration categories obtained from the handling of tools in our study (Table 1), one cannot exclude that the handling of different tools would lead to different outcomes. A last possible explanation for the inaccuracy may be the description (e.g., hardly any vibration sensible or vibrations not visible) of the categories. Although the vibration categories are based on directives (2002/44/EC), categories might benefit from more differentiation in the description. Future research should be directed to exploring the possibilities to improve subjectively assessed hand-arm vibrations. As Fig. 2 shows that there is quite some overlap in the distributions of category 2 and 3 for objectively and subjectively assessed vibrations, revisions should mainly be targeted to improve the differentiating capacity in these categories. Improvements on the description of the assessment categories, studying different tasks and tools or training of observers might be helpful for future refinement of the method.

Despite the good validity of the subjective hand-arm vibration assessment expressed in a high ICC, the percentage of exact agreement of the subjective assessment compared to the objective measurement was relatively low (i.e., 52% of all tasks). Although this agreement of 52% is higher than the 25% agreement based on chance, it should be noted that the presented assessment method is prone to improvements. Disagreement of the objective and subjective assessment of more than one category occurred only in 2 (4%) of all tasks (Table 4). It can thus be concluded that, despite a relatively low percentage of absolute agreement in absolute values, subjective assessments differ not too much from objective measurements. Furthermore, it was shown that, in tasks that were incorrectly subjectively assessed, objective measures differed 1.92 m/s2 from the category boundaries. Therefore, misclassification takes place, even when tasks are not close to category boundaries, especially in the categories 2 and 3.

As can be seen in Table 4, not all categories of vibration are equally represented in our experimental protocol. Vibration category 2 and 3 occurred in 19 tasks whereas category 1 and 4 occurred in 10 and 16, respectively. This occurred as the objective vibration value per task established a-priori was not always the same as the intensity that was actually measured during the trial. Also, the objective measurement was not always assessed in the same category when repeated by the same worker. This is probably a result of the fact that the exposure to vibration highly depends on the circumstances in which a task is executed and on worker's individual characteristics (OSHA, 2008). However, as reasonable amounts of tasks are represented in each category, it can be concluded that the present assessment method is valid and reliable in low as well as high intensity hand-arm vibration tasks. To the best of our knowledge, for ICC calculations, no particular power calculations can be performed. Therefore, we chose 64 observed tasks to be a reasonable number for this particular study design. As all calculated ICCs show to be significantly different from 0 showing rather small confidence intervals, there does not seem to be a power issue in our experiment.

A limited number of tasks and workers were assessed in our study; therefore, the external validity of the current results can be questioned. Besides, despite that we build a realistic mock-up of work situation, results might differ from results obtained in real occupational settings. However, the range of vibration during the tasks executed in our study are comparable to those measured in a large battery of industrial tasks in an earlier study (McCallig et al., 2010). Furthermore, no large differences in results can be expected when tasks would have been performed by more than two workers. From the above it can be concluded that although minor sources of biases cannot be ruled out, the present results seem applicable on a large variety of industrial tasks, workers and occupational.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Our study shows that our method of subjectively assessed intensity of work-related hand-arm vibrations is fairly reliable among observers and moderately valid. The assessment method is even more valid than information provided by manufacturers that are often used in risk assessment is more easily applicable and cheaper than the more valid objective measurements. Our method for occupational safety and health practitioners, is a first attempt to use subjective risk assessments of hand-arm vibration. Regarding our results, the method can potentially be used in ergonomic risk assessments. In general, observers with minor knowledge and training on the matter are able to perform an acceptable assessment of hand-arm vibrations in work situations. Although our results are promising, results have to be reproduced under different circumstances (e.g., using different handling tools, observed by trained observers) to prove its consistency and to potentially refine subjective vibration assessments. Besides, the current assessment method is prone to some improvements that can potentially be achieved by improving descriptions of the vibration categories or training of observers, mainly in the classification of the middle vibration categories.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was financially supported by the Dutch Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

