@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effects of transfer distance on spine kinematics when placing boxes at different heights

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Twisting and lateral bending observed during lateral transfer tasks have been associated with increased risk of back injuries.


                        
                        
                           
                           Physical separation of the lift origin and destination encourages stepping and turning the body rather than twisting the spine.


                        
                        
                           
                           The current research explored the relationship between transfer distance and spine motion during a simulated palletizing task.


                        
                        
                           
                           Separating the lift origin and lift destination by 1–1.25 m yielded the best balance between spine kinematics and productivity.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Lifting

Back injury

Musculoskeletal disorders

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Twisting and lateral bending motions in repetitive lifting tasks are associated with occupational low back injuries and can be challenging to reduce with engineering controls. This study tested the hypothesis that twisting and lateral bending can be reduced by changing the transfer distance. Eighteen males, with no material handling experience lifted 10.9 kg boxes from 0.9 m above the floor and placed the boxes at a destination located 0.50, 0.75, 1.00, 1.25, 1.50, or 1.75 m away and at heights of 0.5 m, 0.9 m, and 1.3 m above the floor. Overall, twisting and forward bending decreased with increased transfer distance when placing the box. Conversely, the lateral bending when lifting and placing the box increased with increasing transfer distance. In short, having a transfer distance between 1 and 1.25 m when performing palletizing tasks to different heights may optimally balance spine kinematics, back injury risk, and productivity measures.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Manual material handling tasks in industry that result in lateral bending and twisting motions of the spine have been associated with the onset of low back injuries (Kelsey et al., 1984; Marras et al., 1993; Punnett et al., 1991). Twisting and lateral bending movement velocities associated with asymmetric spine motions have been identified as two of the five risk factors in the Lumbar Motion Monitor risk model (Marras et al., 1993; Marras and Granata, 1995). The challenge faced by ergonomists attempting to prevent injuries in repetitive lifting tasks, that cannot be eliminated or automated, is how to control or limit the range and speed of these spine postural deviations. While spine motions and moments in the sagittal plane (forward flexion) can be reduced by raising lift origins and destinations (Davis and Marras, 2005; Lavender et al., 2003), controlling the postural deviations in the frontal plane (lateral bending) and the transverse plane (twisting) poses a greater challenge to industrial ergonomists. Some would argue that the exposure to lateral bending and twisting motions could be controlled through training on better lifting techniques. Lavender et al. (1995) reported that when instructed to step during an asymmetric lifting task, participants significantly reduced the amount of spine twisting and lateral bending. Unfortunately, the studies investigating the effectiveness of training on lifting techniques have shown few people actually adopt the techniques and there is little change in reported low back pain (Daltroy et al., 1997; Lavender et al., 2007; van Poppel et al., 1998).

Alternatively, Marras and Allread (2006) advocated that asymmetric spine motions can be controlled through adjustment to workplace layout, for example, separating the lifts origin and destination. Jorgensen et al. (2005), however, reported that manipulating the transfer distance had limited effectiveness when trying to control spine kinematics. In our prior work, we found that separating the lift origin and destination by 1 m to be effective in reducing the degree to which participants twisted or laterally bent their backs (Lavender and Johnson, 2009) when lifting boxes with handles from and to conveyors 0.76 m above the floor. Additionally, when transferring boxes without handles from 0.5 m, 0.9 m, and 1.3 m above the floor to a conveyor 0.9 m above the floor, a task similar to that experienced when de-palletizing materials, Mehta et al. (in press) reported transfer distances between 1 and 1.25 m provided a balance between several spine kinematic variables. The present study, using a similar paradigm, investigated if the relationships between transfer distance and spine kinematic measures persist when transferring boxes without handles from near hip level to three different levels representative of a palletizing task. Specifically, this study tested the hypotheses that (1) changing the transfer distance between a lift's origin and destination affects the amount of twisting and lateral bending and the speed of these motions, and that (2) the relationship between the spine kinematics and the transfer distance depends upon the height to which boxes are placed.

@&#METHODS@&#

Eighteen healthy male students with an average age of 20 years (SD = 2.5 years) with no previous material handling experience and no prior history of musculoskeletal disorders of the shoulder and torso participated in this study. The mean height and weight of the participants were 1.82 m (SD = 0.06 m) and 75.5 kg (SD = 12 kg). All participants signed an informed consent document approved by The Ohio State University Institutional Review Board.

Two passive conveyors were constructed from Creform™ materials. The conveyors frames were fitted tightly on top of large scales, which were used to identify the timing of each lift's initiation and termination in the data stream. The frame of the destination conveyor was placed on a movable dolly, so that the transfer distance between the two conveyors could be adjusted. The boxes (0.4m×0.3m×0.25m) were made of cardboard (without handles) and filled with paper to achieve the desired weight. Fig. 1
                         shows a schematic of the experimental setup.

Three dimensional spine kinematic data were obtained with a magnetic motion capture system (The Motion Monitor™) using the LiftTrainer™ program which sampled the kinematic and force scale data at 120 Hz. This system provided data on the movement of each lower and upper arm, the head, and the spine (between T1 and S1) and associated movement velocities. The spine data used the local coordinate system of the sensor on the sacrum.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

The experimental design investigated two independent variables: the transfer distance (6 levels) and the final height at which the boxes were placed (3 levels). The participants performed a simulated material handling task in which they moved three 10.9 kg boxes, one at a time, from an origin conveyor (fixed at 0.9 m above the floor) to a destination conveyor positioned 0.5m, 0.9m, and 1.3m above the floor. These heights were selected to represent palletizing work performed at low, medium, and high levels, respectively. The transfer distances between the lift origin and destination were 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 1.25, 1.5, and 1.75 m. For analysis purposes, the lifting tasks were broken down into three phases: picking (initial lift), carrying, and placing (termination of the transfer). Given that the lateral bending and twisting postures peak during the picking and placing phases (Lavender and Johnson, 2009), only the data from these two phases were used. The picking and placing phases were analyzed separately to determine whether the hypothesized changes in spine postural deviations and associated movement velocities due to transfer distance were limited to one or the other of these phases in the box transfer process. The dependent variables were the peak angular displacements in the sagittal plane (degree of forward bending), the transverse plane (degree of twisting) and the coronal plane (degree of lateral bending), along with the peak three-dimensional angular velocities of the spine (from T1 to S1) while picking up and placing the boxes.

After signing an informed consent document, anthropometric measures (height and weight) were obtained from each participant. Seven motion capture system sensors were then placed on the subject: on the back of the head, at the top of the thoracic spine (T1), over the top of the sacrum (S1), and bilaterally on the upper and lower arms using Velcro straps and medical tape.

The participants were instructed to simulate a work within a fast-paced distribution environment as they move the three boxes from the origin conveyor to the destination conveyor within 15 s. The participants were free to choose their style of lifting and no instructions were provided regarding how to lift or handle the boxes. However, due to the cables running to the motion sensors, participants could only turn to their left while transferring the boxes. Before the start of data collection process, the participants were asked to practice the lifting task so that they could pace themselves and complete the set of three lifts within the specified time window.

The sequence of destination heights was counter-balanced across subjects. Within each height condition, the sequence of transfer distance conditions was randomized. Participants performed two replications of the task for each combination of destination height and transfer distance. A 1-min break was provided after each set of three box transfers and a 5-min break was provided after each block of conditions at a given destination height was performed to minimize fatigue development.

Given that the present study was designed to emulate a continual work flow in a fast-paced distribution environment, where people are lifting materials more or less continuously throughout the work periods, only second and third lifts in the sequence were analyzed as the initial lift in the sequence was not representative of a continual work flow. Out of 18 subjects, 2 subject's data were excluded due to unexpected errors in the data collection program. The picking, carrying, and placing phases of each lift were based upon the data from the force scales under the origin and destination conveyors. However, the selection of each phase needed to be preformed manually to accommodate variability in the subject's lifting styles. The time points for each phase were picked based on the orientation of the participants with respect to the conveyor and change in force scale levels. For example, the picking phase was initiated when the participant reached for the box and terminated when the participant initiated the turn. Likewise, the placing phase was initiated when the participant displayed arm or spine motion consistent with placing the box and terminated with the scale registering the additional force. Within the picking and placing phases, the peak twisting, lateral bending and forward bending postural deviations (absolute values) and peak movement velocities were extracted for each lift using Matlab software. The resulting data were averaged across the two lifts.

A two-way repeated measure ANOVA (destination height, transfer distance) was conducted using SPSS (version 19) on the degrees of twisting, lateral bending, and forward bending, and associated movement velocities during the picking and placing phases. Bonferroni post hoc analyses were utilized when significance (p
                        <0.05) was achieved for pair-wise comparisons across levels of an independent variable.

@&#RESULTS@&#

One measure when picking and four measures when placing showed significant changes due to the transfer distance by itself (Tables 1 and 2
                        
                        ). Fig. 2
                         indicates that the degree of twisting and forward bending when placing the box was significantly reduced as transfer distances increased. Conversely, lateral bending velocities when picking and placing increased with transfer distance as did the forward bending velocity when placing. For example, the lateral bending velocity of the spine when picking increased linearly (r
                        2
                        = 0.81) at the rate of 1.23 degrees/s for every quarter meter increment in transfer distance. However, for the other four measures showing this significant main effect, each was affected by the interaction between transfer distance and the height at which the boxes were placed (Tables 1 and 2).

As for the postural deviations, only the degree of forward bending during the picking phase showed a significant interaction effect between the transfer distance and destination height. Fig. 3
                        e shows that there was greater degree of forward bending motion with transfer distances up to 1.0 m when the boxes were to be placed at the 0.5 m destination height, suggesting that with the shorter transfer distances, the participants did not return to an upright posture between lifts when placing at this lower level.

The significant interaction between transfer distance and destination height for the extension velocity was largely due to the increase in the extension velocity in the 0.9 m condition once the transfer distance exceeded 0.75 m. Overall, the trend under this condition was linear (r
                        2
                        = 0.93) and resulted in an increase in extension velocity at the rate of 2.6 degrees/s for each quarter meter increment in transfer distance (Fig. 3f). No effect was observed for lifts terminating at the 0.5 m or 1.3 m levels.

While overall the degree to which one twists during placing was significantly reduced with increased transfer distance (Table 2, Fig. 2), the significant interaction between the transfer distance and the height of the destination conveyor showed that the decrease in the degree of twisting only occurred for lifts terminating at 1.3 m above the floor (Fig. 4
                        a). This trend was linear (r
                        2
                        = 0.96) and for these higher box placements the degree of twisting decreased by an average of 1.86 degrees for each quarter of a meter increment in the transfer distance. The multiple comparisons procedure showed that the degree of twisting at the 0.5 m and 0.75 m transfer distances was significantly greater than when the transfer distances were 1.5 and 1.75 m. The twisting velocity showed a marginally significant interaction effect (p
                        =0.049) between the transfer distance and the destination height. As Fig. 4b shows, when transferring the boxes to the 0.9 m height, the twisting velocity was mediated by transfer distance and was minimized with the transfer distance of 1 m.

The degree of lateral bending during placing was significantly higher for lifts terminating at 0.5 m (18.4 degrees) as compared to the 0.9 m (6.9 degrees) and 1.3 m (8.3 degrees) destination heights. The significant interaction effect between the destination height and the transfer distance seen for the degree of lateral bending when placing was due to decrease in lateral bending after transfer distance exceeded 1 m for the lifts terminating at a height of 0.5 m (Fig. 4c). The degree to which one laterally bends was unchanged with transfer distance when lifts terminated at the 0.9 or 1.3 m levels.

Additionally, lateral bending velocity was significantly lower for lifts terminating at 0.9 m (23.1 degrees/s) as compared to 1.3 m (30.7 degrees/s) and 0.5 m (32.4 degree/s) heights. The significant interaction between transfer distance and destination height showed that the lateral bending velocity increased significantly for 0.5 and 0.9 m box placement heights and once transfer distances reached 1.25m and 1 m, respectively (Fig. 4d).

As described above, overall during placing, the degree of forward bending reduced significantly as a function of transfer distance (Table 2). However, this reduction in the degree of forward bending with increasing transfer distance was primarily due to the reduced forward bending at the low (0.5 m) placement height (Fig. 4e). On the other hand, the forward bending velocity during placing increased significantly after transfer distance reached 0.75 m for 1.3 m destination height and after the transfer distance reached 1 m for the 0.9 m destination height (Fig. 4f).

Lift duration increased linearly with increase in transfer distance (r
                        2
                        = 0.95) by an average of 0.10 s for each quarter of a meter increment in the transfer distance. On average, lifts to the 1.3 m level (1.66 s) took longer than lifts with placements at the lower (1.5 s) or medium levels (1.56 s) (p
                        < 0.001). The significant interaction between lift height and transfer distance (p
                        =0.004) showed that placing boxes at the high height took longer primarily at shorter transfer distances.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Overall, the degree of twisting and forward bending during box placement monotonically declined with increasing transfer distance. However, increasing the transfer distance also increased the forward bending velocity during box placement and lateral bending velocity during picking and placing phase of the lifting task. The following section discusses the tradeoff between several spine kinematic measures to find an optimal solution between spine motion and movement velocities.

While the spine twisting kinematics were not affected during initiation of the lift during these simple transfer tasks, the degree of twisting was affected by the transfer distance when placing the box on the destination conveyor. Previously, Lavender and Johnson (2009) and Mehta et al. (2013) reported reduction in the degree of twisting for transfer distance between 1 and 1.25 m while placing the box at 0.76m and 0.9m respectively. Although the overall trend in the twisting data reported here compares with previous studies, decrease in the degree of twisting was not observed when box was placed at the low and medium heights. This discrepancy in the literature could be attributed to the nature of tasks studied in the experiment, for example, Mehta et al. (2013) investigated de-palletizing tasks and Lavender and Johnson (2009) used boxes with handles. However, overall the degree to which one twist was greater when placing at the 1.3 m height therein indicating that manipulation of the transfer distance has the potential to reduce the more extreme postural deviations in the transverse plane that would potentially be experienced in this simple material handling task.

In their Lumbar Motion Monitor risk model, Marras and Granata (1995) have reported twisting velocity significantly impacts spinal injury risk. We did not find transfer distance and destination height affected the twisting velocity when picking and only a weak effect when placing. These results are in agreement with Jorgensen et al. (2005) that showed no effect of transfer distance on twisting velocity. However, Fig. 4b suggests that the twisting velocity was lowest at a transfer distance of 1 m for high and medium heights; thereby suggesting the benefit of this separation distance in improvement of spinal loads for high and medium height lifts.

The degree of lateral bending during picking was insensitive to transfer distance and destination height of the conveyor. During box placement, the degree of lateral bending was reduced at the low placement height and once the transfer distances was 1.25 m or more (Fig. 4c). These findings are in partial agreement with prior findings that showed a reduction in lateral bending motions as transfer distance increased during hip level transfers (Lavender and Johnson, 2009) and in complete agreement with low level transfers when simulating de-palletizing tasks (Mehta et al., 2013). Moreover, Jorgensen et al. (2005) did not report an effect of transfer distance on these postural deviations during low level transfers, but, similar results were seen as in this study for medium and high heights transfers. Thus, increasing the separation distance by 1.25 m for low height transfers reduces the degree to which one laterally bends, and even though we did not measure lower limb movement our results suggest a strategy wherein participants may have taken an extra step when placing the box.

Lateral bending velocity is one of the five risk factors identified by the Lumbar Motion Monitor risk model (Marras et al., 1993; Marras and Granata, 1995) and is known to impact spinal compressive and shear forces (Marras and Granata, 1997). Our results showed that lateral bending velocity increased significantly with transfer distance when picking and placing the box. Similar increases in lateral bending velocity with transfer distance have been reported for de-palletizing (Marras et al., 1997; Mehta et al., 2013) and palletizing tasks (Jorgensen et al., 2005). Overall, the lateral bending velocity increased after the transfer distance was greater than 1m during box picking and placement (Fig. 2). Thus, transfer distance greater than 1 m between lift origin and destination could potentially increase loading of the spine, particularly for medium and high destination heights. Although, given the nature of simulated work task, the increase in movement velocities could be attributed to the added time pressure to complete the set of three lifts within 15 s when the distances between the origin and destination increased.

Overall during picking, the degree of forward bending was unaffected by transfer distance. This result is in agreement with previous studies in the literature (Jorgensen et al., 2005; Lavender and Johnson, 2009; Mehta et al., 2013). The interaction between transfer distance and destination height when picking suggests that the degree of forward bending changed as a function of transfer distance for low heights alone, specifically, after transfer distance reached 1 m. It should be noted that the overall magnitude of these motions when picking boxes for the low destination was much lower than when placing the box. Additionally, forward bending velocity of the spine during placing increased as a function of transfer distance. Moreover, this effect was prominent for lifts terminating at high and medium heights. Similar results have been reported during a de-palletizing task (Mehta et al., 2013). In their palletizing task, Jorgensen et al. (2005) found no effect of transfer distance on forward bending velocity. However, in agreement with our previous work (Mehta et al., 2013), current results also suggest that an increase in movement velocity indicates a lifting strategy wherein participants may have been using the momentum of the box in order to complete the larger distance required under the time constraint of the experimental task.

The linear increase in time/lift with transfer distance highlights the potential productivity/ergonomics tradeoff. However, the external validity of this tradeoff is debatable since increasing the transfer distance by half a meter, for example from 0.75 m to 1.25 m, would increase the duration of the lift by 0.20 s. This translates to 80 s per hour if a person is lifting at a pace of 400 lifts per hour, a value that might be observed in a palletizing station in a distribution center (Lavender et al., 2012). Similar productivity/ergonomics tradeoff has been previously reported for de-palletizing task (Mehta et al., 2013).

In summary, the interaction between transfer distance and lift origin height suggests different solutions based on lift height to optimize spine kinematics. For transfers to medium and high locations, a transfer distance of 1 m is suggested as this distance provides a balance between increase in lateral and forward bending velocity as well as the decrease in the degree of spine twisting. However, for low height transfers, distance of 1.25m would be optimal as the increase in lateral bending velocity during placing is counterbalanced by decrease in the degree of lateral and forward bending during box picking and placement. In short, a separation distance between 1 and 1.25 m may be an optimal solution when palletizing across a range of heights.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

This study only included male volunteers as they represent the majority of the workforce in grocery and general merchandise distribution centers. While we can speculate that the spine kinematics in women may decrease more with transfer distance on account of reduced stature and upper body strength, this needs to be investigated.

None of the participants in the current study had experience in material handling tasks. Previously, Plamondon et al. (2010) reported differences in lifting style between “expert” and inexperienced material handlers, as boxes were transferred from a conveyor to a hand truck 1.5 m away. Our approach used untrained individuals as we wanted to understand the effect of this engineering control on spine motions in individuals that have not developed particular lifting habits through long term exposure to these types of tasks.

Another limitation in this study is that we used only boxes without handles and we did not permit the participants to “toss” the boxes as the transfer distance increased. Both of these factors could affect the spine kinematics. Perhaps handles would lead to more pronounced effects of the transfer distance as the hand positions are fixed during the transfer. Tossing at more extended reach distances would potentially increase the twisting motions as the boxes are accelerated prior to their release. Further research is needed to tease out the effects of these factors.

While this study has demonstrated the effects of engineering control on spine kinematics, the results are only applicable to palletizing tasks where fatigue is not a limiting factor. The effect of fatigue on spine kinematics during palletizing tasks is yet to be investigated. Moreover, increasing the transfer distance does increase the physiologic cost. Further research is needed to determine the sensitivity of the physiologic costs to increases in transfer distance.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Overall, our main hypotheses were supported by findings of the present study. The degree of twisting was reduced when lift origin and destination were separated spatially. Additionally, physical separation of lift origin and destination reduced the degree of forward bending. Our results also suggest that the degree of spine twisting and lateral bending and movement velocities depend on the combination of transfer distance and destination height. However, physical separation above 1 m while placing the box at high and medium heights also increased the movement velocities of the spine. Additionally, transfer distance greater than 1.25 m also increased spine movement velocities while placing at low destination height implying greater load on the spinal structures. Thus, for a palletizing task, a transfer distance of between 1 and 1.25 m between the lift origin and destination would be an optimal engineering control that provides a balance between spine kinematic and productivity measures. However, the effect of increasing the transfer distance on physiological measures is yet to be determined as is the effect on experienced material handlers.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

