@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#3D skin length deformation of lower body during knee joint flexion for the practical application of functional sportswear

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Visualization of skin deformation including lines of non-extension was provided.


                        
                        
                           
                           Skin deformation along the dermatome directions of lower body was investigated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Optimal positions of seam for the various lengths of functional pants were suggested.


                        
                        
                           
                           Unit area deformation can be used for the attachment of various wearing devices.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Skin length deformation

Line of non-extension

Functional compression pants

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  With the advent of 3D technology in the design process, a tremendous amount of scanned data is available. However, it is difficult to trace the quantitative skin deformation of a designated location on the 3D body surface data during movement. Without identical landmarks or reflective markers, tracing the same reference points on the different body postures is not easy because of the complex shape change of the body. To find the least deformed location on the body, which is regarded as the optimal position of seams for the various lengths of functional compression pants, landmarks were directly marked on the skin of six subjects and scanned during knee joint flexion. Lines of non-extension (LoNE) and maximum stretch (LoMS) were searched for, both by tracing landmarks and newly drawn guidelines based on ratio division in various directions. Considering the waist as the anchoring position of the pants, holistic changes were quantified and visualized from the waistline in lengthwise and curvilinear deformation along the dermatomes of the lower body for various lengths of pants. Widthwise and unit area skin deformation data of the skin were also provided as guidelines for further use such as streamlined pants or design of other local wearing devices.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Observation of the extensible nature of the skin layer is essential in the ergonomic processes of various disciplines, not only for tissue engineering such as plastic surgery but also for advanced apparel technology. However, early references on the characteristics of the skin are typically derived from anatomists or surgeons, because the orientation of the skin layer must be considered to reduce scars from surgical incisions during surgery.

Among previous research, Karl Langer reported a series of directions of maximum skin tension called “Langer's lines” (Langer, 1978). Langer's lines are the natural orientation of the collagen fibrils, which are the base lines for skin surgery (Elsner et al., 2002). When surgical incision lines are made across Langer's lines, the surgical operation results in a robust scar formation that pulls the wound further open by high tension (Bethke, 2005; Wong et al., 2010). Langer's lines tend to be parallel; however, they form discrete groups that intersect each other. Later, Willhelmi et al. (1999) reported that Langer's lines change with body posture. He suggested alternative guidelines for facial incisions called “Borges' relaxed skin tension lines (RSTLs),” and alternatives for body incisions called “Kraissl's wrinkle lines.” However, RSTLs also differ depending on the development of muscle, body posture, and body region. Furthermore, RSTLs are influenced by age, particularly in very young and old groups (Nizet et al., 2001; Hermanns-Lê et al., 2001).

Alternatively, Iberall (1970) observed directions of minimum skin extension during joint movement and illustrated lines of non-extension (LoNE) by connecting lines of minimum skin extension. He suggested the grid structure of LoNE for the space suit that was later further developed and digitalized by Bethke (2005). Bethke utilized a motion analyzer to trace the movement of sensors on the leg. Recently, Wessendorf and Newman (2012) further developed LoNE by adding the capability to track the direction of LoNE, minimum extension, and minimum compression during a squatting motion. However, due to the difficulty of tracking the reflective sensors, their strain field analysis did not include the highly extensible region of the posterior thigh near the hip.

Using 3D scanned data, Seo et al. (2013) estimated dynamic skin tension lines (DSTL) on part of the leg. They locally analyzed skin deformation and numerically computed the maximum tension directions by tracking the points drawn on the skin. Previous studies with DSTL demonstrated the nature of skin extension theoretically. However, they are not practical enough to adopt in the development of functional compression pants, due to a lack of visualization. To the best of our knowledge, 3D visualization of the skin strain field has been limited to the human ankle joint (Marreiros, 2010) or the inner part of the leg (Lee et al., 2013). In addition, DSTL have not included grooved areas of joints, such as under the hip.

From the viewpoint of apparel technology, 3D skin deformation of the whole body or lower body has been studied recently (Kim et al., 2012a, 2012b; Lee et al., 2013; Jeong and Lee, 2012; Watkins, 2011). Choi and Ashdown (2011) provided a careful procedure for 3D measurement of the human body for clothing construction, verified the accuracy of 3D measurements, and analyzed the change of body surface length and lower body circumference in standing and active postures. Their observation was limited to vertical and horizontal surface measurements, which are used for traditional clothing construction. However, in the construction of functional sportswear a streamlined design is currently preferred, and design lines may be curved. Quantification of deformation along the various curvature directions on the skin surface would be helpful for functional design lines and their fabrication using seams.

In fact, covering a large skin surface of heterogeneous extension with continuous textile materials without any stress is almost impossible. The deformation of a textile fabric may involve a non-uniform strain distribution in a complex deformation surface (Shanahan et al., 1978; Bondar et al., 1999). The heterogeneous and anisotropic nature of the skin is far more complex, due to localized wrinkles around joints as well as its intrinsic extensible properties. To overcome the different extensible properties between textile materials and skin, functional garment patterns are usually separated into panels. Panels of different strain are joined with stitches called “seams”.

One of the key variables affecting the performance and comfort of compression suits is the location and quality of the seams that join and assemble the pattern panels together. Although new technologies, such as welding and bonding, are available for seams in addition to conventional stitches (Choi et al., 2014), the unfavorable properties of seams such as weight, bulkiness, and impermeability may trigger disparate contact sensations on the skin during movement. Therefore, the location, flexibility, and elasticity of the seams should be carefully adjusted to avoid interference with the nature of the human body, including the stretch direction of the skin. With this purpose, several researchers have investigated ergonomic panel sectioning to identify seam locations.

For example, Jeong and Hong (2008) divided the textile materials based on the shape of muscles, with each panel allocated to a different percent of pattern reduction rate, resulting in high-performance cycle wear. Jeong and Lee (2012) further analyzed the 2D pattern considering 3D human body deformation. Wang and Tang (2010) addressed the problem of generating planar patterns from 3D body surface and computed strain generated by sewing the pieces of various panels and wrapping them onto the body. They proposed an algorithm to calculate the distortion and optimized the division of 2D patterns for compression garment.


                     Kim and Hong (2012) and Choi and Hong (2011) noted dermatomes as locations of seams. Dermatome is an area of the skin supplied by nerves from a single spinal root. Kim and Hong (2012) investigated the extension properties along the dermatomes of the lower body of a subject, and they found an interesting location of a LoNE near dermatome L4, among several dermatomes. The LoNE near L4 was used as a seam line in their work, and wearers positively evaluated the compression suits that adopted the LoNE near L4 as a seam. Further investigations of extensible properties along the dermatomes with several subjects are necessary. If seams are inevitable in the fabrication of functional sportswear, the question arises whether a seam located at the boundary of a spinal nerve bundle would be in a better position to avoid an unpleasant contact sensation because of its location in between nerve bundles. Knowledge of the extension properties along the dermatome is also required. If a seam did not interfere with the extensible direction of skin, then the wear sensation would be better.

Practical observation of LoNE has not been performed extensively. Because LoNE for pants vary when the area of interest contains wrinkles and joints under the hip and knee, detailed guide lines are necessary. To date, the rationale for an optimal pattern of panel separation by seams in various directions has not been fully provided. This should be based on the skin deformation analysis of the lower body covering different lengths from waist to ankle, depending on the length of the pants. Recognizing that the extensibility of the skin is localized along the leg, skin deformation mapping should be separately provided or visualized depending on length of pants. The requirement for visualization of the 3D data over time in two dimensions has also been mentioned by Wessendorf and Newman (2012).

Therefore, to provide a practical guide line for LoNE that depends on the length of the pants, the LoNE of the lower body were investigated extensively. In addition, local deformation along the part in the vertical and horizontal directions, as well as area mapping of deformation during knee flexion, was visualized for the attachment of wearing devices over the lower body.

3D body data were obtained for six males in their 20s for the analysis of skin deformation. RSTLs are different depending on the development of muscle, body posture, and body region, and the six subjects ranged from normal to overweight persons as shown in Table 1
                        , with mean value and standard deviation. The subjects were informed of the experimental procedures, agreed to participate, and signed a consent form.

Reference points were marked on the body surface at intervals of approximately 30 mm and scanned by a whole body scanner (Cyberware, Inc., USA), as shown in Fig. 1(a). Because the body dimensions were different, the number of points drawn 30 mm apart on the skin was also different. The scanner collected high-speed 3D measurements every 2 mm from head to toe in color. Postures included standing upright and knee joint flexion of 0°, 30°, 45°, and 60°, adjusted by goniometer. Knee joint flexion was chosen because knee bending is a major determinant of the ability to climb, squat, and kneel, in addition to walking, running, and loping (Bethke, 2005).

Direct marking on the skin is necessary to trace skin deformation at one location during movement of the lower body. Although the observation of LoNE based on direct marking of the original and flexed postures is accurate for a specific person, prediction of LoNE for a new subject is not accurate enough when an average location of reference marks is used. Therefore, in this study we used both the directly marked points on the body and newly drawn guide points on the 3D images. New guide points were generated by dividing the radial curve, producing an equal interval for each person, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Likewise, the longitudinal curve from waist to ankle was divided by 30. Then, new guide points were connected longitudinally and horizontally using Geomagic Design X 2014 (3D Systems, Korea) as in Fig. 2
                        . Geomagic Design X is a reverse-engineering software that combines history-based CAD with 3D scan data processing.

Measurement guide lines on the knee-flexed position for skin deformation were produced from the nearby identical reference points directly drawn on the skin of the subject, so as to keep identical marked positions as much as possible. For the measurement of the curved skin deformation, a dermatome line was initially drawn on the body, and later revised considering both the direct reference marks and the new dots derived by ratio division of the waist, hip, thigh, knee, calf, and ankle by 50, 50, 21, 17, 17, and 17, respectively. Referencing both the directly drawn dots and the newly selected guide dots based on the ratio division, we can obtain the average position of LoNE between dermatomes, then later, apply them to a new subject's lower body, regardless of the actual body size.

The length of the connected lines was measured for each posture. The longitudinal direction included lines that are used in clothing construction, such as the front centerline, side line, and inside seam of the lower body. Major horizontal lines are the waist, hip, mid-thigh, knee, calf, and ankle circumference. The curved directions were based on an anatomical dermatome mapping (Greenberg, 2003). In addition, to observe the unit area change during knee flexion, the longitudinal and horizontal lines were crossed to form a lattice.

To observe skin deformation that is relevant for various lengths of functional pants, we divided the total length of lower body from the waist to ankle into four sections, which were named Rate 10, 7, 5, and 3, as shown in Fig. 3
                        . Rate 10 indicates the whole length, Rate 7 ends at one quarter the length from knee to ankle, Rate 5 reaches to three quarters the length from hip to knee, and Rate 3 is the shortest line and ends halfway from hip to knee.

The length change of each connected line was calculated during knee joint flexion using Eq. (1), and the positive and negative differences for the six subjects were averaged. The location of each LoNE was expected to be at the zero point calculated by Eq. (1). A tolerance zone was set at ±0.5 cm from the zero point. The exact position of a LoNE on the lower body was found by interpolation between the locations of two neighboring curves of different signs using each distance from the zero point.
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    Skin
                                    
                                    length
                                    
                                    variation
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                    length
                                    
                                    of
                                    
                                    curves
                                    
                                    in
                                    
                                    knee
                                    
                                    joint
                                    
                                    flexion
                                    
                                    of
                                    
                                    60
                                    
                                    degree
                                    
                                    (
                                    B
                                    )
                                    –
                                    length
                                    
                                    of
                                    
                                    curves
                                    
                                    in
                                    
                                    standing
                                    
                                    posture
                                    
                                    (
                                    A
                                    )
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

Lines of maximum stretch (LoMS) were selected where the skin length deformation was maximum according to Eq. (1). LoMS provides the boundaries of pattern blocks and positions that should be avoided for seams.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Fig. 4
                         illustrates longitudinal deformation of the skin during knee flexion. The numbering goes from Curve 1, which is the midpoint of medial thickness, to Curve 14. Skin deformation is visualized along the 14 curves covering the full length from waist to ankle, i.e., Rate 10. A color code was created to represent the sign of the skin deformation. The yellow dotted lines in Fig. 4 are LoNE during knee joint flexion in each of the different views of the lower body. Lines of positive extension during knee flexion are depicted as reddish color, and appear on the posterior of the body. The lines that must be avoided for seams, LoMS, are presented as bright red; Fig. 5(b) shows that the LoMS is near Curve 13. Negative deformation that occurs during knee bending is indicated by blue on the lateral and frontal area.

Because of the variety in physique, each subject has a somewhat different value of skin deformation. However, the tendency of the sign change was similar, as shown in Fig. 5(a). The average skin deformation of the six subjects is presented in Fig. 5(b). For 60° knee joint flexion, the deformation has a negative value for Curves 1–10, except for Curve 2, and thereafter it is positive up to Curve 13 before decreasing again. LoNE were found near Curves 2 and 10 for full-length pants (Rate 10).

The result of medial LoNE in the full-length case (Rate 10) indicates that the appropriate position of the inseam is not at half the medial thickness, but instead at Curve 2 and between Curve 13 and 14. Similarly, the lateral LoNE of Curve 10 was not at half the lateral thickness. A LoMS was located at the back (Curve 13), where the skin fold is most apparent.

As we changed the length of the ROI (range of interest) from Rate 10 to the shorter Rate 7, the location of the lateral LoNE moves anterior, close to Curve 9. Otherwise, the mode of skin deformation for Rate 10 was almost the same as that for Rate 7, as can be seen from Figs. 6 and 7
                        
                        .

In the case of Rate 5, where the knee is not included, the variation of skin deformation among subjects decreased, as shown in Figs. 8 and 9
                        
                        . The location of the medial LoNE was positioned at Curves 1 and 2. The lateral LoNE moved to Curve 8. On the posterior of Rate 5, the effect of unfolded skin under the hip was more apparent, compared to the longer ROI of Rates 10 and 7, resulting in a high extension value near Curve 13. The skin deformation of Rate 3 was similar to that of Rate 5, as illustrated in Figs. 10 and 11
                        
                        .

The inclusion of the knee in the ROI varies the total longitudinal deformation of the skin, and consequently changes the location of the LoNE and LoMS. This fact indicates that, for functional purposes, a seam or other ornamental treatment that changes the extensibility of the materials should be located differently in pants of different lengths.

Horizontal skin deformation was observed during knee bending. Curve 1 is at the waistline, and the curves are numbered sequentially down to the ankle circumference, as displayed in Fig. 12
                        
                        . The circumferential length during bending was almost unchanged in the upper Curves 1–7. From Curve 8, the circumference increased around the hip (8 and 9), mid-thigh (11–13), and from knee to calf (19–26). Curve 10 crosses a folding zone at the base of the leg where there is high uncertainty. Therefore, during knee flexion of 60°, we may designate a zone of LoNE as the waist, hip, mid-thigh and ankle area (in yellow dotted lines), and a zone of expansion from Curve 8 to 13, and from Curve 19 to 26 (in red). The tendency of skin deformation around circumference of lower body during 60° knee joint flexion was illustrated as in Fig. 13.

We now investigate whether the same trend would exist if we were to divide the body by the frontal plane, so that the scanned image is separated into anterior and posterior by the mid-plane of the leg. This would be useful for the placement of a local wearing device.

Interestingly, for the separated anterior and posterior regions, the LoNE shifted, as shown in Fig. 14
                        . Instead of an extensible zone at the lower leg (Fig. 12), a zone of LoNE was detected, depicted in yellow curves. In addition, the extensible properties of the skin in the anterior and posterior of lower body showed alternate directions of skin deformation, especially between Curve 7 and 22 (Figs. 15 and 16
                        
                        ). The extension and contraction of the anterior and posterior parts of the lower body crossed each other in the group of horizontal lines, as shown in Fig. 14.

By using LoNE in Fig. 14, the longitudinal skin deformation was depicted concurrently for each block of different extensible properties. When the criterion for a LoNE was set at ±0.5 cm deformation, a larger area of LoNE was found (Fig. 17(a)). To be stricter for the attachment of devices, when the criterion for a LoNE was set at exactly zero skin deformation (Fig. 17(b)), most of the LoNE disappeared.

Because sophisticated curve cutting is widespread in the production of functional compression suits, skin deformation in curved directions was also investigated using the six subjects (Fig. 18
                        ). Among the numerous curves we can create using landmarks we chose the dermatome, as dermatome mapping is commonly used in neurology for the localization of sensory phenomena in patients with neurological disorders (Greenberg, 2003). Furthermore, in the previous paper dermatome L4 was found to be a LoNE in one subject (Kim and Hong, 2012), stimulating further investigation. Curves start on the back centerline and pass to the legs of the body, based on dermatomes L2, L3, L4, L5, S1, and S2. Observations were conducted from full length (Rate 10) to short length (Rate 3), as previously discussed. A LoNE was found between L3 and L4, and the exact position was interpolated as illustrated in Fig. 19
                        . The LoNE is closer to L4, which agrees with previous research (Kim and Hong, 2012).

Most parts of the upper thigh were extended in the circumferential direction as shown in Fig. 12. However, we found a LoNE near L4 in a curved manner, as shown in Figs. 19 and 20
                        .

Above the LoNE the skin contracts during knee bending, whereas below the LoNE the skin extends, with a maximum on Curve 4 (L5), which crosses the knee. The length of Curves 5 (S1) and 6 (S2), which pass the deep fold below the hip, increased slightly during knee bending (Fig. 20). Because of the deep fold and the development of the hip curve, the variation of Curves 5 and 6 is far larger than that of the other curves.

For the shorter ROI (Rate 7), the trend of skin deformation was similar, except that the LoNE for Rate 7 moved slightly further down from Curve 3 (L4) than that of Rate 10 (Figs. 21 and 22
                        
                        ).

As the length of the ROI decreased in Rate 5, the LoNE was located closer to Curve 3 (L4). The most extensible curve, LoMS, was Curve 6 (S2), which crosses the deepest folding compared with the other posterior curves (Figs. 23 and 24
                        
                        ).

For Rate 3, the LoNE moved further posterior, passing Curve 3 (L4) and slightly toward Curve 4 (L5). The other trends were similar to those for Rate 5 (Figs. 25 and 26
                        
                        ).

Skin deformation of each local area during knee bending was investigated because it gives a wider range of applications than discrete lines. A total of 384 surfaces of 3 × 3 cm were created for standing and knee-bending postures. Each corresponding surface area for two postures was compared for the six subjects, and the mean deformation value for each surface is illustrated in Fig. 27
                        . Surface areas that increased are colored red, with larger deformed areas being redder, whereas the dark blue areas contracted a large amount.

Non-extension areas found in this work are indicated by yellow or pale colors. It is not desirable to use the dark red areas (maximum extension areas) for seams in functional clothing construction.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, it is postulated that information based on skin layer deformation is necessary for the design of next-to-skin functional pants, especially for the position of seam lines, which is a critical factor in contact sensation. Therefore, we measured the skin length deformation during knee joint flexion in various longitudinal, horizontal, and curved directions using 3D technology. This study is distinct from previous research in that while the skin deformation was observed in vivo by tracing identical landmarks to maintain the original points of measurement before and after flexion motion, ratio division was applied to create new guide lines around the circumference for investigation of the deformation. The amount of skin deformation was slightly different for each of the six subjects (who varied from normal to overweight), but the basic tendency of the boundary between extension and contraction of skin surface was very much within the same region. To generalize, the average value of deformation based on ratio division was used to find representative LoNE and LoMS.

The observation of skin deformation in this research was not limited to local changes of a conventional interested region, but expanded to express holistic changes based on changing ROIs. The dependency of skin deformation on the ROI was apparent, because the compensation of skin deformation passing through extension and contraction varies depending on the length of the pants, especially depending on the inclusion of the knee joint. Skin deformation is greatly affected by the folds under the hip and knee, so that observation with and without those folds is important. However, these had not been investigated separately in previous research.

As found in the work of Wessendorf and Newman (2012), skin on the male's anterior surface of the knee is primarily in extension, and the posterior surface of the knee was primarily in compression during knee joint flexion. Further, for the attachment of wearing device of various size and end-use, investigation of the separate anterior/posterior as well as entire skin length deformation was provided in this study. Interestingly, the regions of extension and contraction of the anterior and posterior leg crossed each other, except for the lower leg.

The analysis of Seo et al. (2013) on skin strain by landmarks provided a lot of information on DSTL. Their results are useful for orthopedic devices such as knee or leg supporters. However, the experiments have been limited to local variation, excluding the waist and under the hip, which is not sufficient for the construction of pants. In addition, it is difficult to predict LoNE from many DSTL.

The findings obtained in this study demonstrated that skin surface was composed of regions of extension and contraction, together with boundaries between those regions called LoNE. This heterogeneous blocking in the continuum structure of the skin layer has unique biomechanical properties when compared to textile materials. The details of the biomechanical properties of each region are another important subject of interest, which is beyond the scope of this research. In this study, a simple solution that copes with the differences between the heterogeneous nature of skin and textile materials is to divide textile materials into pieces of mixed types, and to join those pieces with a seam structure that uses LoNE.

The LoNE found in this research are different from Langer's lines, which are the natural orientation of collagen fibrils in the derma, whereas the LoNE in this study are based on quantitative data of human skin deformation using scanned 3D data of the actual body. The results of this study are differentiated from the study of Wessendorf and Newman (2012), where motion-capture data of one female was analyzed and deformation above the thigh was not included. The advantage of the LoNE found in this study is that they are applicable in the production of functional compression pants of different lengths, by providing visualized skin deformation mapping in various aspects. In particular, LoNE that adopt the curves of dermatomes of the lower body of six males are a unique outcome that is in close agreement with the LoNE near dermatome L4 in previous research (Kim and Hong, 2012).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In view of clothing technology, the properties of skin extension and contraction have mainly been observed in only the lengthwise and widthwise directions. In addition to the conventional length change, this study provides curvilinear skin deformation as well as the unit area changes of the skin surface. These are then used in the determination of LoNE for the position of seams of various lengths of compression pants. Although the BMI range of the six male subjects varies from normal to overweight, the locations of the LoNE were within the same region between two curves of extension and compression, so that the final LoNE are provided in ratio bases for general use. A shift in LoNE positions was observed when the length of the pants varies from full to short length, although the overall lengthwise trend was similar. LoNE in blocks of lower body were also provided for local wearing devices such as orthopedic devices. Although numerous curvature directions could be observed, lines of lower body dermatomes were used as the first trial for finding curvilinear LoNE in this study. Practical visualization of LoNE along with the skin deformation of area units was provided as guidelines for the position of various pant seams or the design of other wearing devices for further use. LoMS are lines of maximum stretch, which are not suitable as locations of seam lines.

This study was limited to the deformation of the outermost skin layer during knee joint flexion, and detailed further research on LoNE with different body postures is required to understand the holistic view of skin deformation. The adequacy of the seams along the LoNE should be investigated further in an actual wear test along with the anatomy and biomechanics of joints, soft tissue, and muscle.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (NRF-2010-0014897).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

