@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Greater physical fitness is associated with better air ventilation efficiency in firefighters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Firefighters who performed the simulated work circuit (SWC) in less time ventilated less air at a given work intensity.


                        
                        
                           
                           The fastest firefighters on the SWC performed longer on the graded walking test.


                        
                        
                           
                           Firefighters with better peak oxygen consumption also performed better on the SWC.


                        
                        
                           
                           Firefighters who performed the SWC in less time had a greater oxygen extraction rate in the vastus lateralis muscle.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Firefighting

Work efficiency

Near infrared spectroscopy

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Firefighting is a hazardous task associated with a heavy workload where task duration may be limited by air cylinder capacity. Increased fitness may lead to better air ventilation efficiency and task duration at a given heavy work intensity. This study compared performance, air ventilation and skeletal muscle oxygen extraction during a maximal graded walking test (GWT), a 10 METS (metabolic equivalent) treadmill test (T10) and a simulated work circuit (SWC). Participants (n = 13) who performed the SWC in a shorter time had significantly lower air cylinder ventilation values on the T10 (r = −0.495), better peak oxygen consumption (r = −0.924) during the GWT and significantly greater skeletal muscle oxygen extraction during the SWC (HbDiff, r = 0.768). These results demonstrate that the fastest participants on the SWC had better air ventilation efficiency that could prolong interventions in difficult situations requiring air cylinder use.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Firefighting tasks in emergency conditions impose high physiological and psychological demands. Unlike many other professions, workload demands during interventions are unpredictable, making planning impossible, a situation that renders the job potentially hazardous. Generally, firefighters who possess good physical capacity will use different and possibly more economical techniques for a given task (von Heimburg et al., 2006). Thus, by maintaining an optimal fitness level, they could reduce the physiological demands of tasks which, in turn, could improve the safety of citizens, the firefighters themselves and their teammates. According to the United States Fire Administration (2011, 2012), 50 and 45 firefighters died in 2011 and 2012, respectively, from stress/overexertion, including 48 and 39 from heart attacks, the most frequent cause of death.

Several studies have demonstrated that firefighting tasks require high energy expenditure which, under certain conditions, approaches maximum individual physical capacity (Baker et al., 2000; Bos et al., 2004; Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992). Michaelides et al. (2011) pointed out that fitness represents a significant portion (60%) of the outcome score in an ability test of specific firefighting skills. It has been shown that various physical and physiological qualities are required to perform adequately during firefighting. Firefighting tasks are highly associated with muscle strength and endurance (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992; Harvey et al., 2008; Henderson et al., 2007; Michaelides et al., 2011; Rhea et al., 2004; Sheaff et al., 2010; Williford et al., 1999), aerobic (Perroni et al., 2010) and anaerobic metabolism (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992; Michaelides et al., 2011; Rhea et al., 2004; Sheaff et al., 2010; Williford et al., 1999). Moreover, wearing a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) on top of fire-protective clothing increases physical demands of the occupation (Baker et al., 2000; Dreger et al., 2006; Eves et al., 2005; Louhevaara et al., 1995). Extreme heat from fire situations also makes firefighting more physically demanding (Bruce-Low et al., 2007; Petruzzello et al., 2009; Smith et al., 1997). Finally, it has also been shown that firefighting entails considerable psychological stress, with important physiological side effects, especially cardiovasculer ones (Guidotti, 1995).

As can be expected, physical fitness is important to perform duties and meet the physical demands of firefighting, particularly when an air cylinder is used. The firefighter's objective is primarily to perform as efficiently and economically as possible while ventilating the least amount of air at a given work intensity, because the autonomy time of intervention in fires frequently depends on air cylinder capacity. It is likely that increased physical fitness can lead to better air ventilation efficiency and, hence, to longer autonomy, somewhat reducing the physiological pressure imposed on firefighters and possibly allowing them to complete critical tasks.

The purpose of this study was 3-fold: 1- Verify if the fastest firefighters during a simulated work circuit (SWC) ventilate less air at given workload intensities, 2- Determine whether the fastest firefighters during an SWC perform better on a maximal graded walking test (GWT) up to exhaustion, and 3- Find central or peripheral physiological parameters, if any, which better correlate with performance during an SWC.

Thirteen male firefighters took part in this study (age 28.4 ± 5.1 years; height 175.5 ± 4.5 cm; weight 84.4 ± 9.0 kg; peak oxygen uptake (VO2peak) 47.8 ± 5.1 mlO2 kg−1 min−1). Participants completed a physical activity readiness questionnaire that helped to identify the risk factor(s) of any health problem facing physical activity practice (Jamnik et al., 2007). Firefighters, found to be at moderate or high risk of cardiovascular, pulmonary or metabolic disease according to criteria of the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM), were excluded from the study (Thompson et al., 2010). Participants older than 44 years were excluded to meet ACSM criteria. Before presenting to the laboratory, they were asked not to practice any intense physical activity during the 48 h preceding each test. They were also asked to refrain from consuming tobacco and caffeine, at least 2 h before the tests and from, alcohol or drugs, at least 24 h before the tests. The study was approved by the UQTR Research Ethics Committee. Finally, all study subjects had already participated in simulated fire fit test in the gym during their training and/or hiring.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

All participants completed the following tests on 3 different days while wearing firefighting protective clothing, SCBA and air cylinder:
                           
                              1
                              The GWT for measuring different physiological parameters while connected to a metabolic system;

The 10 METS treadmill test (T10) designed to measure the time to ventilate air from the cylinder at 10 METS, the intensity needed to complete the fire fit test work simulation described by Deakin et al. (1996) within 8 min (Dreger and Petersen, 2007).

The SWC to measure the time needed to perform a test mimicking different firefighting tasks while wearing protective clothing and breathing with the SCBA. Participants performed the SWC as quickly as possible while respecting regulations of the test protocol.

The three tests were performed in their number order for logistical constraints. The height of each participant was measured before the first testing day, whereas weight and fat percentage (Tanita BF-350 Body Composition Analyzer, Tanita, Tokyo, Japan) were measured on each testing day. All 3 tests were administered in a laboratory or in a sports gym where the ambient temperature was maintained at 21 °C.

During each test, participants were dressed with firefighting bunker gear (Honeywell, Morristown, NJ, USA), leather (STC Marshall 22014, STC, Montréal, QC, Canada) or rubber firefighting boots (Acton FirePro, Québec, QC, Canada), work gloves (DragonFire, Chesterfield, VA, USA) and a hood (PGI Inc., Green Lake, WI, USA). In addition, they wore an SCBA (MSA Firehawk M7 4500, MSA, Cranberry, PA, USA) and an air cylinder (MSA Firehawk M7 4500) for all 3 tests, except for the GWT because oxygen consumption was measured with a mask. Participants also wore a helmet (Firedome series, Bullard Cynthiana, KY, USA) and a mask (MSA Firehawk M7 4500) for the T10 and SWC. Mean total mass of the firefighting protective equipment was 22.5 ± 0.75 kg for the GWT and 25.1 ± 0.70 kg for the T10 and SWC.

Peak oxygen consumption (VO2peak) and different submaximal and maximal physiological parameters were measured during the GWT on a treadmill (Model 643, Quinton Instruments, Seattle, WA, USA). Walking speed (5 km/h) was the same during the test to avoid running. After 2 min of warm up at 0%, grade was increased by 2% at each bout of 2 min up to exhaustion.

This test measured air ventilation from the air cylinder at an intensity of 10 METS (35 mlO2 kg−1 min−1) on an inclined treadmill: incline percentage was determined by the interpolation of GWT data. T10 intensity was reported as average VO2 in work associated with completion of the fire fit test work simulation described by Deakin et al. (1996) at the specified performance standard of 8 min (Dreger and Petersen, 2007). More specifically, each participant had to walk on the treadmill up to a 3000 psi air pressure decrease from the air cylinder. Firefighters who were unable to expend 3000 psi had to walk to exhaustion.

The SWC closely simulates the variety and workload demands of firefighting. The circuit was similar to the fire fit test work simulation described by Deakin et al. (1996). More specifically, the test was composed of 10 different tasks executed one after the other without interruption. Between each of them, participants walked towards the next station according to predetermined distances. They had to complete the circuit in the shortest possible time without running. The test was performed on a hardwood floor.

1. Hose-carrying: participants carried a bucket equivalent to a section of rolled 65-mm hose weighing 16.5 kg in one hand for a distance of 15.24 m, and came back the same distance, with the bucket in the other hand. They then walked 15.24 m to the next event (W1).

2. Ladder-raising: participants had to pick up a ladder (13.6 kg) from the floor, carry it for a distance of 15.24 m and raise it against a brick wall. They then walked 15.24 m to the next event (W2).

3. Hose-dragging: participants dragged 2 iron plates, each weighing 20 kg and placed on a 38-mm coiled hose section of 30.48 m, for a distance of 26.00 m. They then walked 15.24 m to the next event (W3).

4. Ladder-climbing 1: participants climbed 10 rungs (3.45 m) of a 7.2-m ladder, up and down 3 times. They then walked 30.48 m to the next event (W4).

5. High-volume hose-pulling: while standing in a stationary position, participants pulled on a rope attached to a bundle of hoses (a 30.48-m length of 100-mm hose and a 15.24-m length of 65-mm hose) for a distance of 15.24 m, with hand-over-hand movement. They then walked 15.24 m, repeated the pull, and walked 15.24 m to the next event (W5).

6. Forcible entry: with a 4.5 kg steel-head sledge hammer, participants struck sideways on a rubber truck tire filled with sandbags (total weight 102.5 kg), moving it to a distance of 30.5 cm on a 76.2-cm high table. They then walked 15.24 m to the next event (W6).

7. Victim rescue: walking backwards, participants dragged a 68.2-kg dummy (‘Rescue Randy’) over a total distance of 30.48 m (15.24 one way, touched a line, and returned 15.24 m) with a strap under the armpits. They then walked 15.24 m to the next event (W7).

8. Ladder-climbing 2: participants climbed 10 rungs (3.45 m) of a 7.2-m ladder, up and down twice. They then walked 30.48 m to the next event (W8).

9. Ladder-lowering: participants lowered the ladder from where it was previously erected, and carried it for a distance of 15.24 m (W9).

10. Spreader tool-carrying: participants picked up and carried a 18.2-kg spreader tool in each hand for a total distance of 30.48 m (15.24 m one way, touched a line, and returned 15.24 m).

On their first visit to the laboratory, participants were tested to measure their VO2peak. Ventilation and pulmonary gas exchange (VO2: oxygen consumption, VE: pulmonary ventilation, VE/VO2: ventilatory equivalent ratio for oxygen, RER: respiratory exchange ratio) were measured with a gas analyzer (Moxus, AEI Technologies, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). Each participant wore a Hans Rudolph 2700 series body style saliva trap 2-way NRBV mask (Hans Rudolph, Kansas City, MO, USA) and a head support for Rudolph series 2726 valves. Prior to the test, the device was calibrated according to the manufacturer's instructions with 4 different gases of known concentrations. Flow volume was calibrated with a 3.00-L Hans Rudolph 5530 series calibration syringe. In all tests, participants wore a telemetry system (RS800CX, Polar, Kempele, Finland) which continuously measured and recorded heart rate (HR) at 5-s intervals during exercise. Data were analyzed by Polar ProTrainer 5 software. Participants also wore a portable near infrared spectrophotometer (Portamon, Artinis Medical Systems BV, Utrecht, the Netherlands) in all tests to measure oxyhemoglobin (HbO2), deoxyhemoglobin (HHb), total hemoglobin (THb), difference of hemoglobin concentration (HbDiff = HbO2 – HHb), and tissue saturation index (TSI%). Furthermore, lactatemia was measured with a lactate analyzer (Lactate Pro LT-1710, Arkray Inc., Kyoto, Japan) during and after exercise.

Muscle oxygenation was measured in the vastus lateralis muscle by NIRS since the lower limbs are always involved during several firefighting tasks. NIRS is a non-invasive method that monitors local muscle oxygenation/deoxygenation. It is based on relative tissue transparency to light in the near-infrared region and oxygen-dependent absorption changes of hemoglobin and myoglobin. The parameters commonly measured by NIRS were HbO2, HHb, THb, HbDiff and TSI%. These signals were zeroed in during resting baseline and reported as relative differences in concentration during exercise. This was done while participants were seated in a chair with feet on the ground and legs in a relaxed position approximately at a right angle. A setting time of 120 s was allowed on each test for signal stabilization before the baseline of 60 s was recorded. The NIRS was installed on the vastus lateralis muscle at approximately 40% of the distance from the patella to the greater trochanter.

All data are presented as means ± SD. Pearson correlations were determined for specific parameters. Kendall's rank correlation coefficients (τ, “tau”) were computed between levels of air pressure decrease, with Pearson coefficients linking performance time and time to ventilate up to a corresponding psi decrease. Kendall's rank correlation coefficients were also computed between treadmill grades on the GWT with various Pearson coefficients linking performance time and some physiological parameters. Statistical significance at P < 0.05 was accepted.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Table 1
                         lists the descriptive physiological characteristics and anthropometric measurements of the 13 study participants.

Firefighters who completed the SWC in less time also performed longer until exhaustion on the GWT (r = −0.789; P < 0.001). Indeed, participants who had higher VO2peak (mlO2 kg−1 min−1) completed the SWC in less time (r = −0.924; P < 0.001).

Only 9 participants were able to ventilate air up to a 3000 psi air pressure decrease from the air cylinder during T10. Therefore, for comparison, we measured the time to ventilate air at the highest common value (n = 13) of air pressure decrease, which was 1850 psi. Firefighters who completed the SWC in less time were slower to reach 1850 psi during the T10 (r = −0.495; P < 0.05) and those who had greater VO2peak were also slower to reach 1850 psi during the T10 (r = 0.635; P < 0.01). Table 2
                         reports significant correlations between SWC completion time, VO2peak and different times to ventilate air to different pressure decreases on the T10. Moreover, participants who completed the SWC in less time ventilated less air from the air cylinder in the first 8 min during the T10 (r = 0.489; P < 0.05). There was also an inverse correlation between VO2peak and the quantity of ventilated air from the air cylinder in the first 8 min during the T10 (r = −0.579; P < 0.05). Weight was also strongly correlated with time to ventilate air up to 1850 psi (r = −0.715, P < 0.01).


                        Table 3
                         reports correlations between SWC completion time and selected physiological variables in different grades of the GWT. Table 4
                         displays correlations between VO2peak and selected physiological variables in different grades of the GWT. No significant correlations were observed between SWC completion time and muscle oxygenation parameters (HbO2, HHb, THb, HbDiff and TSI%) or between VO2peak and muscle oxygenation parameters during different grades of the GWT. Finally, during the SWC, participants reached mean HR of 91.4% and maximal HR of 94.4%.


                        Fig. 1
                         displays the values of selected physiological variables of each SWC task. SWC completion time and VO2peak were correlated with skeletal muscle oxygenation (Tables 5 and 6
                        
                        ).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The principal original finding of this investigation was that firefighters who completed the SWC in less time took significantly more time to ventilate air from their cylinder up to air pressure decreases of 1,850, 2500 and 3000 psi from their air cylinder. Moreover, this correlation kept strengthening as effort duration increased, strongly indicating that the longer a firefighting intervention in the field will last, the more physical fitness will be an asset for performance, through its mediating effect on air ventilation efficiency. Moreover, we observed that faster performance on the SWC was also correlated with longer time until exhaustion during the GWT and better relative VO2peak. Taken together, greater aerobic fitness was associated with greater air ventilation efficiency of faster firefighters on the SWC. According to Holmér and Gavhed (2007), cardiovascular strain is lower in individuals with higher maximal aerobic capacity for a given submaximal intensity. Therefore, we can hypothesize that air cylinder supply duration for a given workload will be greater for the fit test firefighters during real interventions. This could be very important when performing critical tasks.

We also examined physiological changes during submaximal workloads on the GWT (Tables 3 and 4). Systemic physiological parameters were positively correlated with firefighters' performance and VO2peak. Consistent with our expectations, participants who completed the SWC more rapidly and reached a higher VO2peak had lower VE, VE/VO2, and RER values during submaximal workload on the GWT. First, if VE was lower for a given grade during the GWT, we surmised that air ventilation from an air cylinder would also have been lower. Second, lower VE/VO2 could be beneficial for firefighters because, for a given quantity of oxygen consumed, less air ventilation would be needed, conserving air in the cylinder. Martin et al. (1979) found that non-athletes had greater exercise VE/VO2 and greater respiratory responses to O2 compared to endurance athletes at equal relative workloads. This also shows that greater aerobic physical fitness leads to better air ventilation efficiency from the air cylinder for a given work intensity and for a comparable oxygen demand. Also, firefighters who completed the SWC in less time demonstrated lower RER during the GWT, suggesting that anaerobic contribution to energy release was lower. Goedecke et al. (2000) found that, during different exercise intensities at 25–50–70% of peak power output, circulating plasma lactate concentration was significantly correlated with RER, indicating that anaerobic contribution was lower. This, in turn, suggests that participants who completed the SWC more rapidly and had a better VO2peak had lower plasma lactate concentration values for some grades during the GWT. Thus, for a given intensity, energy release from the anaerobic process was lower. Moreover, we presume that fatigue was lessened and exhaustion delayed. Finally, Kendall's rank correlation coefficients (Tables 3 and 4) point to the fact that the higher the submaximal intensity, the higher the significance of correlation between measured parameters (RER, VE/VO2, VE, %HRmax).

This study showed that higher fitness level is a strong factor helping to ventilate less air from the air cylinder. Also, heavier body weight was associated with less air ventilation efficiency since, in that case, air pressure decreased more rapidly during the T10. This is in accordance with Cotes (1969) who found that oxygen uptake and ventilation are linear functions of body weight in normal males during submaximal exercise. Conversely, despite the fact that body weight was positively correlated with air ventilation, we still observed some positive correlation between VO2peak and time to ventilate air from the air cylinder during the T10. Actually, these finding suggest that firefighters with greater body weight and better physical fitness are more efficient in air ventilation than smaller, less fit firefighters. The partial correlation coefficient was r = 0.539 (P < 0.05) between VO2peak and time to ventilate 1850 psi controlling for participant weight.

In this study, firefighters' performance on the SWC and VO2peak value achieved on the GWT were correlated with several skeletal muscle oxygenation variables. The rate of decline in muscle oxygenation during the SWC was significantly correlated with SWC completion time (Table 5): firefighters who completed the SWC in less time showed greater O2 extraction in the vastus lateralis muscle, indicating that participants with greater systemic oxygen uptake during the SWC were the fastest. Kawaguchi et al. (2001) reported that the kinetics of peripheral muscle oxygenation may reflect systemic oxygen uptake. Actually, many studies also established that vastus lateralis muscle oxygenation was correlated with whole body O2 consumption (Bailey et al., 2009; Bhambhani et al., 1998; Demarie et al., 2001; Hiroyuki et al., 2002; Im et al., 2001; Miura et al., 2000). Localized muscular factors, such as better capillarization, higher oxidative enzyme activity and mitochondrial density, may have contributed to this higher O2 extraction/utilization. Finally, participants with higher VO2peak extracted/utilized more oxygen in the vastus lateralis during the SWC (Table 6). Bae et al. (2000) reported a correlation between VO2max and decline in muscle oxygenation during intermittent bouts of exercise (10-s work: 20-s recovery) at maximal power output over 15 min. This correlation suggests that better aerobic fitness enhances oxygen extraction in the vastus lateralis muscle during exercise where the aerobic process of energy production is solicited.

Moreover, ladder-climbing (Tasks 4 and 8 in Fig. 1) and victim-dragging (Task 7 in Fig. 1) during the SWC generated greater physiological stress, as shown by higher HR and muscle deoxygenation in the vastus lateralis muscle. Firefighters reached 94.1% of their maximal HR during ladder-climbing and victim-dragging. Higher HR reflected greater central physiological demands during these tasks. It is also important to note that psychological demands can influence heart rate via a general sympathetic arousal. Authors have shown that firefighters' heart rate increases rapidly and remains elevated while moving in the truck in response to a call out (Barnard and Duncan, 1975; Kuorinka and Korhonen, 1981). However, in our study, participants probably didn't feel the same psychological stress as in a real fire situation. Moreover, the hot temperature in a real fire induces by itself a significant increase in heart rate (Bruce-Low et al., 2007), whereas, in our study, firefighters performed all tests at a temperature of 21 °C. In terms of muscle oxygenation, Miura et al. (2000) found that oxygenated hemoglobin/myoglobin concentration measured by NIRS in the vastus lateralis muscle reflected muscle activity and lactic acidosis, suggesting that ladder-climbing and victim-dragging may be the most demanding tasks for the lower limbs during the SWC.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

According to this study, the best performances on the SWC were associated with lower air ventilation at a given heavy work intensity. Increased air ventilation efficiency could allow firefighters with greater fitness to perform longer in difficult situations requiring an air cylinder. Furthermore, individuals with better SWC performance also achieve longer performances on the GWT. Better VO2peak and better oxygen extraction rate in the vastus lateralis skeletal muscle also correlated positively with better performance on the SWC.

This study strived to contribute to the physiological analysis of firefighting and to make up for a lack thereof in the scientific literature. To our knowledge, no study has evaluated air ventilation from the air cylinders of firefighters. This research should help to analyze the results of SWCs mimicking firefighting tasks. We now know that firefighters performing SWCs in less time ventilate less air from the cylinder at the same work intensity, which preserves more air in the tank. This could help prolong intervention time during fires and, therefore, make more time available to save a victim after positioning the hoses, the ladders and other instruments needed to control the fire. A periodic (e.g. annual) test would be an important practice to implement in every fire department for assessing the firefighters' fitness. Moreover, the intervention teams could partly be formed according to the fitness of firefighters. Finally, regardless of their physical condition, individuals of smaller size (body weight) ventilate less air from the air cylinder during different exercise intensities while wearing FPE. It thus suggests that every firefighter may not need the same amount of air and, by this very fact, may use an air cylinder of appropriate size for the same period of time during an intervention. Moreover, it is more difficult for an individual of smaller size (the cylinder is relatively heavier versus their body mass) to bear the weight of FPE. Louhevaara et al. (1995) observed that robust body size is an important individual characteristic predicting the smallest drop in maximal power output in demanding, dynamic work with FPE. Proportionate air cylinder size for each individual may facilitate the tasks of firefighters of smaller size, including the majority of women.

All authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors thank the Service de sécurité incendie de Shawinigan for study support, for test equipment and participant recruitment. They also grateful to the Service de la sécurité publique de Trois-Rivières (incendie) for providing the test equipment and facilitating participant recruitment. Finally, thanks are due to all volunteer study participants from these 2 fire departments.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

