@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Reductions in self-reported stress and anticipatory heart rate with the use of a semi-automated parallel parking system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Self-reported stress was significantly lower with assistive parking technology.


                        
                        
                           
                           Heart rate (HR) was on average 13 bpm lower during assisted parks vs. manual parks.


                        
                        
                           
                           Anticipatory stress, measured by HR, was significantly lower with the technology.


                        
                        
                           
                           Turn signal usage was significantly lower during the assistive technology trials.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Automated driving

Parking technology

Mental model

Age

Workload

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Drivers' reactions to a semi-autonomous technology for assisted parallel parking system were evaluated in a field experiment. A sample of 42 drivers balanced by gender and across three age groups (20–29, 40–49, 60–69) were given a comprehensive briefing, saw the technology demonstrated, practiced parallel parking 3 times each with and without the assistive technology, and then were assessed on an additional 3 parking events each with and without the technology. Anticipatory stress, as measured by heart rate, was significantly lower when drivers approached a parking space knowing that they would be using the assistive technology as opposed to manually parking. Self-reported stress levels following assisted parks were also lower. Thus, both subjective and objective data support the position that the assistive technology reduced stress levels in drivers who were given detailed training. It was observed that drivers decreased their use of turn signals when using the semi-autonomous technology, raising a caution concerning unintended lapses in safe driving behaviors that may occur when assistive technologies are used.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

While taking an automobile for a drive in the country or just around the community is sometimes seen as a source of escape from the pressures of daily life, seemingly simple acts such as parking a car along a busy city street or backing out of a crowded parking lot can also be significant sources of stress for many individuals. Not only does stress from such tasks, traffic and other factors impact arousal levels while driving (White and Rotton, 1998), it can also have enduring negative emotional effects that impact post-driving behavior as well (Hennessy, 2008; Van Rooy, 2006). Stress can arise from a variety of sources. One source is the amount of actual effort that has to go into carrying out a task. The greater the amount of physical effort or mental concentration that is required, the greater the total workload on the driver (Brookhuis and de Waard, 2001; Wickens and Hollands, 2000). Another source of stress is the level of uncertainty about one's capability to successfully carry out a task or maneuver and the associated anxiety around the risk of error or failure (Matthews, 2002). As noted by Hancock and Desmond (2001), while the terms stress and workload arise out of somewhat different traditions, there is a great deal of conceptual overlap in describing demands on the individual arising from both internal and external factors.

In a thought paper, Coughlin et al. (2011) proposed concepts and technologies for detecting heightened driver arousal and suggested approaches that offer the potential to bring an operator from an elevated stress level back to an optimal operational state (see also Byrne and Parasuraman, 1996). While some of the technologies envisioned for actively monitoring and encouraging a state change in the driver will likely take some time to be fully realized in production vehicles, there are advanced driver assistance systems being introduced now that are intended to promote wellbeing by reducing the amount of stress associated with particular tasks and maneuvers by employing autonomous or semi-autonomous technologies to supplement or replace basic human control (see Lindgren and Chen, 2006 and Cottrell and Barton, 2013 for reviews). Examples range from semi-autonomous technologies such as adaptive cruise control that automatically adjusts vehicle speed to maintain a safe headway distance from a lead vehicle to blind spot identification systems that provide operators with warning information on the presence of vehicles hidden from their field of view.

While part of the challenge of developing and implementing such systems is technical, equally important considerations include the behavioral aspects of use and acceptance. For example, to what extent is the general public willing and able to learn how to engage with new systems, appropriately trust such technologies, or actually use the systems in ways that produce the intended benefits? This may be particularly the case for older drivers for whom many of these technologies represent significant challenges to their mental models of how to operate a vehicle and who may be less trusting of new technologies per se. Braitman et al. (2010) note that several early reviews of driver assistance technologies found the systems were rated as annoying and drivers turned off the systems. Other work suggests that drivers tend to ignore information presented by such systems (Hurwitz et al., 2010) and adapt driving styles to compensate for the added security (Lindgren and Chen, 2006; Sagberg et al., 1997). Finally, a broad range of literature suggests that human capabilities are not optimally suited for overseeing highly autonomous systems (Sheridan, 1995). It is widely hypothesized that human centered automation (Billings, 1997) is the key to effective implementation of autonomous vehicle systems. Driver state detection systems are envisioned to take a major role in providing the connectivity between the driver, vehicle and operating environment.


                     Coughlin et al. (2011) and Mehler et al. (2009) have proposed that physiological measures can be used in assessing the relative demand placed on the driver by various comfort, safety systems and in-vehicle interfaces. As suggested in Coughlin et al. (2011), integrating these “assessment methodologies into the development process should help manufacturers select optimized designs with the least demand on the driver, resulting in greater user satisfaction, increased safety, and less stress” (p. 20).

This report details findings of an experiment undertaken to evaluate drivers' reactions to a semi-autonomous system for assisted parallel parking. Parallel parking represents a low-speed maneuvering challenge that most drivers confront on a frequent basis. While many drivers appear quite comfortable with this maneuver, others find it an added source of stress and some individuals will go out of their way to avoid parallel parking. If assistive technologies are able to reduce the stress associated with tasks such as parallel parking and backing out of crowed parking spaces, they not only offer the potential for reducing driver stress but may also increase the mobility of individuals who might otherwise restrict their driving to avoid such situations. This is a particular concern for maintaining the mobility of aging drivers. While new assistive technologies offer potential benefits in safety, mobility and other domains, drivers may be hesitant to try and trust new systems for which they lack a mental model and in which they are asked to give-up partial control to an automated system. This experiment was conceived as a “best case” scenario assessment in which a comprehensive orientation would be provided, followed by an evaluation of drivers' reactions to a semi-autonomous technology for assisted parallel parking.

An important aspect of the evaluation methodology employed was the collection of objective physiological data on the stress levels associated with using the technologies in addition to more traditional self-report ratings and evaluations. Self-report evaluations can be useful sources of information on individuals' perceptions and feelings about their interactions with technologies. At the same time, it is important to keep in mind that participants may be biased toward “helping” research by providing answers they think researchers are attempting to find (Orne, 1962). Depending on the context, this phenomenon can be considered as a form of response bias or social desirability bias. By monitoring participants' physiological arousal levels while engaged in the parking tasks with and without an assistive technology, data can be obtained that can be used to validate the extent to which self-report information represents a reliable evaluation of their experience. Heart rate was selected as a relatively unobtrusive measure that our group has found to be highly sensitive to incremental increases in cognitive demand in both driving simulation and on-road driving studies (Mehler et al., 2012; Mehler et al., 2009; Reimer and Mehler, 2011). Similarly, an early on-road driving study by Brookhuis et al., (1991) demonstrated that the demands of a task delivered over a cell phone resulted in an increase in heart rate. In a simulation experiment, de Waard, et al., (1999) found heart rate to be lower in an automated platooning condition than when participants served as platoon leaders. A later field study by Brookhuis and de Waard (2001) found heart rate elevations during heightened driving demands such as entering a traffic circle. Vivoli, et al., (1993) employed heart rate as a measure of stress during driving and found that the highest mean levels were during traffic jams and bad weather. Moreover, heart rate has frequently been used as an index of stress in the broader research literature (Forsman and Lindblad, 1983; Kudielka et al., 2004).

In summary, the primary goal of the study was to test whether drivers who were given a comprehensive introduction to a semi-autonomous assistive parallel parking technology under realistic field conditions would become comfortable enough with the system to derive subjective and objective benefit from the technology compared to manually parking. Furthermore, if participants experienced the technology, would this change their willingness to consider using the technology in the future?

@&#METHODS@&#

Participants were required to be active, experienced drivers, defined as driving 3 or more times a week and having held a valid driver's license for 3 + years. Additionally, participants needed to demonstrate a safe operating history by reporting a driving record free of accidents for the past year. They had to report being comfortable driving a full-sized sedan such as a Ford or Lincoln as part of the study and be willing to parallel park the test vehicle. The participant group was considered to be relatively healthy compared to an unscreened community sample based on self-report and specified health exclusion criteria including: a variety of major cardiac conditions, hospitalization in the past 6 months, neurological problems, taking medications that cause drowsiness or suggest safety concerns (e.g. anti-psychotic, anti-convulsant, anti-depressant, anti-anxiety). Participants were drawn from community volunteers in the greater Boston area who responded to online, print advertisements or referrals. The final analysis sample consisted of 42 subjects, half male and half female, equally distributed across three age groups (20s, 40s and 60s). The age range for the 20s group was 20–29 with a mean of 23.2 (SD 3.2), 41 to 48 for the 40s group with a mean of 45.1 (SD 2.3), and 60 to 68 for the 60s group with a mean of 65.4 (SD 2.4).

A 2010 Lincoln MKS equipped with the manufacturer's forward and reverse proximity sensing systems, rear view camera and Active Park Assist™ (APA) was employed as the test platform. The APA system partially automates the activities involved in parallel parking a vehicle. The system is activated by pressing a button low on the center console near the gear shift. This turns on a set of sensors that measure and identify a feasible parking space as the vehicle is slowly driven past a line of parked cars or other potential parking obstacles. When a feasible space is located, the system sounds a tone and displays the text “SPACE FOUND >> PULL FORWARD” as two lines in a two line message center located immediately below the speedometer in the center of the instrument cluster. The driver is expected to continue to drive forward until the vehicle has moved past the intended parking space sufficiently to support the maneuver to back-up and pull into the space. At this point the driver is prompted “SPACE FOUND >> STOP”, then prompted to remove their hands from the steering wheel and put the vehicle in reverse (i.e., “REMOVE HANDS >> PUT IN REVERSE”), followed by “BACK UP >> USE CAUTION”. At this point, the driver is to release pressure on the brake pedal so that the car can move back into the space. The driver continues to control the accelerator and brake pedal as needed (i.e. adjusting speed as the vehicle is moving in reverse) while the APA system controls movements of the steering wheel. When the rear proximity sensors detect that the vehicle is close to a vehicle parked behind (or other sizable object), the system prompts the user to place the gear shift into forward. Wheel movements are again controlled by the APA system as the driver uses the accelerator (and where needed, the brake) to move the vehicle forward. The procedure (shifting from forward to reverse) continues until the vehicle is parallel to the curb and positioned between the forward and rear vehicles. At this point, the system prompts the driver to place the gear shift in park and the APA system is automatically turned off. When both backing-up and pulling forward, the rear and forward proximity sensors will, respectively, sound warning “beeps” that increase in frequency as the vehicle approaches large stationary objects such as other vehicles located behind and ahead. In addition, the rear camera view is active in the center console display during backing maneuvers. The system remains active if a driver chooses to reverse direction prior to the APA systems prompt, thus providing users with a good deal of flexibility in deciding how close to approach surrounding vehicles. At any point during the parking procedure where the driver takes hold of the steering wheel, the system is overridden and the driver is left in full control of the vehicle. In situations where the automation fails, the vehicle can bump the curb, prohibiting further backing-up, and thus require user intervention.

The vehicle was instrumented with a customized data acquisition system for time synchronized recording of vehicle information from the controller area network (CAN) bus data link for accessing embedded vehicle telemetry and a MEDAC System/3 physiology monitoring instrument (NeuroDyne Medical Corp., Cambridge, MA). The data acquisition system included functionality for playing recorded audio through the vehicle sound system. At all times when a participant was driving, a research associate was seated in the rear of the vehicle. The research associate was responsible for ensuring: safe vehicle operation, that participants understood and followed instructions, recording telemetry was working properly and that the experiment proceeded according to a predefined script. The research associate used key presses at predefined points to trigger steps in the experiment. This ensured that instructions and parking tasks were presented under consistent conditions.

For EKG recordings, a modified lead II configuration was employed; the negative lead was placed just under the right clavicle (collar bone), the ground lead just under the left clavicle, and the positive lead on the left side over the lower rib. The skin was cleaned with isopropyl alcohol and standard pre-gelled silver/silver chloride disposable electrodes (Vermed A10005, 7% chloride wet gel) were applied.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Key components of the protocol consisted of: questionnaires before, during and following participants' experience with the APA technology, a briefing to introduce the concepts and operation of the technology before entering the vehicle, a research associate demonstration of selected technologies, a period of driving the vehicle to gain experience with the basic maneuvering characteristics and promote habituation to the novelty of driving the vehicle, a series of at least three each “practice” parallel parking trials with and without APA technology active followed by a series of three “scored” parks each with and without the APA technology active. During all parking maneuvers, the forward and reverse distance sensors and rear view camera were active and available to participants at their discretion.

The pre-experimental questionnaire was administered prior to a detailed briefing on the technology to capture background information on participants and their exposure, experience and expectations surrounding various technologies. A detailed briefing on the APA technology, forward and reverse sensing systems, and rear view camera technologies that were to be experienced in the evaluation was presented in the laboratory. The briefing was designed to ensure that participants were comfortable with the concepts behind the parking technologies and familiar with their basic operation. The briefing consisted of publically available short video clips prepared by the OEM explaining each technology. The videos were supplemented by pre-recorded narrative and pictures developed by the research group to reinforce key points from the manufacturer's promotional material and the vehicle owner's manual. Finally, participants were given portions of the vehicle owner's manual and encouraged to read the relevant sections describing the technologies.

Following the attachment of physiological recording sensors, participants were escorted to the test vehicle. While approaching the vehicle, the rear ultrasonic sensors and rear view camera were pointed out such that the participant clearly understood their location on the vehicle. The participant was initially seated in the passenger seat and a research associate provided a live demonstration of the operation of the three technologies as well as manual parallel parking of the vehicle. A second technology expectation questionnaire was then administered to capture the participants' reactions and expectations after having been extensively briefed on the technologies and seen an actual demonstration of the features. To ensure consistency between experimental sessions, the in-vehicle briefing material was primarily presented using audio recordings and supplemented by research associate comments and responses to questions only as needed.

Parking trials were carried out on a two lane urban street with one lane of travel in each direction (Hayward St. Cambridge, MA). Traffic flow was generally light to moderate. No experimental related traffic control was employed, so participants frequently needed to park with following traffic waiting or oncoming traffic passing as they would under normal driving conditions. Parks were undertaken between two inflatable vehicles (balloon cars) spaced at a distance of 24 feet and positioned nine inches from the curb. Other parking spots on the street were open for use by the public and were occupied at various times during the experiment. The experiment was conducted throughout the day during daylight hours, typically between 9:00 AM and 5:00 PM. As the test vehicle approached the designated parking location, the research associate pressed a key at a fixed point that placed a flag in the data file that was later used to mark the start of the analysis period.

An adaptation period of approximately 15 min of driving on local urban streets on a fixed route employing an extended series of turns was employed to develop familiarity with the basic maneuvering of the vehicle. As the participant returned to the parking location, they were provided with instructions indicating that they were to complete a series of practice parks. The instructions prompted them to either start parking with the APA technology or to park manually (half the sample was exposed first to an APA parking trial and half exposed first to a manual parking trial). Following this instruction, participants alternated parks between using APA and manually parking the vehicle. Following each park, participants were immediately asked “on a scale of 0–10 where 0 is not at all stressed and 10 is very stressed, how would you rate your stress level during the parking maneuver you just completed?”

Participants were then instructed to drive around the block and, depending upon what phase in the rotation they were in, approached the parking space and either parked manually or using the Active Park Assist feature. A short reminder indicating whether the upcoming park was to be completed manually or with APA was played just before they turned onto the street with the designated parking spot. During the practice period, participants were free to ask the research associate questions about the operation of the technology. At the completion of the training trials (six parks), participates were briefed that “Each trial will consist of driving around the block, returning to the parking spot, parking the car and placing the car in park.” During subsequent parks conversation between the participant and research associate was kept to a minimum. Participants were instructed to continue alternating parking with and without APA and asked to verbally rate their stress level following each park. During the course of the experiment, heart rate data and vehicle telemetry was continuously recorded. At the completion of the evaluation trials, a post-experimental questionnaire was administered.

All participants were exposed to a minimum of twelve parallel parking maneuvers, alternating between trials where the APA technology was active and trials where they engaged in standard manual parking maneuvers. The initial trials were designated as training exposure and the final six (three with technology and three without) were used for assessment purposes. Heart rate data was examined for three time intervals. The first interval (before) began when the test vehicle was approximately 75 feet from the designated parking spot and ended when the vehicle was shifted into reverse. This was a period during which the driver was approaching the parking spot and was aware of whether they would be undertaking a manual parallel parking procedure or using the APA system to assist them with parking. During APA trials, the parking system's search function was initiated during this interval and they experienced the prompts indicating that a parking location was identified, when they should stop, and when it was time to place the vehicle in reverse. In manual trials, drivers had to judge the appropriate point to stop the vehicle for themselves during this interval. This period was used to provide a measure of the participants' anticipatory stress level for the upcoming maneuvering of the vehicle into the parking place. It is appropriate to note that drivers engaged in active scanning in this interval in both types of trials, in one case judging for themselves where to stop the vehicle and in the other attending to the vehicle prompts to tell them when to stop The second interval (during), representing the active parking period, extended from the point where the driver placed the vehicle into reverse through the point where the vehicle was placed in park. This period was used to provide a measure of the participants' stress level while maneuvering the vehicle into the parking space. The final interval (after) covered the immediate recovery period following the completion of the maneuver and extending for 25 s; this was the same interval during which the driver was prompted to verbally rate their stress level on a 0 to 10 scale.

Heartbeats were detected through identification of R-wave peaks in the EKG signal (Mehler et al., 2012). Processed records were reviewed by trained research associates to identify and resolve any detection issues due to recording artifact and skipped and double beats were edited to provide a normalized heart rate record (Mulder, 1992). Non-normal data were tested for significant differences using Wilcoxon signed-rank tests (paired, two-tailed), while normal data were tested with paired t-tests or a repeated-measures ANOVA. All statistical computations were done in R (R Core Team, 2013).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Participants verbally responded to the question “how would you rate your stress level right now?” immediately following each parking maneuver using a 0 to 10 scale where 0 corresponded to “Not at all Stressed” and 10 corresponded to “Very Stressed”. These verbal ratings averaged 2.6 following the manual parks. A lower stress rating of 2.0 was obtained for the assisted parks. This difference was statistically significant (V = 475, p = 0.026, Wilcoxon signed-rank test).

Several questions in the post-experimental questionnaire were selected prior to the initiation of the experiment as primary evaluation questions. These included “how stressful was it parallel parking the vehicle manually?” and “how stressful was it parallel parking the vehicle using the assisted parking system?” Rating was on a 10 point Likert scale where 1 was “Not at All Stressful” and 10 was “Very Stressful”. The mean rating for manual parking was 3.64 (SD = 2.05), while the mean rating for using the APA system was significantly lower at 2.76 (SD = 1.81), (V = 439, p = 0.015, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Thus, the verbal ratings immediately after each park and the retrospective ratings in the post-experimental questionnaire showed similarly lower stress ratings for APA assisted parking relative to manually parallel parking.


                        Table 1
                         provides a summary of parking performance during the active parking phase. Across all trials, parking with the APA system reduced parking time by 27.5% (9.68 s) relative to manual parking (V = 707, p = 0.001, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). The APA reduced the driver's parking distance from the curb by nearly half compared to manual parking (p < 0.001, paired t-test), while reducing the number of times drivers reversed direction while parking by 61.2% (V = 83.5, p < 0.001, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Use of the APA system appears, however, to have a negative effect on turn signal usage (V = 37, p < 0.001, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Given that no overt instructions were provided to participants on the use of turn signals as part of the technology training, it is plausible that some subjects may have assumed that turn signal initiation is handled by the APA parking system, which is not the case.

A repeated measures ANOVA was carried out considering each of the three time intervals (immediately before, during, and immediately after parallel parking) and the two types of parking (assisted and manual) controlling for age and gender. In this instance, both a main effect of time period (F(2,72) = 15.53, p < 0.001) and a main effect of type of parking (F(1,36) = 199.90, p < 0.001) are observed and the mean values for each of the cells are presented in Fig. 1
                        . A significant interaction between parking type and period appears (F(2,72) = 108.69, p < 0.001), characterized by a slight drop in heart rate during the parking period using APA and a marked increase in heart rate during this period when manually parking. While the main effect of parking type can be summarized simply by stating that mean heart rate across the periods was significantly higher in the manual parking trials compared to APA assisted trials (80.5 vs. 71.8 beats per minute), further detail is revealed by considering each of the three time periods separately.

During the evaluation parking maneuvers, mean heart rate for participants when manually parking was 83.8 beats per minute (bpm) (SD = 12.8). When using the Active Park Assist (APA) system, mean heart rate was 70.8 (SD = 11.1) – an average of 13 bpm lower. Calculated as individual differences in heart rate by participant, values ranged from 4.9 to 32.1 bpm, with a mean of 13.0, median of 11.6, and standard deviation of 6.1. To the extent that heart rate is considered an objective measure of effort and stress, parking with the APA system required markedly less effort and involved less stress. This difference in heart rate between manual and assisted parking maneuvers was statistically significant (F(1,36) = 215.54, p < 0.001). This difference was present across age groups and genders and the magnitude of the difference was relatively consistent (no significant interaction with age, F(2,36) = 2.67, p = 0.083 or gender, F(1,36) = 3.57, p = 0.067).

This effect carried over into the period immediately following completion of the parking maneuver. Mean heart rate in the period following completion of the manual parks was 77.4 bpm (SD = 11.1). Following parks using the APA system, mean heart rate was 72.8 (SD = 10.5), or 4.6 bpm lower. This difference was also significant (F(1,36) = 86.38, p < 0.001) and present across age groups and genders, with the magnitude of the difference consistent (no significant interaction with age, F(2,36) = 0.98, p = 0.384 or gender, F(1,36) = 0.30, p = 0.586).

While the 13 bpm higher mean heart rate during the manual parks is the most dramatic finding in the analysis, the data from the period before active maneuvering of the vehicle into the space is in some ways even more interesting. During that period there was a significant (F(1,36) = 89.26, p < 0.001) difference in heart rate depending on whether the driver was about to use APA or to park manually. During the evaluation trials when drivers were anticipating engaging in a manual park, mean heart rate was 76.7 (SD = 12.2). During the evaluation trials when drivers were anticipating parking using APA, mean heart rate was 72.2 (SD = 12.2) or 4.5 bpm lower. Again considering these differences at the individual participant level, values ranged from −0.3 to 12.0 bpm, with a mean of 4.5, median of 4.0, and standard deviation of 3.2. This indicates that prior to the physical work involved in maneuvering the steering wheel to manually park, the anticipation associated with the upcoming parking task was generally more stressful then when drivers were anticipating parking with APA. This finding is particularly notable in that it is observed in individuals who had only a relatively limited period of time develop experience and trust in this technology. The difference was present across age groups and genders and the magnitude of the difference was relatively consistent (no significant interaction with age, F(2,36) = 2.13, p = 0.134 or gender, F(1,36) = 3.09, p = 0.087).

When considering approaches to assessing the relative demands of two or more methods of completing a task, different interface designs, etc., one consideration is the degree of sensitivity each method provides for detecting any actual differences. We were thus interested in the question of whether there might be any difference in the relative sensitivity of a physiological measure of stress (heart rate) and a self-report measure of stress. As already discussed, the use of heart rate during the actual task could be considered biased because of the higher level of physical demand associated with the parking task, thus the level of physiological arousal just prior to parking might be considered a better measure of the psychological stress associated with anticipating having to park manually or depend on the semi-automated technology. As reported, heart rate during the anticipatory period and self-reported workload immediately following completion of the park were both higher for manual parking. It can be noted that the p-value for the test of whether the two methods were statistically different was lower for heart rate (p < 0.001) than for self-reported workload (p = 0.026). However, a test of effect size would generally be considered a more appropriate test of the relative magnitude of the difference in a statistical test (McGough and Faraone, 2009). We thus calculated Cohen's d as a measure of effect size for both comparisons. The value for Cohen's d for the heart rate comparison was 1.38 (generally interpreted as a large effect size) while the value for the self-report comparison was 0.35 (a much more modest effect size). One use of Cohen's d is in calculating sample sizes necessary to detect a difference if one actually exists. The smaller Cohen's d value obtained here suggests that, under the methods and conditions used in this study, the heart rate measure could be used to detect a statistically significant difference between the two methods of parking with a smaller sized sample than the self-report measure we employed.

Looking closer at the question of learning and adaptation, heart rate across each of the six parks during the anticipation period (Fig. 2
                        ) was analyzed in a repeated measures ANOVA. The effect of the repetitions was statistically significant (F(2,72) = 3.83, p = 0.026) as was the interaction between repetition and gender (F(2,72) = 3.70, p = 0.030) and interaction between repetition and age group (F(4,72) = 2.90, p = .028). There were no other significant effects in the model. Across the two parking types, the main effect of repetition in anticipatory arousal appears to be driven by a 0.93 bpm decrease between the first evaluation park and second evaluation park (post-hoc pairwise p-value = 0.012). Between the second and third parks, no significant difference appeared (mean difference 0.03 bpm, pairwise p = 0.933).

Decomposing the interaction between repetition and gender into two independent models that control for age, a significant impact of repetition on anticipatory arousal only appears for females (F(2,36) = 7.62, p = 0.002). Similarly, decomposing the model by age group while controlling for gender, the effect of repetition on anticipatory arousal appears for the 20 year old group (F(2,24) = 4.25, p = 0.026) and among 60 year old women, as shown by a significant interaction effect between repetition and gender in the 60 year old model (F(2,24) = 3.72, p = 0.039). Most notably across the primary model, the pattern of changes with increased repetition appears consistent between the two parking types. Overall, the lack of further reduction in heart rate between the second and third evaluation parks suggests that the level of anticipatory arousal associated with parking was relatively well established at the point the formal evaluation trials were conducted.

In the pre-experimental questionnaire, participants were asked to rate the extent to which they felt two vehicle systems would reduce their stress when parking, a system that “automated much of the process of parallel parking” and a system that “notified you when vehicles were approaching from the side as backed out of a parking space.” On a 1 (not at all) to 10 (a lot) scale, participants gave a slightly positive but modest rating of 5.7 (SD = 3.1) for the expectation that a semi-automated parallel parking system would reduce their stress. In contrast, the mean rating for the expected stress reduction from a cross traffic warning notice was markedly higher at 7.9 (SD = 1.9), a statistically significant difference (V = 13, p < 0.001, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). In rating how likely it was that they would use each of these systems if present in a vehicle (1 = “Not at All Likely”, 10 = “Very Likely”), a parallel parking assistance system was given a rating of 5.7 (SD = 3.0) versus 7.8 (SD = 2.2) for traffic warning system (V = 28, p < 0.001). When asked if they would be more or less interested in purchasing a vehicle if it had one of these systems (1 = “Not more Interested”, 10 = “More Interested”), the mean rating for an assisted parallel parking technology was 5.2 (SD = 3.4) while a traffic warning system for backing out of a parking space was again given a higher rating at 7.0 (SD = 3.1) (V = 24, p < 0.001). Taken together, all of these ratings suggest a higher interest in and expectations for a backup warning system relative to a semi-automated assistive parallel parking system prior to experiencing the technology.

After being introduced to and working with the technology, the original rating that participants gave on the likelihood that they would use the technology if it was in a vehicle they were driving changed significantly from the somewhat neutral 5.7 (SD = 3.0) to 7.5 (SD = 2.9) (V = 130, p = 0.004). Similarly, when asked if availability of this technology would influence their interest in buying a vehicle, the pre-experimental rating of 5.2 (SD = 3.4) increased significantly to 6.4 (SD = 2.9) (V = 222, p = 0.049). When asked “If you had a friend or family member who had some difficulty parallel parking or experiences some stress around parallel parking, would you encourage them to consider getting a vehicle equipped with the technology you experienced today?”, the mean rating (1 = “Not at All Likely”, 10 = “Very Likely”) at 8.3 (SD = 2.1) was quite positive.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The results observed are in line with the hypothesis that use of the semi-automated parallel parking assistance system improved parking performance and resulted in reduced stress levels in the participants both on the basis of self-reported stress levels and objective physiological data. The mean 13 beat per minute difference in heart rate between manual parking and parking with the APA system is particularly striking, although at least a portion of this difference can logically be attributed to the reduced physical workload of maneuvering when the technology actively steered the vehicle. Perhaps more significant is the finding that participants' arousal associated with the anticipation of parking the vehicle prior to a technology assisted park was lower than for manual parks. This post-training behavior during the evaluation trials contrasts with various expressions of hesitancy around trusting the technology on the part of a number of participants prior to and during the initial practice trails. The pattern of findings for these primary measures is consistent across gender and the age grouping in the population assessed in this study.

It is worth noting that during the screening process, potential participants needed to indicate that they would be willing to parallel park as part of the study. This, and a willingness to take part in a driving experiment generally, likely resulted in individuals who might be highly anxious about driving, and parallel parking in specific, to avoid participation. To the extent that this was the case, this may have resulted in an underestimation of the degree of stress or anxiety reduction that some drivers might experience using the active park assistance technology relative to manually parking. Thus, the values reported here may well represent a conservative estimate of benefit.

Given that the heart rate data as well as immediate verbal and post-experimental questionnaire responses all support the assessment that the assistive technology made parallel parking easier and less stressful for most participants, it is of interest to observe that the physiological measure provided the most robust statistical case for the difference between the two modes of parking. This suggests that, at least in some situations, physiological measures can be more sensitive than self-report methodologies for making such distinctions. Making this point does not imply an endorsement for dispensing with detailed questioning of participants about their feelings, reactions and experience with the systems under evaluation. Self-report data provide important detail and characterization that can contribute significantly in interpreting and better understanding the meaning of the observed pattern of physiological results. As discussed earlier, use of such sensitive objective assessment methodologies during the design and development process may aid manufacturers in selecting optimized designs with the least demand on the driver and result in greater user satisfaction. Collecting this objective data on participant state increases the confidence with which it can be taken that participants are not simply telling the evaluator “what they want to hear”.

In selecting heart rate as a measure of stress, we were well aware of other physiological indices and of the literature on various heart rate variability (HRV) metrics. We initially planned to also measure electrodermal activity which we have successfully used in other research (e.g., Mehler et al., 2012). Unfortunately, technical issues encountered during the current study precluded including this measure along with heart rate in this investigation. A reduction in heart rate variability (HRV) has been observed under various conditions of stress/workload. Brookhuis and de Waard (2001) suggested that HRV, particularly the relative power of the 0.1 Hz low frequency (LF) component, is sensitive to the level of computational effort associated with secondary tasks. However, the pattern of results they obtained in their on-road research was more complex and less straight-forward to interpret than simply considering basic heart rate alone. Lenneman, et al., (2005) found that heart rate discriminated differing levels of cognitive demand in their driving task, while the high frequency (HF) HRV component (a measure of parasympathetic influence on the heart) and the pre-ejection period (a measure of sympathetic influence) showed differences between non-driving and driving conditions, but not between differing driving tasks. In a comparison of the relative sensitivity of basic heart rate and a range of HRV metrics at detecting different cognitive demand levels during highway driving, we found heart rate to have larger effect sizes than all of the common HRV metrics tested (Mehler et al., 2011). Thus, while there are known situations where select HRV metrics are likely to be more sensitive than heart rate for detecting various states (Lenneman and Backs, 2009; Mehler et al., 2012), beginning with basic heart rate to see whether arousal differences appeared to be associated with the two methods of parking the vehicle seemed reasonable. This seemed particularly the case since the anticipatory and recovery periods studied here were generally relatively short and the duration of all three periods varied across individual parks and participants. Mean heart rate is generally less influenced by variation in the length of the sampling period compared to HRV metrics where ideal minimum sampling periods for frequency measures are in the range of 2 min and comparison periods should ideally be of equal length (Task Force, 1996). The utility of basic heart rate as a metric appears to have been born out for the situation examined in this study.

The results presented here show that the APA system increased the speed of parking and parking performance, while decreasing the number of times drivers shifted between forward and reverse. The reduction in the frequency of turn signal usage when parking with the APA system may be an illustration of a potential limitation associated with overreliance on an assistive technology. It is plausible that participants were operating under the assumption that signal initiation, like most other interactions, was controlled by the APA system. While far from a major safety risk, this observation may be an important illustration of the need to correctly align a driver's mental model of what the automation is or is not responsible for, with the actual implementation. This mapping of a driver's model of a system to the actual functionality of a given implementation may be a key factor in the successful deployment of future autonomous vehicle systems (see Parasuraman and Riley (1997) for extensive discussion on issues related to automation use, misuse, and successful deployment and de Waard et al. (1999), Carsten and Nilsson (2001), Larsson et al. (2014), and Stanton et al. (2001) on the importance of operators understanding the limitations of systems). The present study suggests that, with appropriate training, or a shift in design strategy to automatically handle seemingly logically linked actions such as turn signal initiation with the activation of the APA system (Sarter et al., 1997; Wickens and Hollands, 2000), positive mapping can result in users rapidly realizing the benefits of an assistive technology. Future research needs to investigate the role of semi-autonomy in the technology habituation process, and assess how system trust may vary under higher levels of autonomy. Parking technologies, such as the one studied here, may provide an optimal setting in which to assess, in a safe and controlled way, how drivers adapt to increasing levels of automation.

We would again like to emphasize that participants were given a detailed orientation and guided training in the principles and correct use of the assistive technologies studied. It is unknown to what extent equivalent mastery and benefit would have been obtained without such an introduction. As discussed earlier, expectations for benefits of the system on the part of participants were generally relatively modest prior to training in how to use the system. Observing proper operation of the system and gaining firsthand experience in how to properly use the system resulted in a significant positive shift in perception of the value of the technology. The degree to which the method and detail with which users are introduced and oriented to new technologies impact the full realization of potential benefits of new comfort and safety systems is worthy of further investigation. Work may wish to investigate differences in driver behaviors such as head and eye movements throughout the parking task, as differences in search strategies may relate to observed outcomes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

Support for the collection of data and other aspects of this research was provided by Ford Motor Company. We gratefully acknowledge the United States Department of Transportation's Region One New England University Transportation Center and the Santos Family Foundation for funding to instrument the research vehicle and initial development of this manuscript. The manuscript was completed under the support of the Toyota Class Action Settlement Safety Research and Education Program. The views and conclusions being expressed are those of the authors, and have not been sponsored, approved, or endorsed by Toyota or plaintiffs' class counsel. While the technology selected for study and methodological design was developed by the MIT AgeLab, we wish to acknowledge Dev Kochhar and other members of Ford Motor Company Research for useful insight and comment. We also gratefully acknowledge Katie Godfrey, Charles Jones, Alea Mehler and Jarrod Orszulak for their roles in data collection and Jonathan Dobres for assistance in statistical analyses. Active Park Assist™ (APA) is a registered trademark of Ford Motor Company.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

