@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Age-related differences in processing visual device and task characteristics when using technical devices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           With aging actions are increasingly controlled by vision.


                        
                        
                           
                           Middle-aged participants using a touch screen should be less efficient than young ones.


                        
                        
                           
                           Visual task difficulty stronger affected middle-aged than young participants.


                        
                        
                           
                           The impact of display size depended on psychomotor abilities.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results emphasize the need for a user-specific design for touch screen devices.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Age

Display size

Tool use

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  With aging visual feedback becomes increasingly relevant in action control. Consequently, visual device and task characteristics should more and more affect tool use. Focussing on late working age, the present study aims to investigate age-related differences in processing task irrelevant (display size) and task relevant visual information (task difficulty). Young and middle-aged participants (20–35 and 36–64 years of age, respectively) sat in front of a touch screen with differently sized active touch areas (4″ to 12″) and performed pointing tasks with differing task difficulties (1.8–5 bits). Both display size and age affected pointing performance, but the two variables did not interact and aiming duration moderated both effects. Furthermore, task difficulty affected the pointing durations of middle-aged adults moreso than those of young adults. Again, aiming duration accounted for the variance in the data. The onset of an age-related decline in aiming duration can be clearly located in middle adulthood. Thus, the fine psychomotor ability “aiming” is a moderator and predictor for age-related differences in pointing tasks. The results support a user-specific design for small technical devices with touch interfaces.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Controlling tools in technical environments challenge the human information processing system when disparate visual and proprioceptive/tactile feedback has to be integrated. For instance, the use of a computer mouse introduces a translational transformation: The relation between the amplitude of the hand operating the mouse (= proximal action effect) and the amplitude of the cursor on a display (= distal action effect) is not 1:1, but amplified by a gain factor. Consequently, proprioceptive/tactile feedback from the moving hand and visual feedback from the moving cursor do not correspond, and human information processing often becomes slow and inaccurate. This problem, which arises from indirect input devices, is alleviated by the increasing reliance on touch interfaces. The direct interaction with the finger or stylus allows faster and usually more accurate input than any indirect input device (for an overview see Douglas and Mithal, 1997).

In mobile technical devices, the size of the touch interface decreases resulting in a more restricted movement space that seems contradictory to an efficient interaction. For example, Tränkle and Deutschmann (1991) found 12% shorter movement times for aiming tasks presented on a large display compared to those presented on a small one. In their experiment display size was completely irrelevant for the visual-motor task. Although task difficulty (Fitts, 1954) was constant across all display sizes, movement times differed. The authors interpreted their finding as being of a cognitive nature: “We assume that a larger display caused the subjects to act in a more ‘carefree’ way and to move the mouse faster from the beginning, while with a smaller display an initially more careful approach was only gradually supplanted by confidence, without being overcome completely, in the course of the learning process” (Tränkle and Deutschmann, 1991, p.171). The subtle influence of display size (task-irrelevant visual information) on psychomotor performance has since been investigated in very few studies. Recently, Lai and Wu (2012, 2014), as well as Jakobsen and Hornbæk (2011), confirmed the effect of display size on motor behaviour. For cursor positioning tasks presented on 7″, 8.9″, 10.1″ or 11.6″ displays, task completion times were significantly higher for the 7″ display than for the larger displays (Lai and Wu, 2012, 2014). Jakobsen and Hornbæk (2011) found a similar pattern of results. They presented map navigation tasks on 7.34″, 22.07″ and 66.23″ displays, and again, task completion time was highest with the smallest display (15.1 s) and slightly – but significantly – differed between the medium (8.6 s) and the large display (8.8 s). It can be concluded that small displays (around 7″) indeed limit motor behaviour in the way Tränkle and Deutschmann first assumed in 1991.

These findings seem somewhat surprising from a theoretical point of view. In most of the above-mentioned studies (e.g., Tränkle and Deutschmann, 1991; Lai and Wu, 2012, 2014) task difficulty was constant across all display sizes. Thus, movement times should have been constant according to Fitts's law (Fitts, 1954). But this was not the case. For constant task difficulties small displays increased movement times (Tränkle and Deutschmann, 1991; Lai and Wu, 2012, 2014).

Fitts's law (Fitts, 1954) is the most prominent principle in motor control for goal-directed movements. According to Fitts, movement times for rapid aimed manual movements increase as a log linear function of task difficulty, i.e., the relation between target amplitude and target size. Numerous studies in the past decades have confirmed that Fitts's law (Fitts, 1954) also holds for varied direct and indirect input devices (for an overview see Douglas and Mithal, 1997). Fitts's law holds also for force-controlled input devices (e.g., isometric joystick; Sutter, 2007; Sutter et al., 2011) where users do not perform any ballistic hand movement but apply force to a force-sensitive surface in order to move a cursor on a display. How is this possible?

Cognitive approaches, the ideomotor principle for instance (Greenwald, 1970; James, 1890; for recent overviews of empirical evidence see, e.g., Hommel et al., 2001; Nattkemper and Ziessler, 2004), assume that any intentional act requires a goal that is an anticipatory representation of the intended action effect. The anticipation of action effects may fulfil a generative function in motor control. Actors select, initiate, and execute a movement by activating the anticipatory codes of the movement's effect. Thereby, representations of body-related effects (e.g., applying force to the isometric joystick) seem to be of minor relevance, but representations of the effective part of a tool (e.g., moving cursor on the display) predominate action control (e.g., Kunde et al., 2007; Janczyk et al., 2012; Müsseler and Skottke, 2011; Müsseler and Sutter, 2009; Wang et al., 2012; for a recent review see Sutter et al., 2013).

The impact of visual action effects on motor control has been clearly demonstrated in experimental setups that varied visual task characteristics only, while motor behaviour remained constant (e.g., Ladwig et al., 2013; Rieger et al., 2005; Sutter et al., 2008, 2011, 2012). Participants performed pre-defined hand movements on a covered digitizer tablet and received visual feedback on a display in front of them. Studies in our lab (Sutter et al., 2008, 2011, 2012) adapted a task introduced by Rieger et al. (2005). We presented two horizontally arranged target boxes on the display. Participants moved the cursor back and forth between the two boxes until they performed 25 error-free movements. We decoupled manual movements and visual cursor movements, and varied visual cursor amplitude and target size only. Hand amplitude on the digitizer tablet remained constant within a block. According to Fitts's law (Fitts, 1954), this keeps task difficulty for the hand movements constant, and randomly varies task difficulties for the cursor movements. What we found was an increase in movement times as a function of visual task difficulty. This supports that actions are planned and executed with regard to their distal (visual) effects (i.e., visual cursor amplitude and visual target size), not with regard to their proximal (proprioceptive/tactile) effects. It is this predominance of visual (distal) action effects that explains why Fitts's law applies also to cursor movements of force-controlled input devices where users do not longer perform any ballistic hand movement, but produce a ballistic cursor movement.

With aging, visual action effects become increasingly important in controlling goal-directed movements (e.g., Pratt et al., 1994; Seidler-Dobrin and Stelmach, 1998; Sutter et al., 2012). For rapid aiming, Pratt et al. (1994) investigated the impact of practice on movement kinematics in young and old adults (mean age 21 years and 66 years, respectively). Participants manipulated a handle to perform aiming movements with a cursor on a display. Target amplitude and size were always the same, and practice varied between 100 trials (exp. 1) and 200 trials (exp. 2). Young adults modified movement kinematics through practice (from mostly visually controlled to mostly pre-programmed), but old adults did not. The latter continued to control their movements visually, and even an extension of practice (exp. 2) did not result in any adjustments of motor behaviour.

Visual action effects become increasingly important with age, even if visual information is irrelevant to the task: Wang et al. (2012) investigated the perception of hand movements with disturbed visual feedback and without visual feedback (control condition). Young and old adults (mean age 25 years (SD = 2.7) and 67 years (SD = 4), respectively) sat in front of a robot arm. They placed their dominant hand on a handle attached to the tip of the robot arm; while a cover blocked their direct view of the hand and the robot arm. The robot produced one of six pre-defined trajectories in the shape of an acute (γ = 45° or 63° or 81°) or an obtuse triangle (γ = 99° or 117° or 135°). Triangles were isosceles with a constant horizontal base of 26 cm. Participants were instructed to follow the movement of the robot arm with their hand on the handle and to monitor their hand movement very carefully. During the movement participants received perturbed visual feedback on a display. The cursor produced a static equilateral right-angled triangle (horizontal base = 26 cm). The cursor movement was synchronized with the robot arm's movement. In the control condition they did not receive any visual feedback. After the completion of a movement participants were asked to evaluate the shape of their hand movement (acute or obtuse) by giving a verbal response. With perturbed visual feedback participants became uncertain about their hand movement. This was more pronounced for old than for young adults. The authors concluded that the presence of visual action effects attenuated hand perception. And, old adults relied more on visual feedback – or in other words – they were less able to ignore it than young adults. The latter finding is in line with the inhibition deficit hypothesis by Hasher and Zacks (1988) that assumes a weakening of inhibitory control with age. It is also in accordance with the concept of field dependence (e.g., Witkin and Asch, 1948a, b). Field dependence is assumed to be a trait wherein we perceive the outer world by using internal (field independent) or external frames of reference (field dependent). A number of studies have found age-related differences in field dependence: Old adults are more field dependent than young adults (e.g., Cohen and Axelrod, 1962) as they rely more on environmental information.

As demonstrated above, the increased reliance on visual feedback is clearly apparent in old adults (old adulthood: 65 + years of age; cf., Erikson, 1950). However, the onset for this change in visual information processing might be assigned to middle adulthood (middle adulthood: 40–65 years of age; cf., Aiken, 1998; Erikson, 1950). Several studies comparing young and middle-aged adults have demonstrated small, but significant, age-related differences in visual action effect control (Armbrüster et al., 2007; Sutter et al., 2012). However, these were all visual-motor tasks in which visual information was task relevant. Thus, the present study aims at uncovering the impact of task-irrelevant visual information and investigates the onset of age-related difference in visual action effect control. Participants perform pointing actions on a differently sized active touch area (3.94″, 7.86″ or 11.72″). Although the size of the active touch area is irrelevant to the task, previous studies have demonstrated an impact of display size on performance (Jakobsen and Hornbæk, 2011; Lai and Wu, 2012, 2014; Tränkle and Deutschmann, 1991). We aim to replicate this finding, and hypothesize a significant decline in pointing performance from the large to the medium to the small display size (H1). Such a result would be in line with Tränkle and Deutschmann's statement about the cognitive nature of the display size effect: that the display frame is perceived as a barrier, which restricts the ballistic nature of aiming movements. The replication of the display size effect would be further proof for the strong impact of visual information on human information processing, even when visual information is completely unrelated to the task.

Secondly, if the onset for age-related changes in visual information processing is in middle-age adulthood, then we will find a larger display size effect for middle-aged adults than for young adults (H2). Previous studies have found that middle-aged and old adults rely more on visual information than young adults (Armbrüster et al., 2007; Sutter et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2012). This would be in line with our prediction of age-related differences in the display size effect. However, previous studies have focussed on visual information that was task relevant. Consequently, our study extends the focus to investigating the impact of task irrelevant visual information.

Thirdly, apart from a general decline in motor and cognitive functions (e.g., Stelmach et al., 1987; Welford, 1976; Vercruyssen, 1997), several studies have demonstrated a less optimized and therefore time-consuming movement control in old adults (e.g., Pratt et al., 1994; Seidler-Dobrin and Stelmach, 1998). There is reason to believe that this age-related decline has its onset in middle-age adulthood, at least for processing task relevant information (Armbrüster et al., 2007; Sutter et al., 2012). Consequently, we hypothesize an inferior performance of middle-aged adults compared to young adults (H3).

Fourthly, we will further investigate if these age-related differences (see H3) are moderated by other critical abilities that change over the lifespan: for instance, the experimental pointing task shows a high validity with the fine psychomotor ability “aiming” (Fleishman, 1972). If motor control is already less optimized in middle-aged adults, then aiming abilities should significantly differ between middle-aged and young adults. This age-related difference in aiming should account for any age effect in pointing (H4a). The processing of task irrelevant information can be linked to the trait “field dependence” (e.g., Witkin and Asch, 1948a, b). If the onset for becoming more field dependent is already present in middle-age adulthood, then field dependence should significantly differ between middle-aged and young adults. And, this age-related difference in field dependence should account for any display size effect in pointing (H4b).

Finally, we look at the impact of task relevant visual information by varying target amplitude and target size. In accordance with Fitts's law (Fitts, 1954), we hypothesize an increase in pointing times as a function of task difficulty. If young participants pre-program movements to a greater extend than middle-aged adults (see H4a for optimized motor control), the impact of task difficulty should be more pronounced for middle-aged adults than for young adults (H5).

@&#METHOD@&#

Two groups of participants were studied in the experiment. In the group of young adults a total of 16 students (8 females) of the RWTH Aachen University volunteered for the experiment for credit in a psychology course. They were between 22 and 32 years old (mean age 26 years (SD = 2.9)) and all were right-handed. The middle-aged group (N = 16, 8 females) responded to a newspaper ad and received a small compensation of 5 € for participation. They were 40–62 years old (mean age 51 years (SD = 6.7)) and 14 out of 16 were right-handed.

The use of mouse and in-/direct touch interfaces was assessed with a 3-point scale (“regular”, “infrequent” and “never”). Table 1
                         depicts the frequencies for young and middle-aged adults. Young and middle-aged adults frequently used the mouse. Most of them infrequently or never used direct touch interfaces with finger input, and never used indirect touch interfaces with pen input. Age groups did not differ significantly in their use of in-/output devices (mouse: Z = −2.1; p > 0.20; finger touch input: Z = −2.18; p < 0.10; pen input: Z = 0; p = 1).

Near visual acuity was assessed with a Honeywell Titmus Vision Screener using Landolt rings (different sized patterns of 3 Landolt rings and 1 unbroken ring). If necessary participants wore their optical aid (contact lenses or glasses) for the test, so that all participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The test consisted of 14 sets and the test symbol to be identified in a set was the position of the unbroken ring. Size decreased from the first to the last set. Participants started with the largest set and continued to the smaller ones until two consecutive misses occurred. On average young (middle-aged) participants identified 13 (12) out of 14 sets correctly. This is a near visual acuity of 1.2 (14/11 to 14/12 Snellen acuity). Near visual acuity did not differ significantly between age groups (13 vs. 12; Z = −1.56; p > 0.10).

Pre-test: Field dependence was measured with subtest 10 (embedded figure test) of a common psychometric test (Leistungsprüfsystem = LPS, Horn, 1983). This speed test assesses one of Thurstone's intelligence factors (closure 2) and concerns the ability to detect substantial information within distracting details. To assess fine psychomotor abilities we used the psychomotor test battery (Motorische Leistungsserie = MLS, Schuhfried, 2002). The standard version 1 (Schoppe, 1974) presents a steadiness task, tracing task, aiming task, tapping task, and pegboard test (for methodological details see Sutter and Oehl, 2010). Participants perform the task with the dominant hand.

Experiment: A high precision 15’’ (diagonal measurement) TFT desktop touch screen monitor (Iiyama AX 3819 UT) with a 1024 × 768 resolution and a ‘Touchlogic Twisted Nematic®’ (RS 232C ELO Touchsystems) was used. The touch logic was capacitive with a touch resolution of less than 1 mm. The positional accuracy was high: reported touch coordinates were within 1.5% of the true position. The glass thickness was 3 mm nominal. The computer was operating with a 266 MHz Intel Pentium II CPU and a GeForce 4 Ti 4800 SE graphics card. The stylus was a high precision professional touch input device for industrial applications (WES®).

The desktop touchmonitor (mounted on a stable base) was positioned on a table (table height 70 cm) in an upright position (Fig. 1
                        , left). Participants sat in front of the desktop touch screen monitor (horizontal distance 40 cm). The chair height was individually adjusted to the constant table height, until participants were seated comfortably. The angle of the touchmonitor was also individually adjusted to avoid glare and effects of anisotropy. Participants positioned the non-dominant hand at the desktop monitor's frame, as if holding an iPhone or PDA. The dominant hand operated the stylus on the touchmonitor. The touchmonitor presented three different display sizes by varying the relation between active (white area) and inactive (black frame) touch area. For the small display, the active touch area on the screen was 6 × 8 cm (3.94″), the remaining screen area was inactive and black coloured. The active area for the medium and large displays were 12 × 16 cm (7.86″) and 18 × 24 cm (11.72″) respectively, and the remaining screen area was inactive and black coloured.

On the display a cross-hair cursor and a target box were presented in black colour on a white background. The discrete pointing task (Fig. 1, middle) involved positioning the stylus on the cross-hair cursor (start position) followed by tapping the target box. The target box then disappeared and a new trial was presented. Depending on the display size (small, medium, and large) target boxes appeared in up to four sizes (2.5 mm, 5.0 mm, 7.5 mm, and 10 mm) and in up to three distances (25 mm, 50 mm, and 75 mm). Indices of difficulty (IDs) according to Fitts's law (MacKenzie, 1992) were between 1.8 and 5 bits (Table 2
                        ). The start position was always located centrally. The target boxes were placed in eight different directions (45°, 90°, 135°, 180°, 225°, 270°, 315°, or 360°) relative to the start position to exclude confounding effects of movement directions.

The serial pointing task (Fig. 1, right) followed a similar design as described for the discrete pointing task, but included the appearance of eight consecutive target boxes. After hitting the first target box its colour changed from black to white and the second black-coloured target box appeared. This continued until all target boxes were hit correctly.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants' near visual acuity, field dependence, and fine psychomotor abilities were first tested (pre-test) before they were randomly assigned to two experimental tasks (experiment). In the discrete pointing condition 8 young and 8 middle-aged participants conducted single pointing actions and in the serial pointing condition another 8 young and 8 middle-aged participants conducted successive pointing actions. For each participant the touch logic was calibrated and adjusted to their individual pointing style. Each trial started with the self-paced positioning of the stylus on the start position. The task was to hit one target alone, or eight consecutive appearing targets with the stylus. Participants were instructed to operate the stylus as fast and as accurately as possible. Each participant worked through three blocks of different display sizes (small, medium and large). Due to the different screen sizes and the spatial restrictions, IDs differed across display sizes (Fig. 1): in the small display IDs were 2.6 or 3.5 bits; in the medium display IDs were 2.1, 2.6, 2.9, 3.5, or 4.4 bits; and in the large display IDs were 1.8, 2.1, 2.6, 2.9, 3.1, 3.5, 4.0, 4.4, or 5 bits. The range of IDs was the same for the discrete and the serial pointing task. The order of display sizes was counterbalanced across participants and IDs randomly varied within a block. In total, 320 discrete (80 serial) pointing trials were presented. Prior to each experimental block 10 discrete (2 serial) pointing trials were given to familiarise participants with the task. Between each pre-test and each experimental test block standardized rest breaks of 3–5 min were provided. Additionally, participants could take a break whenever they had finished an experimental trial within a test block. The experiment lasted between 80 and 120 min.

The experiment was based on a four factorial mixed design. The independent variables were age, task type, display size, and task difficulty. The factors age (young vs. middle age) and task type (discrete vs. serial pointing) were between-subject factors. The factors display size (small vs. medium vs. large) and task difficulty (see Table 2; IDs present in all displays 2.6 and 3.5 bits) were within-subject factors. For the discrete task, pointing time was the interval between positioning the stylus on the start position and the correct hit of the target box, and for the serial task pointing time was the mean interval between moving from target box to target box. Endpoint variability was the deviation between actual endpoint positions and midpoint of the target box. An error was measured when participants did not hit the start cross and/or the target box at the first attempt. These trials were omitted (discrete pointing: 15%; serial pointing: 17%), which meant pointing time and mean endpoint variability were calculated for error-free trials only.

Statistical analyses of hypotheses 1–3: for pointing time and endpoint variability we conducted separate 2 × 2 × 3 mixed ANOVAs with the between-subject factors age (young vs. middle-age) and task type (discrete vs. serial pointing), and the within-subject factor display size (small vs. medium vs. large). For comparability, these analyses consider only trials from IDs present across all display sizes, i.e., trials with an ID of 2.6 and 3.5 bits.

Statistical analyses of hypothesis 4: first, all variables of the MLS and LPS were analysed for age differences using Mann–Whitney U-tests (two-tailed tests; exact p). Second, to identify possible moderator variables we calculated rank correlations (Spearman's Rho, one-tailed tests) between significant variables of the MLS and LPS, and the dependent variables of the experiment (pointing time, endpoint variability). Third, variables showing a significant correlation with pointing time or endpoint variability were added as covariates to the 2 × 2 × 3 mixed ANOVAs with the between-subject factors age, task type, and the within-subject factor display size (see above).

Statistical analyses of hypothesis 5: For the small display we conducted a 2 × 2 × 2 mixed ANOVA with the between-subject factors age (young vs. middle-age) and task type (discrete vs. serial pointing), and the within-subject factor ID (2.6 vs. 3.5 bits). For the medium display we conducted a 2 × 2 × 5 mixed ANOVA with the between-subject factors age (young vs. middle-age) and task type (discrete vs. serial pointing), and the within-subject factor ID (2.1, 2.6, 2.9, 3.5, 4.4 bits). And for the large display we conducted a 2 × 2 × 9 mixed ANOVA with the between-subject factors age (young vs. middle-age) and task type (discrete vs. serial pointing), and the within-subject factor ID (1.8, 2.1, 2.6, 2.9, 3.1, 3.5, 4.0, 4.4, 5 bits). For each display size separate analyses were carried out for pointing time and endpoint variability. Post-hoc tests were only carried out for effects concerning hypothesis 5 (significant main effect age or age × ID interaction). For completeness, significant results for the mixed ANOVAs with the factors age, task type, and ID, and the covariates field dependence and aiming duration are provided in Appendix A.

@&#RESULTS@&#

For pointing times and endpoint variability, separate 2 × 2 × 3 mixed ANOVAs with the factors age (young vs. middle-age), task type (discrete vs. serial pointing), and display size (small, vs. medium vs. large) were carried out. These analyses considered only trials from IDs present across all display sizes, i.e., trials with an ID of 2.6 and 3.5 bits.

For pointing time (Fig. 2
                        , black and grey bars), the ANOVA revealed significant main effects of the factors age (F(1, 28) = 4.71, p < 0.05, η
                        2 = 0.14), task type (F(1,28) = 6.72, p < 0.05, η
                        2 = 0.19) and display size (F(2, 56) = 8.24, p < 0.01, η
                        2 = 0.22). Interactions were not observed (all p's > 0.20). Pointing times of young participants were 115 ms faster than those of middle-aged participants (781 vs. 897 ms). In discrete tasks pointing times were 138 ms slower than in serial tasks (908 vs. 770 ms). Concerning display size, post-hoc Bonferroni-corrected contrasts showed significantly higher pointing times for the small display than for the medium (889 vs. 817 ms, p < 0.01) and large display (889 vs. 812 ms, p < 0.05). The difference of 5 ms between pointing on the medium and large display was not significant (817 vs. 812, p > 0.20).

For endpoint variability (Fig. 2, white lines) the ANOVA showed significant main effects of the factors task type (F(1, 28) = 6.23, p < 0.05, η
                        2 = 0.18) and display size (F(2, 56) = 105.63, p < 0.01, η
                        2 = 0.79), and a significant interaction between these factors (F(2, 56) = 7.15, p < 0.01, η
                        2 = 0.20). Other effects were not significant (all p's > 0.20). Endpoint variability increased from the smallest to the largest display, and this effect was stronger in the serial pointing task (2.1 vs. 2.5 vs. 3.3 mm) than in the discrete task (2.2 vs. 2.3 vs. 2.8 mm). For the discrete pointing task, post-hoc Bonferroni-corrected contrasts showed significant differences between the small and large display (Δ = 0.6 mm; p < 0.01), and the medium and large display (Δ = 0.5 mm; p < 0.01), but not between the small and medium display (Δ = 0.1 mm; p > 0.10). For the serial pointing task endpoint variability significantly differed between all display size conditions (all post-hoc Bonferroni-corrected contrasts with p's < 0.01).

First, for all variables of the LPS and MLS differences between age groups were analysed by Mann–Whitney U tests. Table 3
                         depicts these results. For the LPS, field dependence significantly differed between young and middle-aged adults. Young adults solved significantly more tasks and therefore can be considered as being more field independent than middle-aged adults (34.87 vs. 25.50 solved tasks; p < 0.01). For the MLS, we found two significant variables: aiming duration and pegboard duration. Young adults were significantly faster in the aiming and pegboard task than middle-aged adults (p's < 0.01). No other dependent variables differed between young and middle-aged adults (p's > 0.05).

Second, we calculated rank correlations (Spearman's Rho, one-tailed tests) between significant pre-test measures (field dependence, aiming duration, pegboard duration) and the experimental variables (pointing time, endpoint variability). Fig. 3
                         depicts the significant correlations between pointing time and aiming duration (left; r = 0.57; p < 0.01), and pointing time and field dependence (right; r = −0.42; p < 0.01). Pointing time did not significantly correlate with pegboard duration (p > 0.10), and endpoint variability did not correlate with any of the three parameters (p's > 0.10).

Third, we added field dependence and aiming duration as covariates to the 2 × 2 × 3 mixed ANOVA (see section 3.1) to account for potential moderating effects. Fig. 4
                         depicts pointing times (black and grey bars) and endpoint variability (white lines) from this covariate analysis. Any differences between Figs. 2 and 4 account for moderating effects of aiming duration and field dependence. The analysis of mean pointing times revealed significant main effects of the factors task type (F(1,26) = 12.77, p < 0.01, η
                        2 = 0.33) and aiming duration (F(1,26) = 9.96, p < 0.01, η
                        2 = 0.27). The effects of the factors age and display size were no longer significant (p's > 0.20). All other main effects and interactions were not significant (p's > 0.10). The analysis of mean endpoint variability revealed significant main effects for the factor task type (F(1, 26) = 6.61, p < 0.05, η
                        2 = 0.20) and display size (F(2, 52) = 3.72, p < 0.05, η
                        2 = 0.12), and their significant interactions (F(2, 52) = 7.12, p < 0.01, η
                        2 = 0.21)). All other main effects and interactions were not significant (p's > 0.20).

Small display: Fig. 5
                         (left) depicts pointing times as a function of ID (2.6 and 3.5 bits) for each task type and age group separately. 2 × 2 × 2 mixed ANOVAs with the factors age, task type and ID were carried out. For significant results see Table 4
                        .

For pointing times, the ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of the factor ID and a significant interaction between ID and task type. All other main effects (age: F(1, 28) = 3.31, p < 0.10, η
                        2 = 0.10) and interactions were not significant (p's > 0.10).

For endpoint variability, the ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of the factor ID. All other main effects and interactions were not significant (p's > 0.10).

Medium display: Fig. 5 (middle) depicts pointing times as a function of ID (2.1, 2.6, 2.9, 3.5, 4.4 bits) for each task type and age group separately. 2 × 2 × 5 mixed ANOVAs with the factors age, task type, and ID were carried out. For significant results see Table 4.

For pointing times, the ANOVA revealed significant main effects of the factors age, task type, and ID. ID interacted significantly with task type, and with age. The three-way interaction between ID, age, and task type was also significant. The remaining interaction was not significant (p's > 0.20). As can be seen in Fig. 5 (middle), ID affected young adults less in the discrete pointing task than in serial pointing tasks (Δ 236 ms and Δ 924 ms). On the other hand, middle-aged adults showed the same impact of ID in discrete and serial pointing (Δ 450 ms and Δ 458 ms).

For endpoint variability, the ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of the factors ID and task type, and their significant interaction. All other main effects and interactions were not significant (p's > 0.20).

Large display: Fig. 5 (right) depicts pointing times as a function of ID (1.8, 2.1, 2.6, 2.9, 3.1, 3.5, 4.0, 4.4, 5 bits) for each task type and age group separately. 2 × 2 × 9 mixed ANOVAs with the factors age, task type, and ID were carried out. For significant results see Table 4.

For pointing time, the ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of the factors age, task type, and ID. The interactions between ID and task type; and between ID, task type, and age were significant. All other main effects and interactions were not significant (p's > 0.10).

For endpoint variability, the ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of the factors ID and task type, and their significant interaction. All other main effects and interactions (ID × task type × age: F(8, 208) = 1.75, p < 0.10, η
                        2 = 0.06) were not significant (p's > 0.20).

The significant results for the mixed ANOVAs with the factors age, task type and ID, and the covariates field dependence and aiming duration are given in Appendix A.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study we investigated the impact of task irrelevant (i.e., display size) and task relevant (i.e., ID) visual information on pointing performance of young and middle-aged adults. Participants performed a Fitts task on a touch screen using a stylus. They were asked to position the stylus on a cross-hair cursor on the screen and to move it to a target box once it appeared on the screen (= discrete pointing task). In a serial pointing task, once the stylus was positioned in a target box a new target box appeared. The serial task required participants to “hop” from one target box to the other and to tick eight target boxes in succession. Differently sized active touch areas on the touch screen determined display size and varied from small (3.94″) to large (11.72″). Compared to the display size effect found in former studies (Jakobsen and Hornbæk, 2011; Lai and Wu, 2012, 2014; Tränkle and Deutschmann, 1991) we assumed prolonged pointing times for the middle-sized display (7.86″) when compared to the large display (11.72″). In line with Tränkle and Deutschmann's statement about the cognitive nature of the display size effect - that the display frame is perceived as a barrier that restricts the ballistic nature of aiming movements - we hypothesized that the small display (3.94″) would further prolong pointing times when compared to the middle-sized display. Indeed, this is what we found: pointing times and endpoint variability were strongly influenced by display size. Pointing times were significantly longer when actions were performed on a small display compared to the other display sizes. While recent studies (Jakobsen and Hornbæk, 2011; Lai and Wu, 2012, 2014) demonstrated significantly prolonged task completion times for 7″ displays compared to display sizes ranging between 8.9″ and 66.23″, we could not establish such a difference in pointing times between middle (7.86″) and large display (11.72″). On the other hand, endpoint variability was lowest for the small display and significantly increased for the large display. However, it is important to note that although endpoint variability varied, it was in total very low. Consequently, it is not very likely that these small differences in endpoint variability (from small to large display: +0.9 mm) caused any speed-accuracy trade-off, although pointing times varied in the opposite direction (from small to large display: −77 ms). The covariate analysis supports this as the display size effect was completely moderated by aiming duration (see discussion below). Another reason for not finding further decreases in pointing time could have emanated from the task types we presented in our study. Both discrete and serial pointing were very simple actions, which were accomplished very quickly with pointing times ranging from 654 ms to 954 ms (for IDs present in all displays). In pointing tasks presented by Lai and Wu (2012), pointing times ranged from 1580 ms to 5480 ms; and in geospatial tasks presented by Jakobsen and Hornbæk (2011), pointing times went up to approximately 10,000 ms (navigate task), 33,000 ms (compare task), and 52,000 ms (trace route task). These tasks were very elaborate and demanded much more cognitive and motor resources than the tasks presented in our study.

To sum up, hypothesis 1 can be partially confirmed. The smallest display deteriorated performance considerably compared to the other display sizes, but we did not find any performance difference between the medium and large display. It seems the display size effect depends on the type of task and the task complexity: large displays – providing a good overview – facilitate geospatial tasks, but probably do not have any further facilitation effect on pointing tasks. Future studies should further investigate the impact of task type and task complexity.

Our second hypothesis made predictions about age-related differences in the display size effect. Previous studies found that both middle-aged and old adults increasingly relied on task relevant visual information (Armbrüster et al., 2007; Sutter et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2012). The present study investigated if this would also be the case for task irrelevant information, but this is not what we found. The predicted interaction between age and display size was not significant, therefore, hypothesis 2 must be discarded. One reason for not finding any interaction between age and display size could be that although the display size may have affected performance, such interference did not come to the fore because the motor task was very simple and participants across all ages had enough resources available to ignore task-irrelevant information. It is very well known that a certain amount of task complexity is needed to observe reliable age differences in responses (Myerson et al., 1990; Salthouse, 1985). The impact of task complexity on age-related differences in the display size effect should be addressed in future experiments (for the impact of task complexity on age cf., Light and Spirduso, 1990). Varying display size within a block of tasks or presenting tasks of higher task difficulties would increase task complexity. It is important to note that for tasks presented across all display sizes IDs were very low (2.6 and 3.5 bits). Consequently, task difficulty did not really put high demands on the motor system. Another way to increase cognitive task complexity would be to apply a secondary task. This variation would also meet ecological demands, since in modern work users of technical devices are often confronted with more than one task (e.g., following a conversation and making notes). The present experiment was not able to clarify the onset of age-related differences in processing task irrelevant visual information. Further experiments should cover a broader range of ages. Finding age-related differences of the display size effect between young, middle-aged, and old adults would clearly demonstrate the onset for these changes. Especially when using age as a continuous variable and not as a categorical one, as in our study.

Another reason for not finding a significant interaction between age and display size is the following: according to the psychomotor test battery (Schuhfried, 2002) aiming duration measures the ability to control the speed of arm and hand movements. We found age differences in aiming duration and a moderating effect of aiming duration on pointing times. Middle-aged adults performed arm-hand movements more slowly than young participants, and when we accounted for this in the covariate analysis any effect of age and display size diminished. It seems that the nature of the display size effect is better explained by psychomotor skills than by perceptual processes. However, further experiments are needed to clarify this and to see whether – and to what amount – perceptual processes also add to the display size effect. At the moment the contribution of perceptual processes remains unclear.

With regard to the impact of age we found slower pointing times for middle-aged adults – as hypothesized (H3). However, we also found significant age-related differences in aiming and pegboard duration, and in field dependence (pre-experiment screening). All these variables (aiming duration, pegboard duration, and field dependence) reflect the speed component in either movement execution or information processing. That means, as documented in other studies (e.g., Stelmach et al., 1987; Welford, 1976; Vercruyssen, 1997), a general slowing down in speed mostly evokes age-related differences in motor responses. Since aiming duration and field dependence significantly correlated with pointing times, both variables were added as covariates to analyse potential moderating effects. And this is what we found: aiming duration, but not field dependence significantly affected responses. We confirmed that aiming duration (H4a), but not field dependence (H4b) moderated the age affect and the display size effect. Consequently, the fine psychomotor ability “aiming” is a moderator and predictor for age-related differences in pointing tasks.

Results confirm the onset for age-related changes in aiming to be in middle adulthood. This is in line with studies already demonstrating the onset of age-related changes in motor control in middle adulthood (e.g., Armbrüster et al., 2007; Charness et al., 2004; Light and Spirduso, 1990; Yan et al., 1998). Motor control changes in many ways, i.e., time and variability in movement planning, and execution increase for middle-aged and old adults compared to young adults (Yan et al., 1998). This suggests that movements are less pre-programmed, meaning there is a greater amount of visual on-line control during movement execution (cf., Pratt et al., 1994; Seidler-Dobrin and Stelmach, 1998; Yan et al., 1998).

Finally, we varied target amplitude and target size for different task difficulties. In accordance with Fitts's law (Fitts, 1954) pointing time increased with increasing task difficulty. We hypothesized a stronger impact of task difficulty on middle-aged adults' performance than on that of young adults. Significant age effects and three-way interactions between age, ID, and task type were found for the medium and large display. However, age-related differences diminished in the large display when data was analysed with ANOVAs including the covariates, aiming duration and field dependence (Appendix A). This means aiming duration accounted for most of the variance in the data and moderated the age effects. Consequently, we can confirm hypothesis 5.

To sum up, we demonstrated that task-irrelevant (display size) and task relevant visual information (ID) affected pointing performance. Pointing was more efficient on large and medium displays than on a small display. We found an age effect, but age did not further aggravate the display size effect. Aiming duration moderated the age and display size effect in pointing speed, but it did not affect pointing accuracy. Task relevant visual information (ID) affected pointing times of middle-aged adults moreso than that of young adults. Again, aiming duration accounted for the variance in the data. The onset of an age-related decline in aiming duration can be clearly located in middle adulthood. Thus, the fine psychomotor ability, aiming, is a moderator and predictor for age-related differences in pointing tasks.

The demonstrated onset for age-related differences in middle adulthood bears several practical implications for designing technical devices with display sizes up to 12”. First, users in general benefit from larger displays (8″ to 12″). That means small technical devices should provide sufficient space for touch interactions. Second, icons and objects to be touched should be of considerable size to enable efficient touch input. For input with a pen, object size should be larger than 5 × 5 mm; for finger input, size must be considerably increased. Third, the interaction between age and ID indicates that middle-aged adults particularly benefit from low IDs (e.g., small amplitudes and large objects) in pointing tasks. Since middle-aged adults represent the late working population, companies profit for the long term by providing tablets instead of smart phones for their middle-aged employees. Fourth, we did not investigate old adults in our study, so we will not be able to estimate the exact impact of visual device and task characteristics on their performance. However, aiming abilities further decline with age and, therefore, it is reasonable to assume a further decline for old adults. Consequently, it is of considerable interest to provide large displays and low IDs in technical devices specifically designed for the aging population – for instance in self-monitoring healthcare devices.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We thank Emily Black, Philipp Brauner, Maryvonne Granowski, Kathrin Wendler, and Martina Ziefle for supporting this research.


                     
                        
                           
                              Results for the ANOVAs with the factors age, task type and ID, and the covariates field dependence and aiming duration.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Small
                                    Pointing time
                                    ID
                                    F(1, 26) = 5.05, p < 0.05, η2 = 0.16
                                 
                                 
                                    ID × Task type
                                    F(1, 26) = 13.03, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.33
                                 
                                 
                                    Medium
                                    Pointing time
                                    ID
                                    F(4, 104) = 3.60, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.12
                                 
                                 
                                    Task type
                                    F(1, 26) = 11.20, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.30
                                 
                                 
                                    Aiming duration
                                    F(1, 26) = 14.56, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.35
                                 
                                 
                                    ID × Task type
                                    F(4, 104) = 9.62, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.27
                                 
                                 
                                    ID × Age
                                    F(4, 104) = 4.97, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.16
                                 
                                 
                                    ID × Task type × Age
                                    F(4, 104) = 2.73, p < 0.05, η2 = 0.10
                                 
                                 
                                    Endpoint var.
                                    ID
                                    F(4, 104) = 4.17, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.13
                                 
                                 
                                    Task type
                                    F(1, 26) = 11.03, p < 0.05, η2 = 0.29
                                 
                                 
                                    ID × Task type
                                    F(4, 104) = 4.79, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.15
                                 
                                 
                                    Large
                                    Pointing time
                                    ID
                                    F(8, 192) = 5.53, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.18
                                 
                                 
                                    Task type
                                    F(1, 24) = 6.19, p < 0.05, η2 = 0.20
                                 
                                 
                                    Aiming duration
                                    F(1, 24) = 10.28, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.30
                                 
                                 
                                    ID × Task type
                                    F(8, 192) = 9.50, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.28
                                 
                                 
                                    Endpoint var.
                                    ID
                                    F(4, 104) = 5.43, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.18
                                 
                                 
                                    Task type
                                    F(1, 24) = 11.47, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.32
                                 
                                 
                                    ID × Task type
                                    F(4, 104) = 3.54, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.12
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

