@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Are pressure measurements effective in the assessment of office chair comfort/discomfort? A review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The relation between pressure measures and office chair comfort has been analysed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The method used for evaluating subjective comfort seems to be critically important.


                        
                        
                           
                           Pressure parameters potentially capable of describing comfort has been identified.


                        
                        
                           
                           Future work is needed due to the controversial results of the few available studies.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Office chair

Comfort

Pressure measurements

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Nowadays, the majority of jobs in the western world involves sitting in an office chair. As a result, a comfortable and supported sitting position is essential for employees. In the literature, various objective methods (e.g. pressure measurements, measurements of posture, EMG etc.) have been used to assess sitting comfort/discomfort, but their validity remains unknown. This review therefore examines the relationship between subjective comfort/discomfort and pressure measurements while sitting in office chairs.
                  The literature search resulted in eight papers that met all our requirements. Four studies identified a relationship between subjective comfort/discomfort and pressure distribution parameters (including correlations of up to r = 0.7 ± 0.13). However, the technique for evaluating subjective comfort/discomfort seems to play an important role on the results achieved, therefore placing their validity into question.
                  The peak pressure on the seat pan, the pressure distribution on the backrest and the pressure pattern changes (seat pan and backrest) all appear to be reliable measures for quantifying comfort or discomfort.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In modern societies, increasing amounts of time are spent in a seated position. Reinecke et al. (2002) and Treaster and Marras (1987) reported that approximately 75% of all employees in industrial countries have jobs that require them to work in a seated position. Low back pain (LBP) is particularly common, and almost everyone experiences it at one time or another (Hoy et al., 2010). A study by McBeth and Jones (2007) showed that approximately one-third of western populations suffered from LBP in the course of any given month. An increasing number of employees with back pain is clearly associated with the increasing number of day's sick leave. Here, Holtermann et al. (2010) analysed a group of Danish employees (N = 5036) in 2000 and found that approximately one-fifth of the employees who had neck-shoulder and LBP experienced long-term sick leave within the following two years. Videman et al. (1990) reported that either heavy or sedentary work is associated with a higher risk of developing back pain compared to occupations with mixed seating and loading regimes. Furthermore, low levels of seating comfort often lead to musculoskeletal complaints such as LBP (Vink and Hallbeck, 2012). Therefore, employers should be aware of the importance of providing a comfortable working environment for their employees to ensure their health and welfare (De Looze et al., 2003). Moreover, seated workers who suffer from discomfort are inefficient and error prone (Hertzberg, 1958). As a result, Christiansen (1997) concluded that users' subjective seating comfort is the decisive criterion that should guide purchase decisions. Despite the popular opinion, as described above, that occupational sitting is highly associated with LBP, several current literature reviews revealed that sedentary lifestyle by itself does not increase the risk of LBP (Hartvigsen et al., 2000; Kwon et al., 2011; Lis et al., 2007; Roffey et al., 2010). However, Lis et al. (2007) emphasised that the combination of sitting for longer than half a day in an awkward posture and/or with whole body vibration is capable of increasing the likelihood of suffering from LBP.

Seating comfort/discomfort is based on a subjective sensation and thus is difficult to quantify. There are three main methods upon which it is possible to gain an indication of the level of sitting comfort and discomfort (Vergara and Page, 2002): anthropometry, subjective assessment and objective measurements. Vergara and Page (2002) reported that subjective evaluation is the only way to determine changes in comfort and pain, based on self-reported questionnaires including the “general comfort rating”, the “body area comfort rating”, the “method of adjustment”, the “Chair Feature Checklist” or “personal comments” (Christiansen, 1997; Shackel et al., 1969). However, the use of subjective evaluations presents difficulties in terms of quantitative measurement versus interpretation (Branton, 1969; Helander et al., 1987). Firstly, chair users must be aware of their comfort/discomfort. It is more difficult to sense varying degrees of comfort compared to varying degrees of discomfort. Secondly, individuals may have difficulty verbalising their feelings of comfort/discomfort. Furthermore, a source of comfort or discomfort may be very difficult to associate with a specific design feature of a chair. Finally, it is difficult to memorise the sensation of comfort/discomfort, which is a necessary requirement for the comparison of different chairs.

It has been shown that the design of an office chair is able to strongly influence the sitting conditions for the user. Dreischarf et al. (2010) reported that spinal loading can be reduced by supporting the upper body using an armrest. The seat pan and backrest cushion properties can also play a decisive role on the chair-user interaction. For example, Mooney et al. (1971) observed an almost 50% reduction in the mean seat pressure in a wheelchair due to a different cushion. Furthermore, Bendix et al. (1996) highlighted the importance of the shape of the backrest, since it can influence lumbar lordosis as well as spinal loading. Similarly, Coleman et al. (1998) stressed the importance of adjustable lumbar support in order to provide a comfortable seat. Besides the office chair design, human factors also play an important role in terms of the loading conditions on the human body. Here, for example Nachemson (1976) showed the influence of different sitting positions on the pressure in the third lumbar disc. Andersson et al. (1974) and Andersson and Ortengren (1974) reported that the disc pressure of the third lumbar disc decreases while reclining backwards with the backrest. More recent studies highlighted the influence of upright and reclined (Zemp et al., 2013) as well as forward inclined (Baumgartner et al., 2012) sitting on the shape of the spine by means of open MRI measurements.

There are several definitions and models of comfort and discomfort available in the literature that are presented in this section. The aim of this review is to analyse the degree to which comfort/discomfort provided by chairs can be quantified, and not the feelings of comfort and/or discomfort experienced by a person. For the purpose of the current study, chair users act as channels of information about chairs (Branton, 1969). Several factors influence feelings of comfort/discomfort (Vink et al., 2005); Personal factors include the user's physical and psychological state as well as the history of the user's comfort/discomfort experience. External stimuli, such as visual input, smell, noise, temperature, humidity, pressure/touch, posture and movement, can also form an important part of the evaluation of comfort/discomfort. Thus, comfort/discomfort can be divided into visual comfort/discomfort (Kooi and Toet, 2004), thermal comfort/discomfort (Cena and de Dear, 2001), olfactory comfort/discomfort (Kempski, 2005), and so on. Sitting comfort/discomfort is a combination of these factors. In particular, external stimuli of pressure and touch play a decisive role (De Looze et al., 2003; Mergl, 2006; Verver, 2004).

According to Richards (1980), “Comfort is a continuous dimension of experience — varying from strongly positive (very comfortable) to strongly negative (very uncomfortable). It involves a transition region which would be described as neither comfortable nor uncomfortable, but neutral. … Comfort depends on multiple physical inputs and discomfort may arise from any of several causes.” Hertzberg (1958) did not define comfort and discomfort as two distinct states of consciousness. Instead, he reported that there is only “discomfort” because “comfort” is only the absence of discomfort. Hence, it is not possible to provide comfort; it is only possible to eliminate the source of discomfort. Branton (1969) adopted a similar point of view concerning the definition of comfort, suggesting that comfort varies along a continuum ranging from a state of indifference to a state of extreme discomfort. He noted that it is very difficult to envisage deriving extreme feelings of well-being while sitting in a chair, regardless of how comfortable the chair may be. Despite this, some studies have attempted to measure degrees of positive comfort (Oborne, 1978). Branton (1969) reported that the absence of discomfort is synonymous with a state of no awareness of sensation and does not necessarily represent a positive sensation. Similarly, the absence of pain does not automatically imply the presence of pleasure. However, more recent studies contradict prior definitions. For example, Kleeman (1981) and Kamijo et al. (1982) reported that comfort and discomfort are influenced by different variables. Zhang et al. (1996) proposed a model of discomfort and comfort as two different entities (Fig. 1
                        ). Discomfort, in this model, is related to biomechanical factors that lead to pain, tiredness, soreness and numbness, whereas comfort relates to well-being and the aesthetic impression of the chair (Helander and Zhang, 1997; Zhang et al., 1996). The intersection of the axes represents the possible transition from discomfort to comfort and vice versa. For example, if the discomfort is low, comfort can be experienced. Conversely, if comfort is reduced, discomfort may be enhanced. The influence of the aesthetic appeal on the comfort experience, at least during the first encounter with a chair, was demonstrated by Knoll (2006), who noted that the haptic impression prevails over time; thus, the physical characteristics of the chair become increasingly important.

Based on the model by Zhang et al. (1996), Paul (1997) highlighted the need for different strategies in ergonomic interventions to reduce discomfort (nurturing) and increase comfort (pampering). Nurturing designates a strategy that aims to decrease discomfort by promoting an active and dynamic use of the body during the workday to maintain health. Pampering is a comfort strategy that concentrates on enhancing comfort through aesthetics and plush environments. Many other studies (Andreoni et al., 2002; Goossens et al., 2005; Kyung and Nussbaum, 2008; Mehta and Tewari, 2000) refer to the comfort/discomfort model of Zhang et al. (1996). However, the concept of comfort and discomfort remains a controversial topic, and there is no generally accepted definition (De Looze et al., 2003; Pearson, 2009). Nevertheless, three issues are clear: comfort is a construct of a subjectively defined personal nature; comfort is affected by factors of various types (physical, physiological, psychological); and comfort is a reaction to the environment (De Looze et al., 2003).

A frequently cited comfort/discomfort model in literature is the model by De Looze et al. (2003). This model describes the interaction of the different factors influencing comfort and discomfort while dividing them into three categories: human, product and environment (Fig. 2
                        ). Moes (2005) introduced a new model in order to explain the process of discomfort sensation during sitting. The initial parameters of this model are the person, the seat, the purpose and the usage. Moes (2005) described four steps in the model until finally discomfort is experienced (I → E → P → A → D). The first step is the occurrence of an interaction (I) between the person and the seat with a specific purpose that results in internal body effects (E). These effects may then be perceived and interpreted (P). The next step is the appreciation of the perception (A). Finally, if the internal body effects are not appreciated, discomfort will be perceived (D). Vink and Hallbeck (2012) then proposed an enhanced model (Fig. 3
                        ) which was based on the models of De Looze et al. (2003) and Moes (2005), as well as on ten papers of a special issue in Applied Ergonomics on product comfort in 2012. In detail, the environmental interaction (I) of the person, the product characteristics and the usage/task can result in internal human body effects (H). Together with the expectations of the person (E) can these effects lead to the perception (P) of these internal effects that can be interpreted as comfort (C), as no feeling (N) or as discomfort (D) that finally could result in musculoskeletal complaints (M). It is also possible that a person feels comfort and discomfort simultaneously, since comfort and discomfort are not clearly interconnected together (model of De Looze et al. (2003)). The circle around E/C highlights that expectations (E) are often linked to comfort (C). A feedback loop between comfort/discomfort and the environment indicates that a too high level of discomfort or a too low level of comfort can be regulated by varying the initial environmental conditions. The main difference between the model of De Looze et al. (2003) and the models of Moes (2005) as well as Vink and Hallbeck (2012) is that in the two latter models the link between the interaction of a person and an office chair to comfort is as strong as the link to discomfort. However, De Looze et al. (2003) indicated a stronger connection between the person-office chair interaction and discomfort.

In addition to the above definitions and models on comfort and discomfort, it must be noted that maximum bodily comfort is not the same as an optimal state of sitting comfort. This is because maximal comfort can be found in sleep, and chair users may seek stimulation from the environment (Branton, 1969). It is also important to note that feelings of comfort/discomfort change with sitting duration. Therefore, Mergl (2006) divided sitting comfort/discomfort into initial sitting comfort/discomfort, short-term comfort/discomfort (up to 30 min), and long-term comfort/discomfort (after 30 min).

Various objective methods can be used to quantify the subjective comfort/discomfort of an office chair. The easiest and most elementary way to determine discomfort is to measure the length of time subjects can spend in a given sitting position (Hertzberg, 1958) or the time it takes until the subject begins to feel uncomfortable (Jones, 1969). Further methods include pressure measurements of the seat pan and the backrest, measurements of posture, the number of body movements, electromyography (EMG), and foot volume change (De Looze et al., 2003). Objective methods have the advantage of being less time consuming, less dependent on a large number of subjects, less prone to measurement error or bias and are easily applicable in the early stages of the design process (De Looze et al., 2003; Lee et al., 1993). However, technical methods to objectively determine sitting comfort/discomfort are always indirect and, at best, can provide only an indication of a chair user's feeling of comfort/discomfort (De Looze et al., 2003). Due to the elusiveness of comfort/discomfort and individual difficulties in producing valid assessments of comfort/discomfort (Helander et al., 1987), an objective measurement to determine sitting comfort/discomfort is clearly required.

In order to demonstrate validity, subjective and objective results should demonstrate a clear correlation. Mainly based on investigations in car seats, several studies (De Looze et al., 2003; Mergl, 2006; Verver, 2004) indicate that the distribution of pressure on the pan of the seat seems to be most clearly associated with subjective comfort/discomfort ratings. However, it remains unclear whether these findings are also valid for office chairs. Since car seats are required to fulfil special safety standards and specific boundary conditions, where the driver's movements are restricted due to seat belts, hand placement on the steering wheel, feet on the pedals, and eyes focussed on the road (Lueder, 1983), it is clear that the requirements and restrictions of office chairs are different. Therefore, with the aim to establish the state of knowledge with respect to comfort during sitting, the purpose of this literature review is to analyse the relation between objective pressure measurement parameters and the quantification of subjective feelings of comfort/discomfort experienced while sitting in an office chair.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

A systematic literature review was conducted in PubMed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/, 23rd July 2012) and Google Scholar (http://scholar.google.ch/, 23rd July 2012) using the following keywords and their combinations: “office chair”, “comfort”, “discomfort”, “objective”, “subjective”, “sitting”, “seating”, “pressure measurements”, “pressure distribution”, and “VDU” (Visual Display Unit). References of all selected papers were searched meticulously by screening titles as well as abstracts, where necessary. The main inclusion criterion was that the studies had to be related to office chairs. Studies concerning the relationship between comfort/discomfort and pressure measurements in other seating arrangements were excluded. After screening titles and abstracts of the studies found, the full texts were evaluated for definite inclusion. The search was restricted to articles written in English and German language journals (Fig. 4
                     ).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The search in PubMed and Google Scholar resulted in 120 papers. Fig. 5
                      provides an overview of the results of the literature search strategy.

Several studies have demonstrated the relationship between pressure and comfort/discomfort and the use of a wheelchair (Brienza et al., 2001; Geyer et al., 2001; Shaw, 1993), car seat (Ebe and Griffin, 2001; Franz et al., 2012; Gross et al., 1994; Kamijo et al., 1982; Kolich and Taboun, 2004; Kyung and Nussbaum, 2008; Milivojevich et al., 2000; Park and Kim, 1997; Park et al., 1998; Thakurta et al., 1995; Yun et al., 1992; Zenk et al., 2012), tractor seat (Mehta and Tewari, 2000; Tewari and Prasad, 2000), mattress (Ballard, 1997; Grindley and Acres, 1996; Lopez-Torres et al., 2008), or surgery seat (Noro et al., 2012). However, only eight papers complied with our requirements and have analysed the topic of pressure distribution and comfort/discomfort in relation to office chairs. Table 1
                      summarises these studies (top) and provides an exemplary overview of the studies not related to office chairs (bottom) while dividing them into the categories short-term and long-term measurement studies that assessed the pressure distribution over a period of less than 30 min and more than 30 min respectively. In addition, the studies were further subdivided into static and dynamic pressure distribution assessments.

Four (Fujimaki and Mitsuya, 2002; Goossens, 1998; Groenesteijn et al., 2009; Vergara and Page, 2000) out of the eight office chair studies observed a relationship between the pressure distribution and comfort/discomfort assessments. One of these four studies assessed a mean correlation (r) of 0.7 ± 0.13 (Goossens, 1998), whereas the other three did not quantify the strength of the relationship. Two out of the eight analysed studies (Bendix et al., 1985; Carcone and Keir, 2007) did not find any relationship. The other two studies of Goossens et al. (2005) and De Looze (published in Vink et al., 2005) could not be used to analyse the relationship between subjective comfort/discomfort and pressure measurements. Here, Goossens et al. (2005) showed that subjects were only able to perceive pressure differences but did not relate their findings to comfort/discomfort, while De Looze (published in Vink et al., 2005) assessed the pressure based on personal sensation but did not use a pressure sensing system.

The studies described in this review analysed different pressure parameters, such as the pressure around the left buttock (Goossens, 1998), the pressure at the ischial tuberosity (Goossens et al., 2005), the pressure uniformity of the seat pan and the backrest (De Looze, published in Vink et al., 2005), the backrest contact area (Carcone and Keir, 2007; Vergara and Page, 2000), the mean backrest pressure (Bendix et al., 1985; Carcone and Keir, 2007), the maximal backrest pressure (Carcone and Keir, 2007), the seat pan contact area (Carcone and Keir, 2007), the mean seat pan pressure (Carcone and Keir, 2007), the maximal seat pan pressure (Carcone and Keir, 2007; Groenesteijn et al., 2009; Noro et al., 2005) and the pressure distribution pattern over time (Fujimaki and Mitsuya, 2002). Furthermore, the studies used different measures for subjective comfort and discomfort. Six papers used a digital scale ranging from 4 to 11 points, one study (Goossens, 1998) used an analogue scale and another study (Goossens et al., 2005) focussed more on the sensitivity and did not directly determine comfort or discomfort.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study reviewed the relevant literature on the connection between objective pressure distribution and the subjective sensation of comfort and discomfort while sitting in office chairs. The results of pressure measurements derived from experiments using other types of seating cannot be transferred to office chairs because the requirements are completely different (Lee et al., 1993; Lueder, 1983). The concepts of comfort and discomfort are complex and controversial. Therefore, many different definitions of these concepts exist. The summarised literature (Table 1) used different subjective evaluation methods based on various comfort models and definitions. This diverse approach to the issue of comfort and discomfort complicates the comparison of different scientific works, particularly if one assumes that the concept of comfort/discomfort is not as simple as understanding comfort as the absence of discomfort.

All studies that have used either an analogue scale (Goossens, 1998) or a digital scale with more than 5 points (Groenesteijn et al., 2009; Vergara and Page, 2000) have observed a relationship between comfort/discomfort and suitable pressure parameters. Suitable pressure measures for short-term measurements were the peak pressure of the seat pan (Goossens, 1998; Groenesteijn et al., 2009) and the pressure distribution of the back rest (Vergara and Page, 2000) as well as the pressure pattern change for long-term measurements (Fujimaki and Mitsuya, 2002). The aforementioned studies concluded that subjects are able to translate pressure applied to the buttocks into perceived discomfort (Goossens, 1998), but also that the type of backrest used is related to general comfort/discomfort in the lumbar spine (Vergara and Page, 2000). Finally, Fujimaki and Mitsuya (2002) noted that discomfort and seating conditions follow a typical pattern and therefore discomfort can clearly be identified by means of the pressure distribution.

All studies that have analysed comfort (Groenesteijn et al., 2009; Vergara and Page, 2000) found a relationship with pressure parameters. Four studies that analysed discomfort (Fujimaki and Mitsuya, 2002; Goossens, 1998; Groenesteijn et al., 2009; Vergara and Page, 2000) reported a relationship with pressure parameters, whereas one study (Carcone and Keir, 2007) could not find a relation between discomfort and pressure measurements. Therefore, our literature review does not appear to support the statement of De Looze et al. (2003) that the relationship between objective measures and discomfort is stronger than the relationship with comfort. The results of this review are more in line with the model provided by Vink and Hallbeck (2012) (Fig. 3), where the environmental interaction (I) link between a person and a product to comfort is as strong as the link to discomfort.

The analysed office chair studies must be interpreted with caution because two of the studies had a very small number of subjects (eight subjects (Goossens, 1998) and six subjects (Vergara and Page, 2000)). Furthermore, Groenesteijn et al. (2009) only analysed two office chairs that did not differ in terms of their comfort/discomfort results or the pressure distribution. The tasks assigned to the subjects during the pressure measurements also differed among the studies. Bendix et al. (1985) and also other studies (Bishu et al., 1991; Drury and Coury, 1982) showed that the preferred sitting position is strongly dependent on the task performed, which changes the pressure distribution. Therefore, it may be that every office task has its own “pressure-distribution comfort/discomfort relationship” and requires a specific office chair to provide optimal comfort for the user. The discussed office chair studies also differed in their measurement duration. Fenety et al. (2000) stated that sitting discomfort is dynamic by nature and requires continuous, objective measurement: A chair may be comfortable for two hours but may become very uncomfortable after four hours (Hertzberg, 1958). On the other hand, Shackel et al. (1969) reported that short-term assessments are a reliable technique for long-term comfort evaluations. These controversial conclusions appear to require resolution, possibly through additional investigation where short and extended-term evaluations of comfort and pressure measurements are compared.

In addition to the papers described in this review, many other studies (Dunk and Callaghan, 2005; Makhsous et al., 2003; McGill et al., 2006; Tan et al., 2001; Vos et al., 2006) have used pressure mats a quality indicator to analyse or compare different office chairs or sitting positions. Bendix et al. (1985) reported a higher level of acceptability for the chair with a freely movable seat pan, although no correlation to pressure parameters could be found. For obvious reasons, the overall pressure of the seat pan decreases with a larger backrest reclination angle, whereas the pressure of the backrest increases. Vergara and Page (2000) found a correlation between comfort/discomfort and the type of backrest used. This is in agreement with the findings of Andersson et al. (1974) and Andersson and Ortengren (1974) who reported a reduction in the pressure of the third lumbar disc while reclining backwards. It is therefore plausible that these changes result from alterations of the spinal shape (Baumgartner et al., 2012; Zemp et al., 2013), as well as of the reduced axial gravitational forces on the spine.

Future studies are needed that analyse the influence of different definitions of comfort/discomfort, different parameters of pressure distribution, long- and short-term assessments, the task performed, the measurement duration for perceiving comfort and discomfort in office chairs, and their relationship with LBP. Research in this field is important due to the variety of approaches that can potentially be implemented. For example, Gross et al. (1992) obtained a patent for an electronic system that adjusts the seat to provide a desirable level of comfort based on pressure sensor data of the seat pan and the backrest. However, very few studies have examined the optimum pressure distribution while sitting in an office chair. A careful examination of the pressure-comfort/discomfort relationship of office chairs may therefore be helpful in the early stages of the design process of office furniture.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In conclusion, the question of whether pressure measurements of the seat pan and the backrest are suitable for assessing the comfort or discomfort experienced while sitting in office chairs cannot be definitively answered due to the limited availability of data. However, the technique used for evaluating the subjective comfort/discomfort seems to play an important role in the interaction analysis between the pressure distribution and subjective ratings of comfort/discomfort. Furthermore, the peak pressure of the seat pan, the pressure distribution of the backrest and the pressure pattern changes (seat pan and backrest) appear to be reliable for quantifying comfort or discomfort.

Future work is clearly needed in the field of pressure distribution measures and subjective comfort/discomfort in order to gain a better understanding of the occurrence of musculoskeletal disorders in the office environment.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

