@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Designing Fatigue Warning Systems: The perspective of professional drivers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Both truck and taxi drivers are experiencing heavy driving fatigue, and they have a positive attitude toward Fatigue Warning Systems (FWSs).


                        
                        
                           
                           Professional drivers hope FWSs could not only monitor and warn their fatigue but also somewhat relieve their fatigue before they could stop and rest.


                        
                        
                           
                           Participants prefer auditory warnings, as opposed to visual, vibrotactile or electric stimuli. Specifically, truck drivers prefer alarm warnings, while taxi drivers prefer verbal warnings.


                        
                        
                           
                           Warning patterns, concerns regarding FWSs are also discussed. The results would provide valuable information for companies who wish to develop FWSs for professional drivers.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

In-vehicle technology

Truck drivers

Taxi drivers

Focus group

Warning signal

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Professional drivers have been characterized as experiencing heavy fatigue resulting from long driving time in their daily work. This study aimed to explore the potential demand of Fatigue Warning Systems (FWSs) among professional drivers as a means of reducing the danger of fatigue driving and to examine their opinions regarding the design of FWSs. Six focus groups with 35 participants and a questionnaire survey with 600 respondents were conducted among Chinese truck and taxi drivers to collect qualitative and quantitative data concerning the current situation of fatigue driving and opinions regarding the design of FWSs. The results revealed that both truck and taxi drivers had a positive attitude toward FWSs, and they hoped this system could not only monitor and warn them regarding their fatigue but also somewhat relieve their fatigue before they could stop and rest. As for warning signals, participants preferred auditory warnings, as opposed to visual, vibrotactile or electric stimuli. Interestingly, it was proposed that verbal warnings involving the information regarding consequences of fatigue driving or the wishes of drivers' family members would be more effective. Additionally, different warning patterns, including graded, single and continuous warnings, were discussed in the focus group. Finally, the participants proposed many other suggestions, as well as their concerns regarding FWSs, which will provide valuable information for companies who wish to develop FWSs for professional drivers.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In recent years, the Chinese road transportation system has been developing rapidly, with the quantity of licensed drivers increasing to more than 200 million, and the vehicle population rising to 120 million (China Statistic Yearbook, 2013). At the same time, although the number of traffic accidents in China has been declining every year since 2002, it remains at a high level. The reports of China Road Traffic Accidents Statistics (2010) indicated that approximately 4 million crashes occurred in China, causing more than 65 thousand fatalities, more than 250 thousand injuries, and 930 million (RMB) (approximately 136.8 million USD) in direct economic losses (CRTAS, 2010). Driving fatigue is a major contributing cause to road traffic accidents. It is estimated that fatigue is involved in 10–20% of serious accidents worldwide (Maycock, 1997; Sagberg, 1999; Fletcher et al., 2005; Horne and Reyner, 1995; Karrer and Roetting, 2007). The actual figure may be much higher because sometimes drivers involved in crashes may fail to recognize or acknowledge the effects of fatigue (Gander et al., 2006; Karrer and Roetting, 2007).

Fatigue is associated with a decrease in physiological arousal, slowed sensorimotor functions and impaired information processing, which can diminish a driver's ability to respond effectively to unusual, unexpected, or emergency situations (Williamson et al., 1996; Kaplan and Prato, 2012; Tzamalouka et al., 2005). However, previous studies have noted that drivers typically underestimated the impact of driving fatigue on driving performance (Reyner and Horne, 1998; Ting et al., 2008). Thus, one of the major challenges in addressing the impact of driving fatigue is the difficulty in detecting fatigue and issuing a warning, particularly when fatigue is likely to increase the incidence of crashes (Williamson and Chamberlain, 2005).

To stress this challenge, there has been an increasing interest in the development of Fatigue Warning Systems (FWSs) over the past two decades (for a review, see Hartley et al., 2000; Williamson and Chamberlain, 2005). Several automobile manufacturers have included FWSs in their vehicles. For example, Volvo has developed a system called Driver Alert Control, which can alert a drowsy driver long before he or she dozes off at the wheel (Arellano, 2009). Similar systems can also be found in other vehicles, such as the Driver Monitoring System in Toyota (Williams, 2008) and the Attention Assist System in Mercedes-Benz (Philips, 2008). In general, to date, the available FWSs consist of two major components: the first component is a driving sensor that gathers and processes information regarding the driver and vehicle and later infers the driver's fatigue level (for example, see Eriksson and Papanikolopoulos, 2001; Ji et al., 2004; Schleicher et al., 2008; Senaratne et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2011; for a review, see Wright et al., 2007); the second component is a warning system that delivers an alert to the driver based on the current fatigue level (see Azmi, 2012).

It is believed that the best approach to prevent a driver's fatigue at the wheel is to ensure that the driver is sufficiently rested before the journey commences and to take regular breaks from driving (Horne and Reyner, 1996). The FWSs can promote the driver's awareness of fatigue while driving and encourage the driver to have a short recuperative break (Gillberg et al., 1996) or consume caffeine (Horne and Reyner, 1996). Many studies have reported that FWSs could reduce fatal and injurious crashes (Kulmala, 1997; Regan et al., 2001; Rumar et al., 1999; Young et al., 2003), which means a considerable reduction in the loss of life and property. For example, Rumar et al. (1999) suggested that FWSs have the potential to reduce fatal and injurious crashes on motorways by 10–15% and may reduce injurious crashes on rural roads by more than 10% (Rumar et al., 1999). Young et al. (2003) also estimated that an FWS could reduce 4% of all single vehicle crashes and result in a savings of $64 million annually in Australia (Young et al., 2003). Estimations based on the data in Germany suggested that FWSs would lead to a 35% reduction in fatigue-related crashes, equal to a 2.9% reduction in all crashes (see Commission, 2006).

Currently, FWSs remain new technology devices for Chinese drivers. The available FWSs in market are mainly equipped in several high-end models of private automobiles. Given the significant difference in driving characteristics between private and professional drivers, the available FWSs may not be suitable and acceptable for professional drivers. Firstly, professional drivers are usually exposed to long duration and distance driving, and thus they would feel tired more frequently than private drivers. A recent questionnaire survey to Netherlands drivers indicated that professional drivers reported more frequently to sometimes having fallen asleep while driving (23% of the professional drivers v.s. 10% of the private drivers) (see Goldenbeld et al., 2011). Our previous survey of Chinese professional drivers regarding driving fatigue experience also indicated that approximately one-third (32.4%) of truck drivers and two-thirds (68.5%) of taxi drivers worked for 60 or more hours per week, and 16.1% and 30.1% of the accidents were reported to be related to fatigue driving by truck and taxi drivers, respectively (Meng et al. 2015). Secondly, professional drivers usually cannot get timely rest while driving, in spite of feeling fatigue (Brown, 1997). For example, truck drivers are under considerable pressure to reach their scheduled destination, and taxi drivers have to take passengers to the destinations before they can stop and have a rest. Thirdly, professional drivers could tolerate more fatigue in driving as compared to private drivers. It has been reported that professional drivers indicated more frequently than private drivers that during the past year they sometimes started or continued to drive when they actually felt too tired to do so (37% v.s. 20%) (see Goldenbeld et al., 2011).

Professional drivers account for a large proportion in the driver population; therefore, it can be expected that professional drivers will be promising users in the future market for FWSs. On the other hand, a technical product must be properly designed to meet the preferences of potential users before it is popularized. There will be little demand for the device unless it is acceptable to the users (Young et al., 2003). At present, most engineers are devoting effort to investigating the technological aspect of FWSs, i.e., which technology should be used to detect drivers' fatigue accurately. Few studies investigate drivers' opinions and preferences about the features of FWSs, although they play a decisive role in the acceptability of this device.

The present study conducted a survey to Chinese professional drivers (including truck drivers and taxi drivers) using both qualitative and quantitative methods. The reason of involving both truck and taxi drivers is that these two types of professional drivers differ from each other in terms of work characteristics. For example, truck drivers frequently drive on long, monotonous, high-speed highways during both daytime and night (McCartt et al., 2000; Larue et al., 2011; Sallinen et al., 2004; Thiffault and Bergeron, 2003), while taxi drivers primarily drive at daytime, in urban road environments which involve a constantly changing scenarios and plenty of potential hazards (Dalziel and Job, 1997). This difference in work characteristic may produce diverse opinions and demands regarding the design of FWSs. The purpose of the survey was twofold: first, exploring the driving fatigue situation in professional drivers to examine whether there was promising demand for FWSs in the market; second, investigating the opinions of professional drivers regarding FWSs design, and providing some references for the future FWSs development. In the first part, a focus group method was used to explore the opinions of truck and taxi drivers regarding FWSs, and the data were also used to develop a questionnaire. In the second part, questionnaire data were collected from truck and taxi drivers who did not participate in the focus group to provide additional quantitative information. The qualitative data (focus group information) and the quantitative data (questionnaire survey data) were combined to understand the opinions of professional drivers concerning the FWSs.

@&#METHOD@&#

A total of 35 professional drivers (18 truck drivers and 17 taxi drivers) took part in a total of six 1-h focus groups (see Table 1
                        ). Each group contained five or six drivers. The truck drivers were recruited from a logistics center in Beijing, where these truck drivers transported cargo between other provinces and Beijing. They usually had several rest hours when waiting for cargo loading or unloading. The taxi drivers were recruited from Beijing International Airport, where these drivers had to wait for approximately 2 h to pick up passengers traveling to the city center.

Data were collected through six focus groups (for detailed description of focus group method, see Bruseberg and McDonagh-Philp, 2002; Krueger, 2009; Newman, 2002), consisting of three truck driver groups and three taxi driver groups. The focus groups were facilitated by a trained research assistant facilitator, and each group had an observer who also took detailed notes about the discussion. A semi-structured interview format was used, and a set of open-ended questions was developed for the focus group discussion (see Table 2
                        ). The questions were developed by the consultant with professional drivers and experts in road safety research. The well-established pattern of focus group questions was followed, starting with the opening questions that gradually draw the participants into the discussion, then continuing to the transition questions and the key questions that focused on the research objectives, and finally ending with the questions that tied the sessions together and brought closure (see also, Newman, 2002; Roetting et al., 2003).

Following this question pattern, the opening question was designed to make the participants comfortable and activate their willingness to join in the discussion. The following two transition questions were intended to lead participants to discuss their driving fatigue and their fatigue management. The key questions were asked for participants' opinions and suggestions regarding the features, warnings types, warning patterns and their concerns regarding FWSs. The ending question tried to give a summary of the discussion and collect some missing comments from the participants.

Prior to the discussion, all participants signed an informed consent form and completed a background questionnaire. At the beginning of the focus group discussion, the facilitator stated that the objective of the focus group was to gather information about various aspects of designing an FWS to improve driving safety. The participants were informed that all opinions were valued and equally welcome, and they were encouraged to discuss any point raised in the group. Audio and video recordings were made of all focus group sessions.

Questionnaires were collected from 300 truck drivers and 300 taxi drivers in Beijing, of which 274 and 286 valid questionnaires were kept after removing incomplete questionnaires, respectively. Most of the truck drivers were recruited from the five largest logistic areas in Beijing. The taxi drivers were recruited at the airport. All the drivers participated in the survey upon their personal acceptance, and they were assured of anonymity and confidentiality. Refusals were notably rare in both groups (both less than 5%).

The survey questions were developed and adapted from the consultant with the experts in safety research and the results of focus groups. They were a part of the full questionnaire survey about driving fatigue among Chinese professional drivers (see Meng et al., 2015). Because the total completion time of the full questionnaire had to be limited within 20 min, only some important items about FWSs were included in the questionnaire.

The basic idea of the FWSs was described in the cover page of the questionnaire as “a device equipped in the vehicle to give you some warnings when you are detected as fatigued”. The questionnaire contained 12 statements to investigate four topics (see Table 3
                        , for the specific questions in the questionnaire, see Table 4
                        ). One of the main purposes of this study is to survey the attitude of professional drivers toward FWSs, and thus the first topic contained two questions regarding whether professional drivers liked to receive warning while their fatigue was detected. In the focus group discussion, the functions of fatigue warning and relieving in FWSs were mentioned many times; therefore, the second topic covered three questions regarding professional drivers' opinions toward fatigue warning and relieving functions. Additionally, four types of warning signals were proposed and discussed in the focus groups, and the third topic in the questionnaire was therefore designed to survey participants' attitude toward these warning signals. The final topic aimed at collecting participants concerns regarding the design of FWSs, which were also raised from the focus group discussion.

Responses to these questions were made using a five-point Likert scale (“Strongly disagree (1),” “Somewhat disagree (2),” “Neither agree nor disagree (3),” “Somewhat agree (4)” and “Strongly agree (5)”) (a similar method was also used in Huang et al., 2008). All the questionnaires were completed by face-to-face interviews, while the interviewers kept neutral position and their roles were only limited to providing clarification regarding the questions if needed. Before the administration of the questionnaire, each driver received detailed information of the purpose and an explanation on how to fill the questionnaire, as well as the potential benefits from the research's findings and the right to deny participation or withdraw at any time.

All audio tapes of focus groups were transcribed verbatim and analyzed using a computerized version of long-table approach (see Krueger and Casey, 2000; Huang et al., 2005). In the traditional long-table approach, the original transcripts were printed, cut and later categorized according to the topic areas. In the present study, this process was implemented by an Excel file instead of paper clippings. The video records were consulted during the transcription when necessary to clarify the audio tapes.

First, the original transcripts were broken into complete sentences, which were aggregated into two sets, one for the truck drivers and the other for the taxi drivers. Next, three members of the research team individually sorted these sentences and identified the major categories in those statements. According to the 8 questions in focus groups, five categories were identified before the sorting work, including “current situation of driving fatigue”, “features of FWSs”, “types of warning signals”, “presentation patterns of warning signals” and “concerns regarding FWSs”. The three members were instructed that they should sort each sentence from the focus group discussion into the five categories, and the sentence that could not be sorted into any category would be put into the category “other suggestions”. When all the three members finished the sorting work, their final results were merged, with the sets of truck driver group and taxi driver group being separated. In this process, if the three members held different opinions about the sorting result of a sentence, they would vote to determine the final sorting result of this sentence (the sentences with inconsistent sorting results took less than 5 percent in all the sentences). The results of each category was reported in the following section, and the frequency of each theme was mentioned in the focus group discussion was also calculated and presented.

In terms of the data analysis of questionnaire survey, the percentage of participants who chose each response was calculated for each question (see Table 4). These quantitative data were reported together with the qualitative data gathered from the focus group discussion, so as to understand professional drivers' opinions regarding FWSs design from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives.

@&#RESULTS@&#

When required to “describe the current situation of driving fatigue among your peers and yourself”, truck and taxi drivers in the focus group consistently considered fatigue an extremely prevalent phenomenon for themselves, as well as their peers. Truck driver participants reported that they usually drove during both daytime and night in a single journey. One truck driver stated that, “I have fallen asleep after driving for a long time, and didn't even wake up when my truck hit a private car”. Taxi driver participants reported that all the taxi drivers were suffering from driving fatigue, and they worked for at least 12 h per day. A participating taxi driver stated that one of his peers fell asleep while waiting for the green light at an intersection, and another taxi driver reportedly died suddenly while driving because of his long consecutive hours working. By comparison, the driving time of these participating taxi drivers (71.2 h per week) was significantly more than that of the participating truck drivers (56.9 h per week, p < 0.01).

Under the traffic regulation in China, drivers should have a rest after a maximum of 4 h driving. However, participants of both the truck and taxi drivers reported that few drivers would take rest as recommended by the regulation. 12 out of 18 participating truck drivers and all the participating taxi drivers said that they only took a short rest when they were too tired to continue driving (i.e., reaching their physical and/or psychological limit). The participating truck drivers reported that if they could manage to reach the destination before the early morning, they usually did not have sleep during the journey; otherwise, they would sleep approximately 3 h around midnight and then keep driving. Taxi driver participants stated that they would only have a sleep of approximately 30 min after lunch and no other regular rest at other times.

All the truck driver participants complained that the tight deliver schedule was the main cause of their fatigue, and they sometimes even did not have enough time for dinner during the trip (only had one meal during the whole day), not to mention having enough rest. Even if the delivery schedule was relatively loose, many truck drivers would forego their rest time in case possible traffic jams, vehicle accidents, traffic control, or road maintenance (which often occurred on the highways in China) might delay the journey. What's worse is that the falling of transportation profit makes most companies cannot afford two drivers in a single trip, and one truck driver has to drive throughout the whole trip. All of the participants of taxi drivers complained that the high fixed license fee to the taxi companies should be primarily blamed for their fatigue driving. The participants stated that if they worked less than 8 h per day, they can hardly earn enough money to pay for the license fee. The heavy traffic in urban Beijing was also mentioned by the taxi drivers as a contributor to their fatigue. They had to drive at relatively low speed in the heavy traffic, especially during the peak hours, which reduced their income. A taxi driver stated that a 35-km journey once took him 3.5 h during morning peak hours. Therefore, taxi drivers had to work much more time to compensate for the income loss resulting from the traffic congestion.

Importantly, it was mentioned by the participants that most drivers held an “optimism bias”, which meant that these drivers thought they were good at counteracting the influence of fatigue, and the danger of fatigue would not occur on them. This attitude toward fatigue made a portion of drivers continue driving for a long duration. Someone also mentioned that sometimes they thought they were still in good condition to drive, while actually they had been compromised by fatigue, especially for the professional drivers who had regularly been driving long shifts. On the other hand, 16 out of 18 truck driver and all the taxi driver participants reported that when they were fatigued while driving, a nap as short as 15 min would help considerably to relieve fatigue. Therefore, a device which could warn drivers of their fatigue and make them have a short rest would be beneficial without taking too much working time.

All of the participants had no experience of any device related to driving fatigue, but most of them showed a positive attitude toward FWSs. In the questionnaire survey, a majority of truck drivers (51.1% somewhat agree and 26.7% strongly agree) and taxi drivers (51.0% somewhat agree and 30.7% strongly agree) expressed that “I would like to receive warnings when I am fatigued”, and 68.5% (49.3% somewhat agree and 19.2% strongly agree) of truck drivers and 80.8% (51.9% somewhat agree and 28.9% strongly agree) of taxi drivers expressed that “I would like to know my fatigue level during the journey”. 77.9% (43.3% somewhat agree and 34.6% strongly agree) of truck drivers and 87.8% (51.1% somewhat agree and 36.7% strongly agree) of taxi drivers expected that FWSs would increase their driving safety while driving. Three primary features of FWSs were mentioned most in the focus group: fatigue monitoring, fatigue warning and fatigue relieving, whose frequency mentioned in the focus group is displayed in Fig. 1
                        . Similarly, 75.1% (56.7% somewhat agree and 18.4% strongly agree) of the truck drivers and 83.9% (58.8% somewhat agree and 25.1% strongly agree) of taxi drivers in the questionnaire survey agreed that FWSs should “monitor and warn me of my fatigue”, and 76.6% (50.9% somewhat agree and 25.7% strongly agree) of truck drivers and 82.3% (48.1% somewhat agree and 34.2% strongly agree) of taxi drivers agreed that the FWSs should also help relieve fatigue and keep drivers alert while driving.

In terms of fatigue monitoring, a taxi driver participant proposed to detect drivers' fatigue level simply by the consecutive driving duration. For example, when the FWSs detected the driver had been driving consecutively for 4 h, some warnings should be activated. However, other participants were opposed to this method because drivers' fatigue level may be different, even after the same driving duration. Alternatively, taxi drivers proposed to monitor drivers' fatigue by eye movement and head nodding, which were considered to be the most apparent symptoms when taxi drivers were fatigued. However, two truck drivers did not think heading nodding would be an accurate indicator of truck drivers' fatigue. Four truck drivers proposed that driving fatigue could be monitored by the maneuver of steering wheel, since they felt a significant decrease in the stability of steering wheel control when they were fatigued.

In terms of fatigue warning, two taxi driver participants proposed to present fatigue warning and also limit the output of accelerator while the driver's fatigue was detected. However, other taxi driver participants disagreed with this point, and they thought that the FWSs should only provide some signals to warn the drivers of their fatigue level but not to interfere with the control of vehicle. Drivers preferred to be informed of their fatigue level and keep their own pace of rest. For instance, when the fatigue warning was presented while taxi drivers were carrying some passengers, the drivers would like to finish the current task and subsequently find a proper place to have a rest.

Additionally, both truck and taxi driver participants hoped that FWSs not only provided some warnings but also could relieve their fatigue for a short period. For professional drivers, their work characteristics did not allow them to stop and have a rest once they were fatigued (for example, the taxi drivers were carrying passengers and the truck drivers could only stop at the service areas). By comparison, fatigue relieving was mentioned more times in the taxi driver groups than in the truck driver groups (26 v.s. 15). It is likely that taxi drivers are exposed to higher driving fatigue in their daily driving, and thus their demand to relieve fatigue while driving is greater as compared to truck drivers. If FWSs could relieve the drivers' fatigue before they finished the current job or reached the next service area, it would help a lot to suppress the influence of fatigue.

Different types of warning signals were mentioned by participants in the focus group, including visual, auditory, vibrotactile warnings, and even electric stimuli (see Fig. 2
                        ). Two truck driver and three taxi driver participants proposed that it might be feasible to use tri-color light to indicate the driver's fatigue level (e.g., “green”, “yellow” and “red” represented “good”, “moderately fatigue”, and “extremely fatigue”, respectively). 66.2% (47.9% somewhat agree and 18.3% strongly agree) truck drivers and 71.1% (50.6% somewhat agree and 20.5% strongly agree) taxi drivers in the questionnaire survey also agreed that visual warnings could be used to warn drivers of their fatigue level. However, many participants in the focus group disagreed because they considered visual stimuli to be easily neglected and were not sufficiently apparent. Furthermore, two truck drivers mentioned that drivers tended to close their eyes while fatigued, which rendered visual warnings ineffective.

Auditory stimuli, including alarm warning and verbal warning, were preferred by participants in the focus group. They considered alarm as a good means to convey warning signals as well as to arouse the drivers. For example, both truck and taxi drivers stated that the sudden presentation of an alarm, such as the sound of a fire alarm, could make people alert and relieve fatigue for a short period. In fact, 75.4% (52.7% somewhat agree and 22.7% strongly agree) of truck drivers and 75.1% (46.9% somewhat agree and 28.2% strongly agree) of taxi drivers in the questionnaire survey also agreed to use alarm sound as warning signal. In the focus group discussion, alarm warning was mentioned more time in truck driver group than in taxi driver group (30 v.s. 12). Taxi drivers worried that such alarm might be annoying and their passengers might be confused and startled. Some others also thought that some types of music (e.g., rock music) could arouse them and help relieve fatigue.

All the participants in the focus group agreed that verbal warnings might be more straightforward and informative than other types of warnings. In fact, 79.0% (53.9% somewhat agree and 25.1% strongly agree) of truck drivers and 84.4% (56.4% somewhat agree and 28.0% strongly agree) of taxi drivers in the questionnaire survey agreed that the verbal message could be used as fatigue warning signals. Some participants stressed that the verbal message should not only warn the drivers of their fatigue state but also emphasize the potential danger resulting from fatigue driving. They believed that the drivers would tend to stop and rest when they realized they were exposed to the high risk of accidents if they continued driving after fatigue. The verbal warnings were also suggested to include the information of previous accidents occurred around the location where the driver was driving, which would increase the driver's awareness of the danger associated with fatigue driving. Interestingly, three taxi driver participants mentioned that most taxi drivers were family-oriented. If the verbal warnings could mention the safety wishes of family members to the drivers, drivers would care more about the danger of fatigue driving. For example, “Your family are waiting for you to come back safely, please have a rest to keep safe driving”. However, this item was not mentioned among truck driver groups, which was probably because truck drivers were relatively young and they had less family consciousness than taxi drivers.

Vibrotactile warnings were also preferred by some participants in the focus group because this type of signals was considered to be perceived only by the driver, without interfering with other passengers. In the questionnaire survey, 73.4% (45.9% somewhat agree and 27.5% strongly agree) of truck drivers and 78.5% (49.2% somewhat agree and 29.3% strongly agree) of taxi drivers agreed to use vibrotactile signal as fatigue warnings. Participants suggested that the tactors could be embedded in the driver's seat, steering wheel or even something wore on their wrist, such as a watch. However, eight truck driver and five taxi driver participants still worried that vibrotactile stimuli might not work well in alerting the drivers, because they thought that vibrotactile warnings might not be arousing enough and their effectiveness might also be degraded by the thick clothes in winter.

For the electric stimuli, almost all participants in truck and taxi driver groups did not support this type of warning signal. They thought that the electric stimuli were too strong, and some drivers might be startled and made a sudden acceleration, brake or steering wheel rotation, resulting in potential accidents.

Interestingly, both truck and taxi drivers proposed that there could be a light installed outside a vehicle to indicate the driver's fatigue state. For example, when the driver was in heavy fatigue, the light would be in the color of red so that other road users (including the traffic police) could know the driver was exposed to driving fatigue. This design might encourage the drivers to stop and rest while they were tired because they realized that others were watching them and they would also be punished if caught by the police.

Thirteen truck driver and six taxi driver participants mentioned that the warnings should be graded according to the drivers' fatigue state. For example, the warnings could be designed into three levels and were presented when the drivers were in a mild, moderately and severe fatigue, respectively. These participants suggested that the urgency of graded warnings should be sequentially increased to indicate different danger levels of fatigue. They also proposed that the graded warnings could be easily implemented by using auditory signals. When a mild fatigue was detected, some music or soft sound could be presented; however, when a severe fatigue was detected, some alarm with high intensity or frequency would be activated. However, other participants mentioned that the graded warnings were overly complicated for drivers, and only one warning at the time when the driver was in a mild fatigue might be better. In this case, the drivers would realize that they should prepare to stop and rest.

Instead of the graded warnings, 3 taxi driver participants also proposed a design involving continuous warnings, which would keep in activation until the driver stopped the car and had a rest. These participants thought that the continuously activated warning signal would be annoying, and the drivers had to stop the car to terminate the warnings.

Other than the discussion about the design of FWSs, several concerns were also stressed by the participants, including quality, price, multifunction, etc. (see Fig. 3
                        ). Price of the device was the theme most mentioned by both truck and taxi driver participants. In the questionnaire survey, 62.2% (48.4% somewhat agree and 13.8% strongly agree) of truck drivers and 63.5% (47.4% somewhat agree and 15.8% strongly agree) of taxi drivers agreed that they worried this device would be too expensive. By comparison, price was mentioned more times in the taxi driver focus groups than in the truck driver focus group when they were required to report their concerns (25 v.s. 18). Participants in truck and taxi driver groups indicated that their companies would not care about the fatigue of the employees; therefore, the drivers had to pay for the device installation by themselves. If the device was more than 1000 yuan (approximately 150 US dollars), the drivers would unlikely be willing to install it, even if they were clearly aware of its effectiveness. Some participants also worried about the device's quality, and 58.9% (46.1% somewhat agree and 12.8% strongly agree) of truck drivers and 62.6% (49.2% somewhat agree and 13.4% strongly agree) of taxi drivers agreed that they were concerned that the device might not be reliable. Additionally, 59.1% (45.6% somewhat agree and 13.5% strongly agree) of truck drivers and 62.0% (48.1% somewhat agree and 13.9% strongly agree) of the taxi drivers agreed that they were concerned that FWSs might be too complex for them to use.

Some others also worried that when the device was installed, the police officer might be easy to obtain the fatigue record of the drivers, which might bring some penalty to the drivers. Two truck driver participants mentioned that drivers' dependency on the system might occur after long-term exposure. That is, the drivers might not stop to have a rest until some warnings were presented from the device. Therefore, if the system failed to issue some warnings when the driver's fatigue was detected, the driver would be exposed to the danger of fatigue driving.

Finally, the participants provided further suggestions for the design of FWSs. The system was generally expected to be flexible enough, and users could set the system according to their own preference. For instance, some participants stated that it would be more easily accepted if the type of the warning signal could be chosen by users. It was also suggested that FWSs should be combined with other in-vehicle devices, preventing from taking up excessive space in their small cabs. Additionally, both truck and taxi driver participants mentioned the entertainment functions of FWSs, for example, playing music, Chinese cross talk, and talk shows, which could relieve drivers' fatigue during long time monotonous driving. Furthermore, all participants of truck drivers suggested FWSs should also provide the information about the distance to the next service area, so that the drivers could arrange their rest schedule during the journey.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study explored the current situation of driving fatigue among Chinese professional drivers and their opinions concerning the design of FWSs (see Table 5
                     ). The overall results of the focus group indicated that driving fatigue was prevalent among Chinese truck and taxi drivers (especially for taxi drivers), which were consistent with our previous questionnaire survey of the professional drivers in Beijing (Meng et al. 2015). The job characteristics of truck and taxi drivers (e.g., the tight delivery schedule, the high license fee) are certainly the primary factors for the driving fatigue of professional drivers. However, the “optimism bias” about driving fatigue and the somewhat poor detectability of the fatigue effect reported in the focus groups suggested the necessity of FWSs in reducing fatigue driving. Both the truck and taxi drivers showed positive attitudes toward FWSs and they would like to know their fatigue level and be warned when they were exposed to fatigue. Therefore, FWSs were considered a good means of promoting driving safety and might have a great potential demand among Chinese professional drivers if properly designed and marketed.

Because of the special job characteristics of professional drivers (i.e., sometimes they cannot have a rest as soon as they were detected as fatigue), truck and taxi drivers required FWSs to be able not only to monitor and present warnings regarding their fatigue but also to relieve fatigue as well before they could stop the vehicle. Currently, most of the available FWSs are focusing on how to monitor fatigue and warn drivers (Eriksson and Papanikolopoulos, 2001; Senaratne et al., 2011; Sigari et al., 2013); however, few have attempted to keep the drivers alert for a short period after their fatigue is detected.

Different types of warning signals were discussed in the focus group. Both truck and taxi drivers preferred auditory warning signals, as opposed to visual, vibrotactile or electric stimuli. Verbal messages, as a typical form of auditory warnings, were expected by the professional drivers to be capable of conveying a wealth of information. “Do not continue driving while fatigue” has been advertised for several decades in China through radio, television, and advertising board along the roads. Therefore, the verbal messages should be designed into a new form to persuade drivers to stop and rest after their fatigue is detected. As proposed by the participants, some information about the consequences of fatigue driving (also including previous accidents occurred around the location where the driver is driving) and the care of their family to them may be more effective to make drivers stop fatigue driving.

An interesting concept about fatigue monitoring was proposed in the focus group, which involved a light installed outside of the vehicle to indicate the driver's fatigue state. This design will make drivers know the fatigue state of each other, which may make drivers tend to stop and rest when their fatigue was detected. The traffic police can also use this light to judge whether a portion of drivers are engaged in fatigue driving. It would be interesting to further investigate the effect of such type of outside indicators on drivers' status. However, FWSs technology should be reliable enough and supporting legislative regulations should be mandated before launching such a countermeasure.

There was no consistent opinion among the participants about whether the warnings should be designed into graded or single stimuli. However, all the participants agreed that some warnings should be presented as soon as a mild fatigue was detected, rather than when the drivers were already in a heavy fatigue. The early warnings leave more time for drivers to arrange their work schedule and to find a proper location to have rest. A number of participants also proposed a continuous warning signal, which would remain activated from when the driver was detected as fatigued until the driver stopped the car. It was thought that the annoying warnings would force the drivers to stop driving. In fact, it was demonstrated that the annoyance factors associated with a device would likely lead drivers to disable the system (Lerner, 1996). For example, in some models of cars, warnings would be kept in activation if drivers do not fasten the seatbelt. The warning signal makes some drivers annoying, so they just insert a plug into the seatbelt base to terminate the warnings. Similar problems may emerge if a continuous warning is used in FWSs.

It is worth noting that Chinese taxi drivers don't feel that taxi companies are concerned about their safety. Taxi drivers mentioned that the GPS module installed in their cars could transfer all their travel information (e.g., car position, travel duration, travel distance, etc.) to the companies, and managers had a clear knowledge of the current fatigue state of taxi drivers. However, managers do not have the motivation to improve taxi drivers' fatigue state, because taxi companies just charge the license fees monthly, and the loss resulting from any accident would be totally addressed by taxi drivers. Therefore, taxi drivers have to pay for the installation of FWSs by themselves. Because of the relatively low income of Chinese taxi drivers, they are sensitive to the price of FWSs. This is also the case for the truck drivers. Meanwhile, the accuracy of fatigue monitoring is also an important issue which will determine whether the drivers will trust and accept the system (Lee et al., 2004).

In conclusion, the results of this study provided valuable information for the companies who plan to develop FWSs for Chinese professional drivers. However, it should worth bearing in mind that professional drivers working under different conditions may not hold the same opinion regarding the design of FWSs. The Chinese professional drivers covered by the present study usually work for long consecutive hours and have relatively low income. Therefore, if the drivers in other areas have similar working condition to that of Chinese professional drivers, the findings from the questionnaire survey and focus group could be generalized to that driver population; otherwise, the findings should be taken with some degree of caution. Some limitations in the present study should be acknowledged. First, the participants in the focus group and questionnaire survey were limited to the area of Beijing, and they may not necessarily represent all Chinese professional drivers. Second, a relatively low sample size was involved in this study, and the data of focus group and questionnaire may not be used to be extrapolated to all Chinese professional drivers. Finally, because all the participants in the focus group had no experience with any existing FWSs, their comments and responses were based on their perception and imagination of how the system might work. These opinions may be different from those the drivers will hold when they are using such actual systems.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant number 71371103 and 31271100, the Open Funding Project of National Key Laboratory of Human Factors Engineering, under grant number HF2013-K-04.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

