@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effect of an on-hip load-carrying belt on physiological and perceptual responses during bimanual anterior load carriage

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Physiological and perceptual effects of an on-hip load-carrying belt (HLCB) during bimanual anterior load carriage were evaluated.


                        
                        
                           
                           The HLCB could lower heart rate, oxygen uptake, minute ventilation and peripheral rating of perceived exertion when carrying a 15 kg load.


                        
                        
                           
                           Using HLCB or similar device is therefore recommended for bimanual anterior load carriage of 15 kg or probably larger.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Anterior load carriage

Energy cost

Heart rate

Load carrying device

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Manual load carriage continues to be a major contributor of musculoskeletal injury. This study investigates the physiological and subjective effects of an on-hip load-carrying belt (HLCB) during bimanual anterior load carriage. Fifteen healthy male participants walked on a level ground treadmill at 4.5 km/h for 5 min carrying 5, 10 and 15 kg loads with hands and arms in front of the body, with and without using the HLCB (WD and ND). Heart rate, normalized oxygen uptake, minute ventilation and, central and peripheral ratings of perceived exertion were the dependent variables. The mean heart rate, normalized oxygen uptake, minute ventilation and peripheral rating of perceived exertion increased significantly with load under both WD and ND conditions. At a load of 15 kg, the mean heart rate, normalized oxygen uptake, minute ventilation and peripheral rating of perceived exertion were significantly lower by 6.6%, 8.0%, 11.8% and 13.9% respectively in WD condition when compared to the ND condition. There was no significant difference between WD and ND conditions with 5 or 10 kg load. It can be concluded that the HLCB could reduce a person's physiological and peripheral perceptual responses when walking on a level ground treadmill at 4.5 km/h with a load of 15 kg. Using a HLCB or similar device is therefore recommended for bimanual anterior load carriage for loads of 15 kg or probably larger.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Load carrying is a well-known risk factor of back pain, musculoskeletal disorders and fall injuries (Chow et al., 2014; Kelsey et al., 1984; Pietri et al., 1992; Kuiper et al., 1999; and Myung and Smith, 1997; Kim and Chai, 2015). Over the years, research has examined the physiological and biomechanical implications of load carrying for risk prevention, energy reduction, mobility improvement, and enhancement of comfort (Datta and Ramanathan, 1971; Legg, 1985; and Haisman, 1988; Wang et al., 2013).

Several studies have shown that factors affecting load carriage performance are the method of carrying, placement of load, the magnitude of the load, speed of locomotion, terrain type and so on (Bastien et al., 2005; Browning et al., 2007; Soule and Goldman, 1969; Stuempfle et al., 2004). It has been reported that metabolic expenditure increases linearly with the increase of load magnitude and walking speed in some (Bastien et al., 2005; Browning et al., 2007; and Keren et al., 1981), but not all studies (Griffin et al., 2003; Bastien et al., 2005; and Abe et al., 2004). Other findings have shown that a well-distributed load using a harness or trunk vest could reduce the physiological responses during long term walking (Datta and Ramanathan, 1971; Lloyd and Cooke, 2000; Knapik et al., 1996). Legg and Mahanty (1985), after comparing the metabolic effect of five different load carrying methods, concluded that the front/backpack (also called doublepack) method produced the least metabolic strain and suggested that the optimum way to carry loads would be stable as that brings the center of gravity of the load as close to the body to make use of the large mass muscles, thereby reducing the metabolic strain.

In contrast, anterior load carriage (i.e. carrying objects with hands and forearms) was considered as one of the least efficient physiologically, as it increases energy expenditure on shoulder muscles (Malhotra and Gupta, 1965; Knapik et al., 1996). When compared with backpack carrying, anterior carrying consumed 34% more oxygen (Malhotra and Gupta, 1965), and required more muscular effort in the contralateral muscles (Cook and Neumann, 1987; Malhotra and Gupta, 1965). Other studies also reported a higher energy cost and a greater cardiovascular strain in hand carriage compared to torso carriage (Knapik et al., 2000; Lind and McNicol, 1968). A significant increase in anterior/posterior shear loading of the spine as compared with other methods of carrying has been reported as well (Rose et al., 2013). The primary disadvantage of anterior load carriage is presumably as a result of extra torque on the smaller groups of muscles of forearms and hands as well as the relatively large loads imposed on the low back muscles and the spine. Nevertheless, many occupations (e.g. military, emergency medical, moving and delivery) require anterior load carrying frequently. Besides, delivery workers tend to adopt this carrying mode over short distances for convenience.

To overcome the various issues, considerable research has focused on determining the transfer of some load from hands to shoulders and the hip (Knapik et al., 2000; Holewun and Lotens, 1992; Smallman et al., 2013). In this regard, Knapik et al. (2000) found that moving a stretcher load from the hands and placing that load on the shoulders and/or hip resulted in improved performance, reduced cardiorespiratory stress and improved the subjective ratings. Holewun and Lotens (1992) observed that when the load was carried primarily on the waist with a hip belt, there was less discomfort compared to shoulder load carriage. Smallman et al. (2013) also generated an on-body assistive device for professional movers in Canada, which could reduce perceived discomfort and flexor digitorum activity, with greater in-phase coordination between the trunk-pelvis. Unfortunately, that device was designed for carrying large objects, and it is too big for delivery workers on full-day shifts. Its effect on metabolic expenditure is unknown as well.

Most previous studies have focused on the physiological effects of backpack carriage and manual material handling that involves lifting, carrying, and lowering of large and heavy objects. There is limited understanding of the physiological responses of bimanual anterior load carriage of boxes that are frequently carried by delivery personnel. Even though previous studies have shown the disadvantages of hand carrying as compared to carrying objects close to the trunk (e.g. backpack) (Cook and Neumann, 1987; Knapik et al., 2000), the research related to physiological changes of transferring load from the hands to the waist is rather limited.

In view of the above, the research reported here is aimed at investigating an on-hip load carrying belt (HLCB) for two-handed anterior load carriage for delivery personnel. The basic needs of a HLCB ought to be lightweight, swift to load and unload, and easy to be used with a waist belt that most men wear. Physiological and subjective responses were measured to assess the effect of the HLCB when walking (Paul et al., 2015). It was hypothesized that the HLCB would reduce energy expenditure and reduce the discomfort of carrying loads.

@&#METHODS@&#

Fifteen male college students aged from 18 to 30 years old voluntarily participated in this study (Table 1
                        ). The sample size was estimated based on the results of a pilot study. Their demographics were recorded prior to the experiment. Each participant completed an informed consent, and a health history questionnaire prior to testing. All participants reported being in good health and free of any musculoskeletal injuries or disorders. They all participated regularly in physical activities, but were not used to carrying loads on a regular basis. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the Hong Kong Institute of Education.

A prototype HLCB (Fig. 1
                        ) was designed to transfer load from the hands to the waist. It consisted of a modified lifting belt, a leather belly protector, and a support of size 10 × 14 cm. The belt and the belly protector were hand made of cowhide. The support was designed using Rhino for Mac (Rhino 5, Robert McNeel & Associates, USA) and 3D printed with ABS on a UP Plus 2 (PP2DP, USA). The total weight of the HLCB was 476 g and it could fit a person having a waist of 72–90 cm. Shoulder straps were not used in order to minimize weight and convenience.

A standard cardboard box of size 36 × 30 × 25 cm used in the delivery industry (sf-express.com, SF Express, China) was used. Sand bags of weight 5 kg (low), 10 kg (medium), and 15 kg (heavy) weight (equivalent to about 7.5%, 15% and 22% of participants' body weight) comprised the load (Bhambhani et al., 1997). The sand bags were positioned in the box with foam of negligible weight, placed in all directions to ensure even distribution of the load. The participants were asked to wear the LCB, then grasp the load at the front bottom edge furthest from the body with both hands (Morrissey and Liou, 1984). The “back” bottom edge of the box was placed on the load support for the with-device (WD) condition of the experiment. In the without- or no-device (ND) condition, the LCB was also worn to make sure the total mass was the same, but the load support was moved to the back when carrying the load.

There were six sessions in total, including 5, 10 and 15 kg loads in WD as well as 5, 10 and 15 kg loads in ND. The experiment was conducted on two separate days. A balanced order experimental design was used in which eight participants began with WD first with the remaining seven participants being exposed to the WD condition in reverse order. The order of presentation of the three loaded conditions was based on a Latin square design. In each condition, participants walked for 5 min at 4.5 km/h (Legg et al., 1992; Pal et al., 2014) on a level ground treadmill (Para Graphics, h/p/cosmos, Germany). The participants were allowed to rest for at least 15 min between any two sessions to avoid fatigue. Prior to the experiment, participants were allowed to “test” the loads briefly. All trials were performed in a controlled laboratory environment at 22–25 °C, and 50–55% relative humidity.

Normalized oxygen uptake (VO2) and minute ventilation (VE) were recorded on a Cortex Metalyzer 3B (CORTEX Biophysik GmbH, Germany). Heart rate (HR) was measured using a Polar S810i wrist watch (Polar Electro, Finland). The mean values of VO2, VE and HR were calculated over the final 2 min of the test, by which time the participants should have reached a steady state (Schertzer and Riemer, 2014). At the end of each session, the participants were requested to indicate the central (i.e. related to the heart and lungs) and peripheral (i.e. related to the upper extremities) ratings of perceived exertion (RPEC and RPEP respectively) on the Borg's scale (Borg, 1985).

Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS 21 software (IBM, Chicago, IL, USA). The physiological and subjective variables were analyzed using a two-way repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with two levels (WD and ND) and three levels of load (5, 10 and 15 kg). The Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment was applied to the degrees of freedom to account for the sphericity assumption. Significance was set at p < 0.05, and the Bonferroni criterion was used for post-hoc comparisons.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The mean and standard error values of the dependent variables are shown in Fig. 2
                     . The device × load interaction was significant for HR (p < 0.001), VO2 (p < 0.001), VE (p < 0.001), and RPEP (p = 0.045). No significant interaction was found for RPEC (P = 0.628). There were significant changes in HR, VO2, VE, RPEC and RPEP with load (p < 0.001).


                     Post-hoc multiple comparisons showed that, when carrying a 15 kg load, there were significant reductions in HR, VO2, VE and RPEP (6.6%, 8.0%, 11.8% and 13.9% respectively) for WD when compared to the ND condition. There was no significant difference between WD and ND conditions with a 5 or 10 kg load except for RREP at 10 kg (Fig. 2).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The results clearly show that the physiological and subjective responses are different depending on the load magnitude and the use of the device. As expected, metabolic cost increases with heavier load. These observations are in agreement with the research of Morrissey and Liou (1984), Taboun and Dutta (1989). Bhambhani et al. (1997) who have demonstrated increases of metabolic expenditure with increasing load. When walking, Bhambhani et al. (1997) reported a 50% increase in VO2 and 36% increase in HR with a 15 kg box when compared to no load. The HLCB significantly lowers HR, VO2, and VE as compared with 15 kg load. No significant differences exist between the two device conditions at loads of 5 and 10 kg except for RPEP at 10 kg (Fig. 2).

HR, VO2 and VE are directly proportional to the load in the WD condition (Fig. 2). In ND, the increase in metabolic rate was gradual at 5 kg load but abrupt at 15 kg load. These findings agree with the previous studies. When a load was carried close to the trunk, the external load could be considered to be an increase in body mass with which the energy cost increases linearly (Bastien et al., 2005; Goldman and Iampietro, 1962; Legg and Mahanty, 1985). However, if the load is carried at a more distal body location, then the energy consumption is greater (Browning et al., 2007, Soule and Goldman, 1969). Schertzer and Riemer (2014) has shown a nonlinear increase in the metabolic expenditure with an addition of mass on the ankle and knee. In this experiment, a nonlinear relation between metabolic expenditure and load was seen in ND. When using the device (WD), part of the load is transferred from the hands to the waist and distributed around the trunk making the load fixated to the body and thus has the same effect as an increase of body mass. As a result, the metabolic cost of WD condition was similar to that of backpack carriage (Bastien et al., 2005; Goldman and Iampietro, 1962; Legg and Mahanty, 1985).

A heart rate over 125 beats/min has been classified as “heavy work” (AIHA Technical Committee, 1971; Kroemer et al., 2001). When carrying 15 kg, the mean heart rates were 125 beats/min and 116 beats/min in ND and WD conditions respectively. Accordingly, WD condition with 15 kg load could be classified as work with “medium stress”. The analysis of subjective responses provided additional supportive information. The Borg scores showed that participants report “hard” in ND and “somewhat hard” in WD for the RPEP.

It was hypothesized that the HLCB would significantly reduce metabolic cost in all load conditions. However, a significant difference was found only at a load of 15 kg. A possible explanation might be that there were no constraints (e.g. height of load, trunk posture) other than grasping the front bottom edges farthest from the body. The participants tend to carry the load in a manner that is most comfortable to them. Photographs indicate the load at a lower height with a greater trunk-ground angle in ND than that in WD (Fig. 3
                     ). A higher position with anterior load carriage produces more muscle activity in the T9 erector spinae muscles and anterior deltoid than that at a lower position (Anderson et al., 2007). Bhambhani et al. (1997) have reported that around 30–40% of the load is transferred to the body as a result of the upper arms and box resting against the front of the body. The greater trunk-ground angle of backward lean probably increased the part of load that is supported by the body in maintaining whole-body equilibrium.

To the best of our knowledge, the use of HLCB for bi-manual anterior carriage is unique. The on-hip-only load-carrying belt for two-handed anterior carriage is different from other devices with a harness or shoulder straps (Knapik et al., 2000; Smallman et al., 2013). The belt developed is easy to make and is a good replacement for what delivery personnel normally wear. Alternatively, the device may be slipped into any waist belt.

The use of a harness or shoulder strap might bring added benefit to load distribution reducing stress at the hip. However, when carrying loads of up to 15 kg, no subjective discomfort was reported. It is not known whether a heavier load will result in discomfort as most of the load is transferred to the hip. One of the important limitations of this study is the lack of information on low back loading. In addition, as each trial was limited to 5 min, the effect of load transfer on muscle discomfort over prolonged walking remains unknown. The load carriage data were collected in a very controlled lab setting. Even though the HLCB was designed for uneven terrain where carts or strollers cannot be used, a level ground treadmill was used in this study. Furthermore, the sample size of the study was relatively small, and all participants were male college students who had no experience carrying loads as a profession. More study is needed with experienced workers in a field environment. Further study of muscle activities and kinematic measures of body posture, in particular for the low back, are proposed.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China under Grant 20130101110148, and the Science Technology Department of Zhejiang Province, China under Grant 2015C31051.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

