@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effects of social interactions with in-vehicle agents on a driver's anger level, driving performance, situation awareness, and perceived workload

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           An in-vehicle agent can improve a driver's psychological state and road safety.


                        
                        
                           
                           Participants drove in a simulator with induced anger or neutral affect.


                        
                        
                           
                           Speech-based agents enhanced driver situation awareness and driving performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Speech-based agents reduced participants' anger level and perceived workload.


                        
                        
                           
                           A driver's situation awareness mediated anger effects on driving performance.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

In-vehicle agent

Road rage

Situation awareness

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Research has suggested that interaction with an in-vehicle software agent can improve a driver's psychological state and increase road safety. The present study explored the possibility of using an in-vehicle software agent to mitigate effects of driver anger on driving behavior. After either anger or neutral mood induction, 60 undergraduates drove in a simulator with two types of agent intervention. Results showed that both speech-based agents not only enhance driver situation awareness and driving performance, but also reduce their anger level and perceived workload. Regression models show that a driver's anger influences driving performance measures, mediated by situation awareness. The practical implications include design guidelines for the design of social interaction with in-vehicle software agents.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

With the advance of technology, we are actually living in the ubiquitous and pervasive computing era (Weiser, 1991). The introduction of various robots or intelligent software agents (Jeon, 2010) has accelerated this trend even in the vehicle context (Jeon, 2012). Important (and already prevalent) social interactions between a driver and an in-vehicle agent are expected to lead to better experiences on the road and safer driving (Riener et al., 2013).

Emotions play a central role in personal evaluations of, or relationships with, artifacts and systems (Norman, 2005) and thus, many tasks have an affective component, specifically under conditions of stress, workload, and multitasking (Lottridge et al., 2011). Given that driving presents such a context, emotional interaction can have enormous consequences. For instance, road rage is one of the most frequently reported examples of emotions impacting driving safety. How can we calm down an angry driver and make him or her focus on a driving task? If we were a passenger, we might say “forget about it” or tune the radio to a channel that the driver is likely to enjoy. But are these the most effective strategies? What would or should an in-vehicle agent do, then, to help a driver manage or mitigate any negative effects of his or her emotional state? Would such intervention be helpful at all? The current study attempts to tackle this problem.

To address that question effectively, we need to identify the underlying mechanisms of anger, and their effects on task driving performance. A considerable amount of research has demonstrated the effects of emotions on various cognitive processes including attention, perception, judgment, and decision making [e.g., Blanchette and Richards, 2010], and the situation awareness model (Endsley, 1995a) heavily depends on those cognitive constructs. However, relatively little research has explored the actual relationship between emotions and operator situation awareness in dynamic situations.

The current paper presents an empirical study to investigate the effects of interactions with in-vehicle software agents on drivers' anger level, driving performance, situation awareness, and perceived workload. Young drivers drove in a simulator after anger induction with one of two types of speech-based agents to see whether the in-vehicle agent would increase driver situation awareness and driving performance. In addition, all of these data were compared to a neutral baseline condition without such a system.

So far, the concept of situation awareness has been used as an assessment tool to predict a driver's performance, but there has been little research on the use of online (real-time) situation awareness prompts for the improvement of operator situation awareness. This possibility was explored by integrating situation awareness prompts into the software agent's spoken cues used to distract or awaken drivers from an angry state, and make them concentrate on the driving environment. This approach is based on attention deployment, which is one of the strategies in the most widely accepted emotion regulation model (Gross, 1998a). This experiment compares a suggestive/notification style situation awareness (SA) prompt condition to a directive/command style emotion regulation (ER) prompt condition (Lee et al., 1999). Further, we examined users' assessment of system politeness (Nass, 2004) and other subjective characteristics.

One of the main research interests regarding recent in-vehicle technologies is the study of natural, intuitive interaction between a driver and a car (Eyben et al., 2010). Indeed, the concept of driving has evolved from an independent task performed by a solo driver, to a collaborative effort involving a passenger [e.g., Forlizzi et al., 2010] or involving an intelligent software agent [e.g., Jeon, 2010]. Obviously, using speech is a natural way to communicate with an in-vehicle system, just as with a human co-driver. Several studies have attempted to identify design considerations for speech-based in-vehicle agents. Some of these tested basic characteristics of the in-vehicle voice. For example, using a young adult voice for the in-vehicle information system made older drivers feel more confident while driving, need less time to complete the driving course, and have fewer accidents than using an old adult voice (Jonsson et al., 2005). Subsequent research (Jonsson, 2009) showed that using a familiar voice (famous TV and radio presenters) yielded better performance (avoiding accidents, following traffic rules, and keeping lane) for angry drivers than using an unfamiliar voice. Moreover, with the familiar voice drivers perceived the in-vehicle system to have a more positive influence and rated themselves as more attentive while driving than with the unfamiliar voice.

Others investigated more dynamic aspects of the adaptive in-vehicle agents. For example, Nass et al. (2005) showed that when the in-vehicle agent's emotion matched the driver's emotional state (e.g., energetic to happy and subdued to upset), drivers had fewer accidents and attended more to the road (actual and perceived), and even spoke more with the agent. That result is especially interesting because it is contradictory to a general expectation that a happy system voice would always be rated positively (Grimm et al., 2007). In another study (Jonsson et al., 2004), drivers were given interspersed warnings about their driving performance: driver blame warnings; driver and car blame warnings; and environment blame warnings. According to the results, when the warnings were associated with the environment, drivers felt most at-ease, liked the system more, rated the quality of the car higher, and attended to the road better than with the other conditions.

Research has shown that anger negatively influences various driving performance measures, and increases risky behaviors such as violations of signs and signals, lane deviations, speeding, and collisions (Deffenbacher et al., 2003; Jeon et al., 2011a; Underwood et al., 1999). One of the undeniable examples of the effects of anger on driving performance and safety is road rage and aggressive driving (Galovski and Blanchard, 2004). Road rage has become one of the nation's top three highway threats, along with drunk driving and failure to use a seat belt (Bowles and Overberg, 1998). According to research by the American Automobile Association (AAA), aggressive drivers are even more threatening to motorists than drunk drivers (Joint, 1995; Mizell et al., 1997).

In its broadest sense, road rage can refer to any display of aggression by a driver (Joint, 1995). Road rage is extremely influential on driving behaviors, and increases the risk of causing an accident (Wells-Parker et al., 2002). Even mild aggressiveness precludes the driver from concentrating on the traffic, increasing the risk of an accident (Deffenbacher et al., 1994). In fact, an average of at least 1500 people are injured or killed each year in the United States as a result of aggressive driving (Mizell et al., 1997).

There has not been much research on the cause of road rage. One exception to note is the attempt of Burns and Katovich (Burns and Katovich, 2003) to reveal the various causes of road rage and aggressive driving through a newspaper analysis from 1985 through 1999. They categorized the causes of road rage into two sections: those related to human behavior or actions and those related to the structure of the environment. Human factors (e.g., driving behaviors, aggressive driver actions, etc.: 71.9%, N = 368) seemed more dominant than environmental factors (e.g., traffic/congestion, poor engineering/road design, road construction, etc.: 28.1%, N = 144). Although the preferred approach to dealing with aggressive drivers largely involves punitive sanctions, researchers have been skeptical as to the effectiveness of punitive reactions to control or reform human behaviors (Currie, 1985; Kappeler et al., 2000). An alternative preventative approach might be achieved by real-time interactions with intelligent in-vehicle agents.

One of the widely used cognitive models to explain dynamic situations such as driving or aviation is Endsley's situation awareness (SA) model (Endsley, 1995a). SA is, in brief, an understanding of the state of the environment including relevant parameters of the system (Endsley, 1995b).

Given that poor SA is a greater cause of accidents than improper speed or improper driving technique (Gugerty, 2011), there have been attempts to try to conceptualize driver SA and develop a driver SA model [e.g., Gugerty, 2011; Ma and Kaber, 2005; Matthews et al., 2001]. To illustrate, Matthews, Bryant, Webb, and Harbluk (Matthews et al., 2001) have tried to propose a model for driver SA that can be used as a basis for understanding the possible impact of the intelligent transportation systems on driving performance.

From a driving perspective, SA includes spatial awareness (i.e., an appreciation of the location of all relevant features of the environment), identity awareness (i.e., knowledge of salient items), temporal awareness (i.e., knowledge of the changing spatial picture over time), goal awareness (i.e., the highest goal may be the navigation plan to the destination; at a lower level, the maintenance of speed and direction to conform to the navigation plan; and at a still lower level, the need to maneuver and place the vehicle in an appropriate manner within the surrounding traffic stream), and system awareness (i.e., relevant information within the larger driving environment as a system) (Matthews et al., 2001). These aspects of SA have been integrated into a goal-oriented model of driver behavior that encompasses strategic, tactical, and operational goals of driving (Matthews et al., 2001; Wickens and Liu, 1988).

On the other hand, Gugerty (2011) discussed SA in driving with a focus on managing attention. His model involves three cognitive processes to update and maintain SA as knowledge: (1) automatic, preattentive processes that occur unconsciously and place almost no demands on cognitive resources; (2) recognition-primed decision processes that may be conscious for brief periods (<1 s) and place few demands on cognitive resources; and (3) conscious, controlled processes that place heavy demands on cognitive resources. Even though his model seems conceptually different from Endsley's model at first, in practice it compromises with Endsley's in that perceiving the elements of a situation (level 1 SA) is probably highly automated in most situations, whereas comprehension and projection (levels 2 and 3 SA) are more likely to use recognition-primed and controlled processes.

In addition to these conceptualizations, there have been several empirical studies that try to engage SA in driving contexts. Walker and colleagues (Walker et al., 2006) evaluated the effects of different forms of non-visual vehicle feedback on driver SA using a probe-recall method. The findings suggest that adding (or using alone) the non-visual vehicle feedback (particularly auditory feedback) increases driver SA compared to vision only feedback. An interesting result is that drivers demonstrated little awareness of diminished SA despite the large changes in vehicle feedback.

Other studies identified positive associations between SA and one or more dimensions of driving performance using various secondary tasks (Ma and Kaber, 2005; Johannsdottir and Herdman, 2010; Ma and Kaber, 2007). For example, Ma and Kaber (2005) examined driver SA involving an adaptive cruise control (ACC) system while calling on a cell phone. Results showed that the use of the ACC system improved overall driver SA under typical driving conditions, and reduced driver mental workload. However, the cell phone conversation (i.e., driving-irrelevant dialogue) degenerated driver SA (especially, levels 2 and 3 SA) and increased driver mental workload. The stage of perception (level 1 SA) may place relatively lower demands on human mental resources, as compared to comprehension (level 2 SA) and projection (level 3 SA), and consequently drivers may be able to address such demands even when resource competition occurs (Ma and Kaber, 2005). In a subsequent study, Ma and Kaber (2007) assessed the effects of in-vehicle navigation aids and reliability on driver SA and performance in a simulated navigation task. Results revealed that perfect navigation information generally improved driver SA and performance compared to unreliable navigation information and task-irrelevant information. They concluded that the in-vehicle automation appears to mediate the relationship of driver SA to performance in terms of operational and strategic behaviors.

In the current study, we pose a question about whether anger effects on driving performance are due to increased driver workload or reduced SA.

SA is a complex process that requires assessment by a variety of online (during driving) and offline (post-driving) measures (Gugerty et al., 2011). Endsley (1995b) reviewed methodologies for the measurement of SA in dynamic systems. On one hand, post-trial subjective rating (e.g., SART: Situation Awareness Rating Technique) (Taylor, 1990) or observer rating techniques can be used as subjective measures. Such measures have shown success in SA assessment by some researchers [e.g., Ma and Kaber, 2007; Jeon et al., 2014a,b], while a few others remain skeptical about the prediction power of such techniques (Walker et al., 2006; Durso et al., 1999).

On the other hand, more objective measures can be administered, including freeze probe recall techniques (e.g., SAGAT: Situation Awareness Global Assessment Technique) (Endsley, 1995b; Endsley et al., 2000), real-time probe (e.g., SPAM: Situation-Present Assessment Method (Durso et al., 1999, 1995), and real-time probes based on SAGAT (Jones and Endsley, 2004), process indices (e.g., eye-tracking), or performance measures. The SAGAT (Endsley, 1995b; Endsley et al., 2000) is an online query technique that taps an individual's recent memory of the situation. In the SAGAT, driving information on the display is removed and randomly selected questions are presented to the operator. The more queries correctly answered, the better the operator's SA. Because the SAGAT freezes the display frequently, it might be intrusive to performance and not well suited to actual operation (Jones et al., 2004). Real-time probe techniques have been suggested for objectively and unobtrusively measuring SA in highly dynamic operating environments, such as driving (Durso et al., 2004; Jones and Endsley, 2000). In the SPAM (Durso et al., 1999, 1995), SAGAT-like queries are given to the operator, but information remains in view and response latency is used as the primary dependent measure. Real-time probes based on SAGAT (Jones and Endsley, 2004) only involve natural verbal communications between an experimenter and an operator without any prior warning signal, which is given in the SPAM. Both the SPAM and real-time probes based on the SAGAT are used to access operator's SA on-the-fly under dynamic operation environment [e.g., Kaber et al., 2012] and thus, these techniques would not necessarily interrupt driving behavior. However, these freeze techniques or real-time probes may not be appropriate for the current study. Frequent queries may enable drivers to concentrate more on driving behavior and even to memorize contextual information, which is not the case with an actual affective state. Moreover, the obvious presence of an assessment technique or conversation with an experimenter during driving is likely to distract participants from the affective source and lead to deterioration of the meaning of the current experiment. Therefore, we did not include those techniques in the current experiment.

Consequently, as a SA measure, we used an implicit performance measure [e.g., Durso et al., 1999], which is operationally defined as the coping level with hazard events. Hazard perception has been considered to be SA for dangerous situations in the traffic environment (Horswill et al., 2004). Whereas empirical research has shown counterintuitive results stating that driving skill is not an important discriminatory variable for road safety [e.g., Williams and O'Neill, 1974], only drivers' hazard perception has been found to correlate with drivers' accident records. Researchers have widely used filmed traffic situations for a hazard perception test and asked participants to actively respond whenever they detect a traffic hazard, using a lever [e.g., Pelz and Krupat, 1974], button [e.g., McKenna and Crick, 1991], or touch screen [e.g., Hull and Christie, 1992]. However, requiring such an active response from participants is different from the natural driving environment and in the current experiment it might distract participants from their affective source. Therefore, we used implicit performance measure instead of obtaining explicit real-time response. The driving scenario has ten events (see Table 1
                        ) that require a driver's special care and each event can be recognizable 3–5 s before it happens, and thus, participants can predict the event in advance and respond appropriately. If participants have good SA at that moment, they are expected to cope with the situation effectively and appropriately.

There are several suggestions for emotion regulation that emerge from the road rage literature [e.g., Mizell et al., 1997]: consider altering your schedule; improve the comfort of your vehicle; concentrate on being relaxed while in traffic; and don't drive when you are angry. These, however, look like more general advice on static preparation for driving, but do not provide sophisticated strategies for dynamic driving environments.

The most well-accepted emotion regulation model in psychology is the ‘process model’ (Gross, 1998a, 2002, 1998b; Gross and Thompson, 2006), in which emotions and affect may be regulated at five points in the emotion generative process: situation selection, situation modification, attention deployment, cognitive change, and response modulation. For example, based on this model, drivers can select low-traffic routes instead of high-traffic routes (situation selection) or try to minimize its affective impact (situation modification) on driving. However, driving is a complicated, interactive situation and drivers are often not able to control every variable.

Diverse empirical evidence has supported the idea that cognitive change (e.g., reappraisal-down) is cognitively and socially more effective than suppression, which is a response modulation at the final regulation point (Gross, 2002). In addition, recent studies have found that engaging in cognitive reappraisal even changes the activity of brain regions involved in the experience of emotion (Ochsner et al., 2002). Harris and Nass (2011) showed that drivers in a reappraisal-down speech condition (e.g., “heavy traffic results from limited routes, not the behavior of other drivers”) had better driving behaviors and reported less negative emotions than participants in a reappraisal-up speech condition (e.g., “the behavior of overly aggressive and inconsiderate drivers leads to traffic congestion”) or a silent condition. However, there are several downsides to using the cognitive reappraisal strategy. (1) The system must be able to precisely know and interpret the dynamic driving situation; otherwise, inappropriate comments can yield worse results. (2) The use of cognitive reappraisal is limited to integral affect, which is coming from the driving task itself, and cannot be applied to incidental affect, such as a driver's anger before driving. (3) It tries to directly change a driver's affective state – depending on a driver's state or characteristics, he or she might be able to accept the system's reappraisal and regulate his or her state, whereas in some serious cases, it might be impossible to change his or her state at all. (4) Reappraisal might require a driver's cognitive efforts even if the cues are given by the speech-based system, which might cause additional workload. In Harris' (2011) subsequent studies, however, there was no measure of drivers' workload with respect to the cognitive reappraisal strategy.

Finally, attention deployment, which is one of the five steps in the process model for emotion regulation, can be used. For example, calling out the angry driver's name can sometimes break through to his or her conscious awareness (Moray, 1959). This processing occurs preattentively, similar to low-level stimuli that produce the pop-out effect in auditory tasks [e.g., cocktail party effects Pollack and Pickett, 1957] or in visual search tasks (Treisman and Gormican, 1988). Hence, it can have a direct impact on driving performance and safety. It may work well for taking a driver's attention away from a source of negative emotion, but how the system can make a driver concentrate on the driving environment is another question to answer. In order to identify user needs in the in-vehicle emotion regulation interfaces, Jeon and his colleagues (Jeon et al., 2011b) conducted interviews and focus groups with drivers with Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) (who often have difficulties with emotion regulation as a result of their brain injury), driving rehab specialists, and young (healthy) drivers. Results showed that a system might need to have user-specific specifications depending on target user populations. For example, driving rehab specialists (who are not trained in social psychology) suggested using short, direct commands for drivers with TBI such as “focus on your driving” or “relax your grip on the wheel.” However, researchers found that telling young drivers about driving or their affective states is likely to make them feel that a system is a “back-seat driver”.

The present experiment tries to apply attention deployment, using SA prompts provided by the in-vehicle software agent. To date, SA queries have been used as an assessment tool of driver's performance, but SA has rarely been used as a dynamic cue to improve driving performance and safety. This may be a less obtrusive and more direct way to mitigate emotion effects on driving performance. Therefore, in addition to trying to regulate or control a driver's affective state (e.g., “Take it easy”, “Relax your grip on the wheel”)—as rehab specialists suggested (Jeon et al., 2011b)—we also included another condition that enhances driver SA (e.g., “If you see any restaurant, let me know”).

Besides the contents of the message, there has been some research on the message style. For example, Lee et al. (Lee et al., 1999) carried out a driving simulator experiment with either command messages (e.g., “Slow down”) or notification messages (e.g., “Icy road ahead”). Command messages promoted greater compliance than notification messages, but might actually reduce overall safety. That result requires further research because in a driving context, safety usually has a priority over a driver's compliance to the in-vehicle system. Moreover, it is still unknown whether the command style messages would yield greater compliance for drivers in a particular affective state (e.g., angry), because traditional literature reports that suggestive styles have been found to lead to greater compliance than directive styles (Crockenberg and Litman, 1990; Lytton, 1977; Rocissano et al., 1987). Based on these backgrounds, the conditions and the hypotheses of the experiment are as follows.

Experimental conditions:
                           
                              -
                              The ER condition: induced anger, agent with the directive/command style emotion regulation (ER) prompts

The SA condition: induced anger, agent with the suggestive/notification style situation awareness (SA) prompts

The no-agent condition: induced anger, no agent

The neutral condition: no anger, no agent


                        Hypothesis A: Angry state
                     

The anger rating score after the experiment will be higher or, at least at a similar level, in the ER condition, whereas the anger rating score will be lower in the SA condition.


                        Hypothesis B: Driving performance
                     

Driving performance will be worse in the no-agent condition than in the neutral condition. Driving performance will be better in the two in-vehicle agent conditions than in the no-agent condition.


                        Hypothesis C: Situation awareness
                     

Driver SA will be improved more in the two in-vehicle agent conditions using the attention deployment strategy than in the no-agent condition. SA score in the two in-vehicle agent conditions will not be different from that in the neutral condition. SA score will be more improved in the SA condition than in the ER condition.


                        Hypothesis D: Perceived workload
                     

There will be no difference between the no-agent condition and the neutral condition in perceived workload. The use of the in-vehicle agents will not add more perceived workload to drivers compared to the neutral or the no-agent conditions.


                        Hypothesis E: Agent assessment
                     

The in-vehicle agent assessment scores will favor the SA condition over the ER condition. Also, participants will respond more to the in-vehicle agent in the SA condition than in the ER condition.

@&#METHOD@&#

A total of 60 participants (26 female, 34 male; mean age = 20.2, SD = 1.2; anger 15 participants, mean years of driving = 4.5, SD = 1.5; neutral 15, mean years of driving = 4.2, SD = 1.5; ER 15, mean years of driving = 4.3, SD = 1.1; SA 15, mean years of driving = 4.2, SD = 1.6) participated in the experiment for partial credit in psychology courses. They reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision and hearing, signed informed consent forms, and provided demographic details about age, gender, and years of driving. All participants had a driving license and more than two years of driving experience, to control for the effects of novice drivers' variable driving. Therefore, all of the participants could be categorized as an “advanced apprentice/junior journeyman” group, in terms of driving experience (Durso et al., 2006).


                        Fig. 1
                         shows the mid-fidelity National Advanced Driving Simulator (NADS) MiniSim version 1.8.3.3 used in the current study. The simulation software runs on a single computer, running Microsoft Windows 7 Pro on an Intel Core i7 processor, 3.07 GHz and 12 GB of RAM, and relays sound through a 2.1 audio system. Three Panasonic TH-42PH2014 42″ plasma displays, each with a 1280×800 pixel resolution, allow for a total of 130 degree field of view in front of the seated participant. The center monitor is 28 inches from the center of the steering wheel and the left and right monitors are 37 inches from the center of the steering wheel. The MiniSim also includes a real steering wheel, adjustable car seat, gear-shift, and gas and brake pedals, as well as a Toshiba Ltd. WXGA TFT LCD monitor with a 1280×800 resolution to display the speedometer, etc. Environmental sound effects are also played through two embedded speakers. These sounds included engine noise, brake screech, turn indicators, collisions, etc. In the present experiment, all participants experienced the same pre-defined route and properties for the driving task.

A driving scenario was created using the Interactive Scenario Authoring Tool (ISAT) software, which comes with the NADS MiniSim. The scenario included an urban road (with speed limit 40 mph) and a highway (with speed limit 50–65 mph). The scenario also contained various road signs, vehicles, traffic signals, and pedestrians commonly seen in an actual driving environment. Ten different hazard events (see Table 1) were created in the scenario to measure driver SA. The hazard events occurred approximately every minute, beginning one minute after the start of the drive.

For each of the emotion regulation (ER) and the situation awareness (SA) conditions, eleven text-to-speech (TTS) files (.WAV format) were generated for all of the intervention speech clips using the AT&T Labs TTS Demo program with the female voice Crystal-US-English (http://www.research.att.com/∼ttsweb/tts/demo.php) (see Table 1). Speech clips in the two conditions simply consisted of a TTS phrase that played for each situation (2–3 s before or after the situation) as the participant approached the event-trigger zone. For both conditions, the timing of spoken speech was exactly the same. On average, the speech clips in the ER condition lasted 2.4 s, and in the SA condition they lasted 2.5 s.

Both sets of speech clips were created based on the attention deployment strategy and they were carefully made different in terms of the cognitive reappraisal (Harris, 2011) mechanism. The ER speech clips mainly came from driving rehab specialists' suggestions (Jeon et al., 2011b). As intended, the ER speech focused more on emotion regulation message (7 times), but also had direct commands about specific situations (4 times: # 04, 05, 08, 09) in order to balance the amount of information provided in the two agent conditions. In contrast, the SA condition focused more on the facilitation of SA using suggestive/notification messages about specific situations (8 times) and also had refreshing messages just to distract drivers from their affective source (3 times: # 01, 02, 03). Following several pilot drives, considering the overall duration and understandability of both sets of speech clips, we refined the speech clips so that researchers or practitioners using either approach (ER or SA) would ultimately be able to practically adopt them into an in-vehicle software agent system.

Before the experimenters induced any particular affective state, participants were asked to rate their current (baseline) affective states using seven-point Likert-type scales (1: not feel at all ∼ 7: strongly feel). The affective states included nine discrete adjectives that were reported as important in driving contexts: fearful, happy, angry, depressed, confused, embarrassed, urgent, bored, and relieved (Jeon and Walker, 2011a). Then, participants went through the Georgia Tech Simulator Sickness Screening Test: (1) Rate their current physical feelings on 17 categories using eleven-point Likert-type scales (0: not feel at all ∼ 10: strongly feel); (2) Drive a 2 min city driving scenario in the simulator (different from the scenario used in the actual experiment); (3) Rate their physical feelings again on the same questionnaire. If the participants felt any symptoms of simulator sickness (e.g., light headed, dizzy, or other adverse reaction) at any time during the drive, the simulation was stopped and they were excused from testing. They were also excused from testing if their scores show signs of simulator sickness [i.e., if any Likert scale value was 5 or higher than the pre-drive rating, or if any three of the ratings were 3 points above the pre-drive survey, Gable and Walker, 2013].

Participants who had not experienced simulator sickness continued into the actual experimental task. Next, participants were randomly assigned to each condition. To induce a particular affective state, participants had 12 min to write a description of their past emotional experience(s), associated with either anger (no-agent, ER, and SA conditions) or neutral affect (neutral condition), which is a frequently-used affect induction methodology [e.g., Bodenhausen et al., 1994; Ellsworth and Smith, 1988]. An experimenter instructed them to remember the memory as clearly as possible and to emotionally revisit the experience again. Participants were urged to refer to two sample paragraphs (Jeon et al., 2011a; Bodenhausen et al., 1994) in the instruction sheet to help them write their own paragraphs. One of these was related to driving as shown in the following:
                           “… I was already late for the meeting when I woke up. I quickly packed all resources I organized last night and drove my car in a hurry. But after a while, a huge truck blocked the road and a series of cars were waiting for that truck to make a U-turn. I saw there was not enough space for the truck and all cars had to back up, one by one, to make more space during the already hectic morning hours. It was a disaster!” (Anger)
                        
                     

If there was more than one experience, participants could choose to write about all of them within the time provided. Participants in the neutral affect condition wrote a description of the mundane events of the previous day (Jeon et al., 2011a; Bodenhausen et al., 1994). After writing the mood-induction paragraphs, participants completed a second rating of their affective states, to assess the effectiveness of mood induction before driving.

Participants then drove the predefined scenario for approximately 13 min. They were instructed to drive as they would drive in the real world, following any traffic and safety rules. Participants were also told that as they drove, they would hear the in-vehicle software agent's comments on the various events 10 times (Harris, 2011) in addition to one at the start of the drive. They were not required to speak or respond in any way, but they could interact with it if they wanted (Jones and Jonsson, 2005). The experimenter counted the number of participants' interactions or responses to the speech-based software agent.

Right after the drive, participants completed the electronic version of the NASA-TLX (Hart, 2006) to provide measurements of perceived workload for the overall task (driving while interacting with the in-vehicle agent, under an induced affective state). Participants were then asked to answer the in-vehicle agent assessment questionnaire. They also evaluated the other system that they had not experienced, by reading the written script in each situation. Then, participants filled out a short questionnaire for demographic information and provided comments regarding the study. All participants were debriefed by the experimenter regarding the study, and about plausible affective/emotional effects on their real-world driving.

To measure driving performance, we used both an observer's manual record and the simulator's automatic log.
                           
                              (1)
                              Manually recorded observer's log: During the drive, a trained experimenter recorded the number of all driving errors, as well as the coping level with the ten hazard events, as an implicit performance measure for driver SA. The coping level for each event was scored as 0: smooth management; 1: near accident with brake screech sound; or 2: crash with objects (thus, their overall implicit performance scores across ten events could range from 0: best to 20: worst). The manually counted errors included four general driving performance measures that anger has been shown to influence negatively [e.g., Jeon et al. 2011a, Dula et al., 2011; Jeon et al., 2014a]: Crossing the center line and sideline were combined into “Lane Deviation” (LD). Infractions of red lights and failure to use turn signals were categorized under “Traffic Rules” (TR). Violations of the speed limit were named “Over Speed” (OS), and collisions were named “Collision” (CO). These variables were specifically chosen because anger easily leads to aggressive behaviors, which account highly for road rage in driving situations (Burns and Katovich, 2003).

Automatically recorded system log: Additional driving performance data were automatically logged in the driving simulator. These data included five driving performance categories: Lane Deviation (deviated feet from the center of the road), Speed, Steering Wheel Angle, Brake Pedal Force, and Collision. The first four variables contained various calculated values such as average, standard deviation, maximum, and minimum. Lane Deviation also included the number of lane crossing.

Other driving performance measures such as the lane-change-test (Mattes, 2003) or headway distance measures [e.g., Ma and Kaber, 2005] were not used in this study because participants might concentrate more on those tasks, being distracted from their affective source.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Participant writings about past experiences were congruent with expectations based on the cognitive appraisal model [e.g., Lytton, 1977]. Overall, participants in the angry state tended to describe events related to ‘other-responsibility’ and ‘individual control’, including conflict with colleagues, family, or boy/girl friends (23 participants), feeling unfair/insulted/ignored/rude (7), failed tasks or bad grades (11), slow/heavy traffic (2), and speeding ticket and/or court processes (4). For the neutral condition, participants described just daily activities such as driving or walking (6), getting ready in the morning/for bed (3), grocery shopping (2), and other routine activities (watching TV, laundry, etc.) (4), which is in accordance with previous research (Jeon, 2010).


                        Fig. 2
                         shows the overall mean rating scores of the angry state at the three times. Results were analyzed with a separate repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) for each affective condition. There was a statistically significant difference among the three timings for the no-agent condition, F(2, 28) = 11.13, p < .001, ηp
                        2 = 0.44. For the multiple comparisons among the three timings for the no-agent condition, paired samples t-tests were conducted. The anger score after induction (M = 3.66, SD = 1.6) was higher than before induction (M = 1.67, SD = 1.4), t(14) = −4.70, p < .001. The anger score after the experiment (M = 2.93, SD = 1.7) numerically decreased from its peak, t(14) = 1.62, p > .05, but was still significantly higher than before induction, t(14) = −3.11, p < .01.

There was a statistically significant difference among the three timings for the ER condition, F(2, 28) = 12.03, p < .001, ηp
                        2
                        =.46. For the multiple comparisons, paired samples t-tests were conducted. The anger score after induction (M = 3.07, SD = 1.5) was higher than before induction (M = 1.20, SD = 0.5), t(14) = −4.53, p < .001. The anger score after the experiment (M = 1.73, SD = 1.1) significantly decreased compared to after induction, t(14) = 2.87, p < .05 and returned to the same level as before induction, t(14) = −1.95, p > .05.

There was also a statistically significant difference among the three timings for the SA condition, F(2, 28) = 7.83, p < .01, ηp
                        2
                        =.36. Again, for the multiple comparisons, paired samples t-tests were conducted. The anger score after induction (M = 3.20, SD = 2.0) was higher than before induction (M = 1.67, SD = 1.2), t(14) = −3.62, p < .01. The anger score after the experiment (M = 2.20, SD = 1.5) significantly decreased compared to after induction, t(14) = 2.19, p < .05 and also returned to the same level as before induction, t(14) = −1.95, p > .05. Participants in the neutral (control) condition showed no significant change among the three timings for the angry state.

In short, the intended anger level increased after the induction procedure and decreased while driving. However, after driving with the agents (ER and SA systems), anger returned to the same level as before induction.

As mentioned, driving performance data were collected (1) manually by a real-time judge who was present at all times and (2) by system logging.
                           
                              (1)
                              Manual log: Manually counted numbers of driving errors were aggregated across four performance categories (see Fig. 3
                                 
                                 ). An overall ANOVA showed a similar tendency as expected, but did not reach conventional levels of statistical significance, F(3, 56) = 2.15, p = .10. The no-agent condition (M = 11.4, SD = 7.0) showed numerically more driving errors than the ER (M = 8.13, SD = 1.1) (p = .07) and the neutral (M = 8.2, SD = 3.9) (p = .08) conditions. However, only the SA (M = 7.13, SD = 0.99) (p = .02) condition showed significantly fewer errors than the no-agent condition. For over speed errors, a one-way ANOVA showed statistically significant differences among conditions, F(3, 56) = 3.74, p < .05. For the multiple comparisons, a Least Significant Difference (LSD) post-hoc analysis (Fisher, 1935) was conducted. The analysis showed that the no-agent condition (M = 7.93, SD = 2.9) showed consistently higher number of over speed errors than the other conditions: the ER (M = 5.13, SD = 2.5) (p < .01), the SA (M = 5.0, SD = 2.7) (p < .01), and the neutral (M = 5.73, SD = 2.7) (p < .05) conditions (see Fig. 4).

System log: The log data were also analyzed (Fig. 5
                                 ). An ANOVA showed that there were significant differences in the number of collisions, F(3, 56) = 7.44, p < .01. An LSD post-hoc analysis showed that the SA condition (M = 0.80, SD = 0.8) led to significantly fewer collisions than the no-agent condition (M = 2.13, SD = 1.5) (p < .01) and the neutral condition (M = 2.21, SD = 1.9) (p < .01). The ER condition (M = 1.13, SD = 0.7) also led to significantly fewer collisions than the no-agent (p < .05) and the neutral (p < .05) conditions. In conclusion, both of the agents significantly reduced the number of collisions compared to the no-agent condition and even the neutral condition. No other comparison reached a statistically reliable result.

These consistent results were confirmed by the correlations between the manual log data and all of the system log data (with lane deviation, speed, steering angle, and brake pedal force, ps < .05). For driving experience, years of driving did not show a significant correlation with the number of errors (p > .05).


                        Fig. 6
                         shows the mean implicit performance scores. Note the “inverted” scale in implicit performance measures (i.e., lower numbers indicate better performance). There were significant differences among the conditions, F(3, 56) = 5.25, p < .01. Subsequent LSD post-hoc analyses showed that the induced anger in the no-agent condition (M = 5.8, SD = 2.2) led to significantly higher (worse) scores than the neutral condition (M = 4.0, SD = 2.2) (p < .05), the ER condition (M = 3.3, SD = 1.8) (p = .002), and the SA condition (M = 3.1, SD = 1.9) (p = .001). These results mean that participants in the angry state without intervention had lower driver SA than in the neutral state or in both of the speech-based agent's intervention conditions.

Implicit performance SA scores were significantly positively correlated with the number of over speed errors in the manual log (r = 0.335, p < .01), the average speed in the system log (r = 0.468, p < .001), and the number of collisions in the system log (r = 0.358, p < .01). Years of driving did not show a significant correlation with SA scores (p > .05).

These results support the main hypothesis of this study that induced affect decreases driver SA, which in turn affects driving performance. This hypothesis was statistically tested with a path analysis using a multiple regression. Based on the hypothesis, mediation models were constructed among affective states, implicit SA scores, and various driving performance measures. Three mediation analyses showed predictive models (Figs. 7–9
                        
                        
                        ). First, affective states and interventions predicted implicit SA scores, F(1, 58) = 3.54, p = .065. Implicit SA scores also predicted the number of over speed errors (manual log), F(1, 58) = 7.62, p = .008. However, affective states and interventions did not predict the number of over speed errors when controlling for implicit SA scores, F(1, 58) = 2.00, p = .162. Therefore, in this case, affective states and interventions might influence over speed errors through SA. When controlling SA, affective states and interventions did not directly influence over speed errors, which shows a full mediation model. This full mediation model could account for 12.7% of the variance in over speed errors.

Second, a similar pattern appeared when setting average speed (system log) as a driving performance variable. Implicit SA scores predicted average speed, F(1, 58) = 14.57, p < .001. However, affective states and interventions did not predict average speed when controlling for implicit SA scores, F(1, 58) = 1.15, p = .29. Therefore, in this case, affective states and interventions might influence average speed through SA. When controlling SA, affective states did not directly influence average speed, which also shows a full mediation model. This full mediation model could account for 20.6% of the variance in average speed.

Third, a different pattern appeared when setting the number of collisions (system log) as a driving performance variable. Implicit SA scores predicted the number of collisions, F(1, 58) = 11.53, p = .001. In addition, affective states and interventions also predicted the number of collisions, F(1, 58) = 11.54, p = .001. Therefore, in this case, affective states might directly influence the number of collisions as well as through SA, which indicates a partial mediation model. This partial mediation model could account for 27.7% of the variance in the number of collisions.


                        Fig. 10
                         shows the weighted overall perceived workload scores. An ANOVA revealed a statistically significant difference in perceived workload among the four conditions, F(3, 56) = 2.82, p < .05. The LSD post-hoc tests showed that the ER condition (M = 61.6, SD = 20.3) (p < .05) and the SA condition (M = 60.9, SD = 18.5) (p < .05) significantly reduced perceived workload compared to the neutral condition (M = 76.4, SD = 13.7). A separate ANOVA for the non-weighted “mental demand” also showed a statistically significant difference, F(3, 56) = 2.94, p < .05 (Fig. 11
                        ). The LSD post-hoc tests showed that the SA condition (M = 67.0, SD = 26.9) (p < .05) significantly reduced mental demand compared to the neutral condition (M = 91.0, SD = 24.4).

For the analysis of system assessment questionnaire results, paired samples t-tests were conducted. The ER condition (M = 3.77, SD = 1.8) showed significantly higher ‘effective’ scores than the SA condition (M = 2.80, SD = 1.9), t(29) = 2.23, p < .05 (see Fig. 12
                        ). However, the ER condition (M = 4.20, SD = 2.0) showed significantly higher ‘authoritative’ scores than the SA condition (M = 0.67, SD = 0.7), t(29) = 2.77, p = .01. Moreover, the ER condition (M = 5.00, SD = 1.7) showed numerically higher ‘annoying’ scores than the SA condition (M = 4.20, SD = 2.0), t(29) = 1.69, p = .10. In addition, participants showed a tendency to react or respond more to the in-vehicle agent in the SA condition (N = 9, M = 1.64, SD = 0.7) than in the ER condition (N = 5, M = 0.67, SD = 0.7), t(23) = −5.51, p = .061. To illustrate, participants in the SA condition were likely to respond to #1 (restaurants), saying the name of the restaurants they saw and #2 and #3 (wild driver detector), agreeing, laughing, or asking about it.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Our experiment assessed the effects of the speech-based software agents (the ER and the SA conditions) on induced anger and driving performance, compared to a no-agent condition and a neutral baseline condition. Various dependent measures were evaluated including anger level, driving performance, SA, and perceived workload across the four different conditions. The overall results demonstrated that anger effects on SA and driving performance can be mitigated by the intervention of the speech-based agents using the attention deployment strategy. Moreover, both agent conditions significantly reduced perceived workload compared to the neutral condition, and reduced anger level compared to the no-agent condition. Interpretations of the detailed results on those variables and practical applications of the in-vehicle agent are discussed further.

First of all, one of the important successes of the current experiment is the effective induction of the angry state. In all three anger conditions (the no-agent, the ER, and the SA), the angry state increased after induction and decreased as the experiment went on. However, in the no-agent condition, even after the experiment, anger still remained significantly higher than before induction, accounting for the source of degenerated SA and driving performance in that condition. In contrast, in the two speech-based agent conditions, the anger scores after the experiment significantly decreased compared to the scores after induction and these values returned to the same level as before induction. It was expected that the anger rating score in the ER condition would become higher or, at least, stay at a similar level after the experiment because young drivers were expected to resist the system that gives direct commands or tries to regulate participants' affective state (Jeon et al., 2011a). In fact, the participants did not show a high resistant tendency to the ER system. That might be because they felt the system was ‘effective’ and ‘helpful’ for obtaining their task goal, which is safe driving.

The current experimental protocol, which has been recently developed, has consistently shown effective in driving research (Jeon et al., 2011a, 2014b). In traditional psychological lab studies, affect researchers have not measured the affect level after the experiment because most of them only have participants answer a few questions right after the affect induction. Thus, they did not need long-lasting affective states for their research purpose. In addition, traditional affect research typically conducted the manipulation check only for the intended affective state. In contrast, the current study protocol has checked various important affective states together and thus, provided a more holistic view of a driver's overall affective state changes. In traditional studies, psychologists have used diverse induction methodologies with a focus on incidental affect, such as watching photos (Lang et al., 2000) or film clips [e.g., Fredrickson and Branigan, 2005], reading scenarios or stories [e.g., Johnson and Tversky, 1983, Raghunathan and Pham, 1999], listening to music [e.g., Jefferies et al., 2008, Rowe et al., 2007], or writing down their past experiences [e.g., Gasper and Clore, 2002]. On the other hand, driving researchers have tried to devise some hazard events so that drivers became frustrated (i.e., integral affect) in those scenarios [e.g., Harris, 2011, Lee, 2010]. However, they just assumed drivers' emotional state, but did not conduct the necessary manipulation checks.

In this experiment, ‘writing personal experiences’ was used as incidental affect induction, specifically because an empirical comparative study shows that this is the most effective method among other anger induction techniques (Lobbestael et al., 2007). Moreover, because driving is a much more complicated and longer-lasting task than a simple social judgment or decision making task, the strength and duration of induced affective states are expected to be more important and have a greater influence on driving performance. Therefore, this experiment also included some hazard events in the scenario as a source of integral affect. The results support that the multiple induction procedure and manipulation checking strategies used in the current experiment work well for this type of driving study.

An important further research question includes “how to guarantee that the induced affective states in a driving simulation are equivalent to affective states in actual driving?” Affective states induced from real driving situations or other life contexts might have a bigger impact on driving performance than the affective states induced from hazard events in simulated driving or writing past experiences.

Angry participants consistently showed more errors than neutral participants in various error types. From this experiment, specific anger effects on driving variables were clearly confirmed, including the total number of errors, over speed errors, and number of collisions. All of these components make their driving more risky and are likely to lead to fatal outcomes when integrated with other situations in real driving.

This low performance in the angry state corresponds to the expectation based on the cognitive appraisal mechanism as well as previous research (Jeon et al., 2011a, 2014b). As mentioned, a lack of compensation due to their controllability and over-confidence might contribute to their worse performance, in addition to lower SA.

Manually checked driving performance measures and driving simulator log data played complementary roles, here. On one hand, our configuration of the simulator had some limitations of data logging at that point. For instance, the scenario had two different speed limit zones, but our data did not differentiate the two different behavior patterns. Moreover, our setup did not detect whether the participant turned on the indicator before changing lanes or turning, which was counted by the experimenter. On the other hand, the experimenter's measurement might also not be perfect. Therefore, measuring and integrating both of them successfully provided a more precise picture of what happened during a participant's drive.

As expected, driver SA was degenerated by induced anger when measured using implicit performance. Implicit performance scores were also positively correlated with several driving performance variables, but driving experiences were not. These positive results motivated a push to identify causal relationships between affective states, SA, and driving performance. In addition to correlations, a path analysis clearly supported the main hypothesis of this study, thereby confirming that induced anger decreases driver SA and then driving performance in turn.

In a multiple regression, there seem to be affective effects on SA, but those effects were not statistically significant. It could be explained by looking at the components of the affective state conditions. Affective states included three induced anger conditions and a neutral condition: the no-agent (anger induction without intervention), the ER condition (anger induction with the ER system), the SA condition (anger induction with the SA system), and the neutral condition (neutral induction without intervention). The statistical power might be reduced because there were only 15 participants in the neutral group, and two other angry conditions also included the intervention, instead of purely angry states. Adding more participants in each group will provide more robust and reliable models about the relationships among those constructs.

The association between affective states and speed-related performance variables (i.e., over speed errors and average speed) was fully mediated by SA. These full mediation models imply that affective effects appear only via the effects of reduced SA. On the other hand, the association between affective states and the number of collisions was partially mediated by SA. This partial mediation model implies that affective states can have an impact on the number of collisions either with or without the effects of SA. In other words, affective effects could influence collisions through other plausible channels [e.g., motor planning and control, Eccles et al., 2011]. Given that a collision is a much more complicated outcome compared to speeding, these results accord closely with our intuition. As mentioned, research has shown positive associations between SA and one or more dimensions of driving performance (Ma and Kaber, 2005, 2007). However, constructing prediction models is expected to contribute more to identifying clear relationships and mechanisms of affective effects and other theoretical constructs. In this light, the results are very promising for the future use of implicit performance measures for driver SA assessment and prediction of driving performance.

Given that SA is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for performance (Endsley, 1995a), the fact that the speech-based agent using SA prompts consistently improved not only driver SA, but also driving performance, is promising for applications of this strategy to the in-vehicle contexts. In addition, it bodes well that several performance measures in the SA condition for angry drivers were even better than in the neutral condition. In other words, interactions with the speech-based agent did not add any workload to a primary driving task, but rather outperformed the neutral state as well as the angry state in some performance metrics.

A partial but logical flow chart about the phenomena and mechanisms can be drawn based on the experiment results and previous literature (see Fig. 13
                        ). Induced affect (anger) might have resulted in rumination, which is the cognitive demand or resource misallocation created by affective sources (Beal et al., 2005; Berkowitz, 1989). Further, if the cause of the affective state is unrelated to the current performance episode (i.e., past anger experience vs. current driving performance), continuous ruminative thoughts should serve as an additional cognitive demand that interferes with task performance (Beal et al., 2005). Then, a failure of divided attention based on that rumination might cause “inattentional blindness” (Simons and Chabris, 1999) or attentional tunneling (Baddeley, 1972; Broadbent, 1954), in which people lock in on certain aspects or features of the environment they are trying to process, and will either intentionally or inadvertently drop their scanning behavior.

These issues might bring about degenerated SA and reduce driving performance. The intervention of the speech-based agents using an attention deployment strategy was conducted here. It consisted of two different components, distraction and concentration. By distracting (or awakening) participants from their affective source, their angry state was decreased. By concentrating them on the driving environment using the SA prompts, their SA increased, which led to the increase of driving performance. Note that in both agent conditions, there were situation-related prompts and this might be a confounding variable for the effectiveness of the ER system. In addition, participants' feeling of collaboration with the speech-based agent in an unfamiliar, demanding driving task seemed to make their perceived workload decrease, compared to independent driving in the neutral state.

Despite the promising results of the use of implicit performance measure, it also suffers from diagnosticity or sensitivity. Using performance measure, we can only indirectly/partially infer participants' SA. Further, we can get SA data as a whole, but we cannot obtain data about different levels of SA. These weaknesses could be complemented with an addition of other measures, such as process indices (e.g., eye-tracking) and post-trial subjective ratings about each level of SA.

The results show that induced anger does not increase perceived workload. Further, it shows that using either the ER or the SA speech-based agent can decrease driver workload compared to the neutral state. In the SA condition, specifically, mental workload was significantly reduced and this can partly account for the reduction of overall workload.

In addition to the different subjective assessment results, the different patterns in the results of workload subcomponents between the two in-vehicle agents can delineate their different mechanisms. The SA system led to the lowest scores in mental demand, efforts, and frustration, whereas the ER system led to the lowest scores in physical demand, temporal, and performance. It can be cautiously inferred that the SA-type agent might influence more covert, psychological components, but the ER-type agent might influence more overt, performance-based components. That is, even though the two systems seemed to reduce overall perceived workload similarly, underlying mechanisms could be differentiated. Thus, they could be applied to different populations or different situations.

Some researchers (Horrey and Wickens, 2004; Wickens and Liu, 1988) have proposed that a discrete auditory task may cause a brief lapse in the performance of a continuous visual task while the auditory stimulus is attended to based on the auditory modality's superiority to attract attention (Spence et al., 1997; Stanton et al., 1992). In fact, a number of studies have shown an auditory cost in the use of in-vehicle information displays (Lee et al., 1999; Horrey and Wickens, 2004; Matthews et al., 1996; Dingus et al., 1997). Related research has shown that even hands-free, auditory cell phone conversations (Strayer and Drews, 2007) or the speech-based e-mail system (Lee et al., 2001) can impair driver attention, which may result in degenerated driving performance.

The speech-based systems used here, however, seemed not to preempt a driving task. Rather, it improved driving performance and reduced perceived workload. The interruption of the speech-based systems can occur not only because of the time it takes, but also because of the rehearsal and the retrieval of driving information (Monk et al., 2004). These distraction effects of the auditory user interfaces could be predicted based on an interruption type, interruption timing, or age (Altmann and Trafton, 2002). For instance, even in the similar affect mitigation system, if the intervention system requires deep, complex cognitive processes (e.g., cognitive reappraisal of the situation), it might be able to increase a driver's perceived workload. However, in the present study, a majority of the message of the auditory prompts refers to the information directly related to the current driving information (i.e., auditory processing might belong to the same thread and there is no overlapping cognitive resources) (Salvucci and Taatgen, 2011). With respect to interruption timing, Monk et al. (Monk et al., 2004) suggested that it would be the best to provide most drivers with messages before they begin a new maneuver or after they finish a maneuver. Given that in the present experiment the auditory prompts are provided before or after the critical event, the distraction effects of auditory interruption seemed to be minimized.

Even though the two agents similarly reduced the angry state and perceived workload and improved SA and driving performance, the results of the subjective assessment were different from those results. The ER type agent was rated more ‘effective’ than the SA type agent. Participants might think that way because directive messages felt more ‘helpful’ in such a highly demanding situation, even with an angry state. Nonetheless, the ER agent turned out to be more ‘annoying’ and more ‘authoritative’. Research has shown that performance enhancement of the auditory user interfaces may not guarantee subjective preference or actual use of the system (Edworthy, 1998; Jeon and Walker, 2011b). In other words, young drivers might turn off the speech-based system if they do not like it, regardless of whether the system can improve driving performance and safety. However, motivated drivers—like people with Traumatic Brain Injury who want to resume driving—might want to use such a directive command style system (Jeon et al., 2011b) despite its authoritative attitude because they eagerly want to recover their independent driving and reintegrate into the community (Jeon and Walker, 2011c).

On the other hand, the SA agent was rated slightly more ‘likable’ (M = 3.4) and ‘friendly’ (M = 4.1), and less ‘annoying’ (M = 4.2) than the ER agent. Even though those differences seem to be very subtle, that may be an important distinction for the intervention for young drivers. Research has proposed that a more indirect and unobtrusive approach for the intervention, or even an intervention below a user's conscious awareness, may be better for a complex driving task (Jeon and Walker, 2011d). In any case, both of the two speech-based systems need to be iteratively improved in order to overcome existing caveats in terms of overall low subjective ratings and acceptance level (e.g., likable and friendly scores in both systems are below or around 4, the midpoint of the scale).

Participants in the angry state showed lower SA and worse driving performance just as drivers with a secondary task usually show. However, as mentioned, there is one important distinction between them. Drivers who were angry did not show any attempt to compensate for their degenerated performance, whereas drivers with secondary tasks typically try to appropriately compensate for their degraded driving. Therefore, the intervention system may also need to be designed to help drivers compensate for their driving behavior in addition to trying to mitigate their affective effects. This can be done when the agent system gets intelligent enough to detect any hazardous situations and then, accordingly manage the timing and duration of the affect interventions just as passengers easily adjust a conversation in such a situation (Ferlazzo et al., 2008). To generate prompts in a more systematic way, a formal SA analyzing method (e.g., GDTA: Goal-Direct Task Analyses) (Jones et al., 2004) can be used. The application of this systematic method could be more useful to practitioners and system designers when they implement this type of in-vehicle agent. Further, this systematic approach could help an intelligent agent generate auditory prompts automatically based on integrated information of a driver's states and environmental conditions.

The present study investigated the effects of the interaction of in-vehicle agents on drivers' state of anger, driving performance, SA, and perceived workload. Our experiment demonstrated that the induced angry state degenerated driver SA and thereby negatively influenced multiple variables of driving performance. However, there were no effects of anger on perceived workload, suggesting that researchers might need a different approach from the traditional workload perspective when they explain the mechanism of affective effects. Given that anger seemed not to increase perceived workload, affective effects might be more serious than the effects of secondary tasks, for which a driver feels more workload and is likely to show some adaptive compensation.

The experiment showed the effectiveness of the use of an in-vehicle software agent to mitigate affective effects on driver SA and performance. In order for drivers in the angry state to concentrate more on the driving environment as well as to distract and awaken them from rumination or obsession with their affective source, the system included SA prompts based on the attention deployment strategy. Further, both the ER and the SA systems successfully reduced the anger level, as well as perceived workload. In addition, several prediction models between affective states and driving performance measures were constructed with partial or full mediations from the effects of SA.

These results could contribute to both theoretical and practical aspects of further research on the social aspects of the in-vehicle situations. First, the relationships among various affect, cognition, and performance constructs were more deeply explored, especially by integrating the construct of SA into our research. Second, a reliable new experimental protocol was set up for identifying the effects of affective states on driving-related variables. Finally, design guidelines for more refined intervention strategies for in-vehicle agents can be drawn, which can also be used with an affect detection system in the near future.

Despite all of these contributions of the current study, more research topics remain to be addressed. The self-rating of participants' affective states in an experimental protocol may be improved by adding more systematic affect detection systems, such as facial and speech detection or physiological sensing (Jeon and Walker, 2011c). Mechanisms and mitigation strategies for other affective states can also be explored, including not only negative affect such as fearful or sad states, but also positive affect such as happy or relieved states. Depending on the type of affective state, affective effects and underlying mechanisms might be different and thus, the agent's intervention strategy should be specified for each type of affect (Jeon et al., 2014b). Even within the attention deployment strategy, the design of the agent's speech can still be elaborated with more variables, such as timing and duration of the speech, gender of speech, partnership, acoustical parameters, or more contextual parameters. In the same line, the discrete speech clips used in this experiment can evolve into a more intelligent system along the lines of Apple's Siri (Speech Interpretation and Recognition Interface) system, so that drivers could have a more natural conversation with the system. The in-vehicle agent may also be more intelligent and more effective, with more precise analysis of the environment and judgment about the start and end of the intervention. Various vulnerable classes of drivers can be examined with this type of affect-driving research, including older drivers, student drivers, and drivers with Traumatic Brain Injury or Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. Based on their unique needs, characteristics and (dis)abilities, a specific mitigation approach might be required when designing an in-vehicle assistive system for a certain target user group (Jeon et al., 2011b).

Research on social interactions (especially emotions and affect) has not had a long history in the in-vehicle contexts as well as general human–machine system research. However, research has proposed a considerable amount of constructs, taxonomies, hypotheses, and theories that could or should be applied to driving research. The approach outlined in this study is expected to help close the existing gap between traditional affect research and the emerging field of social car research, and to contribute to each area. The evidence shown here can also guide researchers and practitioners in designing an effective in-vehicle agent.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This paper is partly based on the first author's PhD dissertation at Georgia Tech. The first author would like to thank his committee members, Dr. John Lee, Dr. Frank Durso, Dr. Arthur Fisk, Dr. Wendy Rogers, Dr. Gregory Corso, and Dr. Bruce Walker for their invaluable feedback for this paper.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

