@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Working postures and physical activity among registered nurses

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Nurses spent a small proportion of their work time in extreme postures.


                        
                        
                           
                           Nurses had few opportunities for rest and recovery.


                        
                        
                           
                           Nurses in the high activity group spent more time in extreme postures.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Musculoskeletal disorders

Posture

Physical activity

Low back

Shoulder

Inertial measurement unit

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Nurses report a high prevalence of musculoskeletal discomfort, particularly of the low back and neck/shoulder. This study characterized the full-shift upper arm and trunk postures and movement velocities of registered nurses using inertial measurement units (IMUs). Intensity of occupational physical activity (PA) was also ascertained using a waist-worn PA monitor and using the raw acceleration data from each IMU. Results indicated that nurses spent a relatively small proportion of their work time with the arms or trunk in extreme postures, but had few opportunities for rest and recovery in comparison to several other occupational groups. Comparisons between nurses in different PA groups suggested that using a combination of accelerometers secured to several body locations may provide more representative estimates of physical demands than a single, waist-worn PA monitor. The findings indicate a need for continued field-based research with larger sample sizes to facilitate the development of maximally effective intervention strategies.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A high prevalence of work-related musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) has been observed among nursing personnel in all settings of patient care, including hospitals, long-term care, and home health care (Alexopoulos et al., 2003, 2006; Bernal et al., 2015; Caruso and Waters, 2008; Choobineh et al., 2006; Davis and Kotowski, 2015; Karahan et al., 2009; Long et al., 2013, 2012; Lorusso et al., 2007; Reed et al., 2014; Smedley et al., 2003; Trinkoff et al., 2002; Waters et al., 2006). Disabling low back and neck/shoulder pain, in particular, is reported more frequently by nurses than by several other occupational groups (Corona et al., 2004; Harcombe et al., 2014, 2009). In 2012, for example, nursing assistants and registered nurses reported the second and fifth highest quantity of nonfatal occupational injuries and illnesses involving days-away-from-work and MSDs, respectively, among all occupations in the United States (BLS, 2013). The low back was injured in 56.2% of the nursing assistant cases and 51.4% of the registered nurses cases, while the shoulder was injured in 12.6% of the cases in both groups.

Working in non-neutral postures has been associated with an increased risk of MSDs of the low back and neck/shoulder in many occupations, including nursing (Bernal et al., 2015; Davis and Kotowski, 2015; Karahan et al., 2009; Long et al., 2013, 2012; Lorusso et al., 2007; Reed et al., 2014; Waters et al., 2006). While several studies have characterized the trunk postures of nurses working full shifts using direct measurement methods (Arias et al., 2012; Freitag et al., 2007, 2012; Hodder et al., 2010), the working postures and movement velocities of the upper arms of nurses have not been previously reported. Characterizations of the upper arm postures and movement velocities of nurses are needed to develop maximally effective intervention strategies intended to mitigate MSD risk factors.

Complementary to exposure to non-neutral working postures, high intensity occupational physical activity (PA) may contribute to several chronic health conditions, including MSDs (Harari et al., 2015; Heneweer et al., 2009, 2011; Holtermann et al., 2010, 2012a,b; Sitthipornvorakul et al., 2011). While regular, high intensity leisure-time PA is generally considered beneficial to overall health (Haskell et al., 2007; Warburton et al., 2006), and many workplace interventions that focus on achieving “adequate” PA levels result in some benefit (e.g., Anderson et al., 2009; Conn et al., 2009; Rongen et al., 2013), opposing effects of occupational and leisure-time PA have been observed in several other studies (i.e. high intensity PA outside of work appears to be beneficial while high intensity PA at work appears to be harmful; Holtermann, 2012b, Hu et al., 2013). The complex (and seemingly opposing) relationship between occupational and leisure-time PA on adverse health outcomes is further magnified by a reliance on self-reported PA estimates.

Low to moderate agreement between self-reported and objectively measured PA estimates has been observed to result in poor predictions of morbidity and health risk (Ekblom et al., 2015; Helmerhorst et al., 2012). Patient care workers, in particular, have been observed to report seven times the number of minutes of moderate or greater intensity PA that they complete during a work week in comparison to direct measurements obtained with a waist-worn PA monitor (Umukoro et al., 2013). One potential reason for the incongruity is that the monitors used to measure PA are typically worn at the waist and may not be sensitive to physically demanding upper body work (e.g., extremes of posture during patient transfers; Matthews et al., 2012). Consistent with this theory is the observation that nursing personnel report their work to be more strenuous the more often they work in non-neutral positions (Freitag et al., 2014).

In light of the lack of information on the upper arm postures and movement velocities, and because of the large discrepancy in self-reported and direct measurements of PA obtained from nurses, we conducted a study to assess the full-shift postures and movement velocities of the upper arms and trunk among nurses using inertial measurement units (IMUs). Simultaneous measurement of PA was accomplished using a waist-worn PA monitor and acceleration data obtained from each IMU to evaluate the relationship between occupational PA and postural demands among nurses in greater detail than what is currently available in the scientific literature.

@&#METHODS@&#

Thirty-six female registered nurses (age = 30.8 ± 10.1 years; body mass index = 24.1 ± 4.4 kg/m2) were recruited via informational meetings, email advertisements, and word of mouth from two medical surgical inpatient units at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics. Each nurse worked a full, 12 h work shift except for two who worked for 8 h and one who worked for 11 h. Twenty-one nurses worked day shifts (starting at 7 am) and 15 nurses worked night shifts (starting at 7 pm). Participants self-reported 1) no history of physician-diagnosed MSDs in the neck/shoulder or back regions, 2) no neck/shoulder or back pain two weeks prior to enrollment, and 3) no history of neurodegenerative disease (e.g., Parkinson's disease). All participants were right-hand dominant. All study procedures were approved by the University of Iowa Institutional Review Board and the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics Nursing Review Committee. Informed consent was obtained prior to participation.

Angular displacement waveforms of upper arm elevation (defined as either forward flexion or abduction of the shoulder relative to gravity) and trunk flexion/extension were estimated using three inertial measurement units (ArduIMU v3, 3D Robotics Inc., Berkeley, CA). Each IMU was a small (45 × 65 × 35 mm), wireless, battery-powered unit that measured and stored acceleration (triaxial, ±8 g) and angular velocity (triaxial, ±2000° s−1) information. One IMU was secured to the lateral aspect of each upper arm approximately one-half the distance between the lateral epicondyle and the acromion and one IMU was secured to the posterior trunk at approximately the 4th thoracic vertebral body. The IMU data streams were sampled at 50 Hz and stored to on-board flash memory.

The raw accelerometer and gyroscope information obtained from each IMU was processed using a custom complementary weighting algorithm developed in MATLAB (r2014a, The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA). The complementary weighting algorithm approach was used in lieu of a solely accelerometer-based approach, as accelerometer-based estimates have been observed to have poor accuracy during complex, dynamic movements (Amasay et al., 2009; Brodie et al., 2008; Godwin et al., 2009; Hansson et al., 2001). Details of the complementary weighting algorithm are described elsewhere (Schall Jr et al., 2015a; Schall et al., 2014). Previous analysis of the complementary weighting algorithm has indicated that the approach has good accuracy and repeatability when used with IMUs similar to those employed in the current study (Schall et al., 2015b). Specifically, sample-to-sample root mean square differences of 5.4° for the trunk and 8.5° for the upper arm have been observed in comparison to a “gold-standard” optical motion capture system. Estimates of mean angular displacement and angular displacement variation (difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles of angular displacement) were also observed to change roughly 2° on average per 8 h of data collection in a previous study (Schall et al., 2015b).

Exposure metrics used to describe posture, movement velocity, and rest/recovery in this study included: selected percentiles (10th, 50th, 90th, and the difference between 90th and 10th) of the amplitude probability distribution function (APDF; Jonsson, 1982); variables describing ‘extreme’ postures, such as percent time with the trunk flexed ≥45° and/or the upper arms elevated ≥60° (Jansen et al., 2004; Punnett et al., 1991; Putz-Anderson et al., 1997); the proportion of time working with high (≥90° s−1) and low (<5° s−1) angular velocities; and variables describing the occurrence of ‘rest’ and ‘recovery’ as in previous studies (Douphrate et al., 2012; Kazmierczak et al., 2005; Wahlstrom et al., 2010). ‘Rest’ was defined as having the trunk or upper arm in a neutral posture (<20°) and moving with an angular velocity of <5° s−1. ‘Recovery’ periods were defined as the number of times per minute of substantial periods (≥3 s) in a neutral posture.

Raw acceleration information obtained from each IMU and a wGT3X-BT PA monitor (ActiGraph, Pensacola, Florida, USA; triaxial, ±8 G, 50 Hz sampling rate) worn over the right hip (anterior superior iliac spine) was used to directly measure PA. Specifically, a custom MATLAB (r2014a, The MathWorks, Natick, MA) program was used to convert the raw acceleration information obtained from each participant and each of the sensors from units of gravity (i.e., g) to metabolic equivalents (METs) that express the energy cost of physical activities. The raw acceleration values were converted into an omnidirectional measure of acceleration by calculating the vector magnitude of the three accelerometer axes and then subtracting the value of gravity (g), after which, negative values were rounded up to zero (Hildebrand et al., 2014). The resulting value has been referred to as the Euclidian norm minus one (ENMO) (van Hees et al., 2013). Data were then further reduced by calculating the average acceleration values per 1-s epoch and then averaging the 1-s epoch values over 1-min intervals. The resulting acceleration averages per 1-min epoch were implemented into a regression equation to predict METs based on the relationship between acceleration and oxygen consumption (VO2) (Hildebrand et al., 2014). Standard definitions were used to categorize PA as “light” (≤3.0 METs) or “moderate” (>3.0 METs) intensity activity.

Complete PA information was obtained from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT monitor for all participants. Instrumentation failure led to the loss of PA information from the IMUs on one participant's trunk, three participants' right upper arm, and three participants' left upper arm. Of these participants, posture information was recovered for the right upper arm of one participant and left upper arm for two participants.

Each posture, movement velocity, and rest/recovery exposure metric was described with descriptive statistics (mean, SD) across all participants. To evaluate the relationship between PA and postural demands among nurses during work, participants were assigned to a “low” PA classification or a “high” PA classification based on a) a median split of the percentage of work time performing moderate PA from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT monitor only, and b) a median split of the average percentage of work time performing moderate PA from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT and the IMUs on the trunk and each upper arm. The second of the two approaches was used because PA measurements have been observed to vary substantially based on sensor location and combining the measurements from multiple locations may provide a more accurate assessment of whole body PA (Matthews et al., 2012; Schall et al., 2016; Swartz et al., 2000).

Tests of normality (e.g., Shapiro–Wilk) and Q–Q plots were used to identify appropriate transformations prior to further statistical analyses. Independent samples t-tests (two-tailed) were used to compare the exposure variables between the low and high PA groups. Each comparison was planned a-priori and was evaluated for statistical significance using a p-value of 0.05. Additionally, on a minute-to-minute basis of the entire sampling duration for all participants, the mean percentage of work time with the trunk flexed ≥45° and each arm elevated ≥60° was plotted against a) the METs/min for each 1-min epoch from the wGT3X-BT worn on the waist, and b) the average METs/min for each 1-min epoch from the wGT3X-BT and the IMUs worn on the waist, trunk, and each upper arm.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In general, nurses were observed to spend a small percentage of their work time in extreme postures, moving at high velocities, or performing moderate or greater intensity PA (Table 1
                      and Fig. 1
                     ). Nurses spent 6.07% of their work time with the trunk flexed ≥45°, 5.73% of their work time with the left arm elevated ≥60°, and 3.48% of their work time with the right arm elevated ≥60°. Less than 1% of work time was spent moving any body segment at high velocities (≥90° s−1) and a small percentage of work time was spent performing moderate or greater intensity PA regardless of partitioning approach (3.43% for the waist only approach; 7.02% for the average approach). While exposure to physical risks were rare, few opportunities for rest and recovery were observed. Nurses spent only 16% of their work shift with either upper arm in a neutral posture (<20°) and moving at a low velocity (<5° s−1) for a minimum of 3 consecutive seconds.


                     Tables 2 and 3
                     
                      provide comparisons of full-shift posture, movement velocity, and rest/recovery exposure metrics for the trunk and each upper arm by PA group based on a) a median split of the percentage of work time performing moderate PA obtained from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT monitor, and b) a median split of the average percentage of work time performing moderate PA obtained from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT and the IMUs on the trunk and each upper arm, respectively. Regardless of the criteria used to partition the data, the high PA group spent a slightly greater percentage of their work day with the trunk flexed and upper arms elevated in extreme postures, moved at higher velocities, and spent a smaller percentage of their work time in a neutral posture and moving at a low velocity for substantial periods (≥3 s).

Only one statistically significant difference was observed between PA groups when the data were partitioned using a median split of the percentage of work time performing moderate PA from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT monitor. In comparison, 24 statistically significant differences were observed between PA groups when the data were partitioned using a median split of the average percentage of work time performing moderate PA obtained from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT and the IMUs on the trunk and each upper arm. Regardless of partitioning approach, nurses in the high PA group were observed to have a greater range of trunk flexion (i.e., the difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the APDF) than nurses in the low PA group (p < 0.05).

Additional statistically significant differences observed when the data were partitioned using a median split of the average percentage of work time performing moderate PA obtained from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT and the IMUs on the trunk and each upper arm include a greater 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the APDF for both the left and right arm for nurses in the high PA group. Nurses in the high PA group were also observed to have a more extreme 10th percentile of the APDF for the trunk (greater extension of the trunk) and spent less time in neutral upper arm postures than nurses in the low PA group under this approach. Nurses in the high PA group exhibited greater 90th percentiles for high movement velocities and spent a greater proportion of time at high velocities (≥90° s−
                     1) for both the right and left upper arms than nurses in the low PA group. They also displayed a greater range of right upper arm elevation than nurses in the low PA group as indicated by the larger difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the APDF, spent less time with the upper arms in neutral postures for substantial periods (≥3 s), and spent less time with the upper arms in neutral postures and moving at low velocities for substantial periods (≥3 s) in comparison to the nurses in the low PA group.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Nursing personnel report a high prevalence of neck/shoulder pain and other symptoms consistent with MSDs that contribute to undesirable consequences such as early retirement, preventable disability, and nurse turnover (De Castro, 2006). Despite the high prevalence of neck/shoulder pain reported among nurses, this study represents the first effort we are aware of to characterize the upper arm postures and movement velocities of nurses working an entire shift using direct measurement methods. While it is unclear how high and for what duration the arms must be elevated for MSDs of the shoulder to occur, existing evidence suggests angles >60° are associated with shoulder pain (Hanvold et al., 2015; Putz-Anderson et al., 1997; Svendsen et al., 2004). Results of the present study indicate that nurses spend a relatively small proportion of their work with the arms elevated above 60° in comparison to other high-risk occupations involving shoulder-intensive work. Nurses did, however, have very few opportunities for rest and recovery, potentially placing them at risk for MSDs.

Several other studies have characterized the upper arm postures and movement velocities of other occupational groups that report a high prevalence of neck/shoulder MSDs. In comparison to the nurses in the current study who spent 5.7% and 3.5% of their time with the left and right arms elevated in extremes postures (≥60°), respectively, dairy parlor workers (Douphrate et al., 2012), automobile disassembly workers (Kazmierczak et al., 2005), and construction electricians (Moriguchi et al., 2013) were all observed to spend a greater proportion of their work time in extreme postures. Hairdressers were observed to spend a comparable amount of time with the upper arms elevated in extreme postures (Wahlstrom et al., 2010).

Nurses in this study were also observed to have a 90th percentile of upper arm elevation of 50.7% and 46.1% for the left and right arms, respectively. The observed 90th percentiles for upper arm elevation among nurses were below those observed for automobile disassembly workers (Kazmierczak et al., 2005) and construction electricians (Moriguchi et al., 2013), and higher than poultry processing workers (Juul-Kristensen et al., 2001) and air traffic controllers (Arvidsson et al., 2006). Occupations with comparable 90th percentiles of upper arm elevation include material pickers (Christmansson et al., 2002), hairdressers (Wahlstrom et al., 2010), hospital cleaners (Unge et al., 2007), and dentists (Jonker et al., 2009).

Lack of movement variation has been suggested to be an important risk factor for the development of work-related MSDs, particularly of the neck/shoulder and arm regions (Mathiassen et al., 2003; Srinivasan and Mathiassen, 2012; Srinivasan et al., 2014). Differences between the 90th and 10th posture percentiles (Kazmierczak et al. 2005; Wahlstrom et al. 2010) or between the 95th and 5th percentiles (Arvidsson et al., 2006) have been proposed as measures of posture variation. In the present study, the right (dominant) arm percentile range for nurses was 39°. This was very similar to hairdressers who had an overall exposure range of 43° (Wahlstrom et al., 2010) and less than the 56° reported for car disassembly workers (Kazmierczak et al., 2005) and 75° for dairy parlor workers (Douphrate et al., 2012). It was greater than the 5th–95th percentile ranges reported for air traffic controllers (Arvidsson et al., 2006).

The 90th percentile for movement at high velocities was roughly 27° s−1 for both the right and left upper arm among the nurses in this study. Compared to other studies, nurses were observed to have lower angular velocities than automobile disassembly workers (Kazmierczak et al., 2005), hairdressers (Wahlstrom et al., 2010), hospital cleaners (Unge et al., 2007), dentists (Jonker et al., 2009), and material pickers (Christmansson et al., 2002). Nurses exhibited comparable peak velocities to air traffic controllers (Arvidsson et al., 2006).

While we are aware of no other studies that have characterized the full-shift postures and movement velocities of the upper arms among nurses, several studies have characterized the trunk postures of nurses and/or patient care workers in other unit types using direct measurement methods (Arias et al., 2012; Freitag et al., 2007, 2012; Hodder et al., 2010). Consistent with these studies, the nurses recruited from the two medical surgical units in this study were observed to spend a small proportion of their work time in extreme trunk postures. Arias et al. (2012), for example, observed patient care unit workers (nurses and patient care assistants) working in two urban acute care hospitals spent 18.5% of their time between 20° and 45°, and only 4.5% of their time in trunk flexion >45°. In the current study, nurses spent 27.7% of their work time between 20° and 45° and 6.1% of their time with the trunk flexed ≥45°. Hodder et al. (2010) observed long-term care nurses working in seven long-term care facilities spent 25% of their time with the trunk flexed >30°, while nurses in the current study were observed to spend 18% of their work time with the trunk flexed >30° (following re-analysis not shown in Table 1).

Although results of this study and some previous work suggest that nurses spend a relatively small proportion of their work time in extreme postures, nurses were observed to have minimal opportunities for rest and recovery. Nurses spent, on average, only 16% of their time and/or 1.8 occurrences per minute with the left and right arm in a neutral posture and moving at a low velocity for substantial periods (≥3 s). This was less than dairy parlor workers (Douphrate et al., 2012), and comparable to automobile disassembly workers (Kazmierczak et al., 2005) and hairdressers (Wahlstrom et al., 2010). It is important to note, however, that nurses may have engaged in some restful actions such as leaning on working surfaces while the arms or trunk were in an extreme posture that could not be assessed without observation.

Several systematic reviews have suggested that exposure to non-neutral working postures (e.g., stooping, squatting, prolonged standing, overhead work) may be associated with a number of potentially serious health outcomes, including MSDs (Gallagher, 2005; Reid et al., 2010; Waters and Dick, 2015). Reductions in strength while working in non-neutral postures may, in part, explain why workers may be put at greater risk of injury, particularly in tasks requiring elevated muscular effort (Gallagher, 1997, 2005; Haslegrave et al., 1997). Many nursing tasks, such as patient transfers, require working in non-neutral postures while simultaneously exerting high forces (Freitag et al., 2007, 2012; Jang et al., 2007). Although PA monitors provide estimates of the energy expenditure of individuals, waist-worn PA monitors may underestimate the intensity of these nurses activities because of an inability to detect arm movements and upper body work (Matthews et al., 2012).

The characterizations of working postures and PA estimates in this study indicate that the overwhelming majority of non-neutral trunk and upper arm postures occurred during what is typically classified as “light” intensity PA (Fig. 1). While this result was not surprising (e.g., nurses likely work in non-neutral postures more often while stationary than while walking), it indicates that estimates of PA measured solely with waist-worn PA monitors may insufficiently capture physical work demands for nursing personnel and workers in other occupations with similar work characteristics. The overarching question of how many sensors (and how many placement sites) are needed for accurate estimation of PA is still under debate (Matthews et al., 2012) and served as a motivating factor for using the two approaches to classify measured PA as “high” or “low”: i) a median split of the percentage of work time performing moderate PA from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT monitor only (results presented in Table 2), and ii) a median split of the average percentage of work time performing moderate PA from the waist-worn wGT3X-BT and the IMUs on the trunk and each upper arm (results presented in Table 3). The results of this study do not provide evidence that multiple site sensor placement is quantitatively “better” than single site placement. However, the large discrepancy in the number of statistically significant differences observed between PA groups depending on partitioning approach (Table 2 vs Table 3) demonstrates the potential effect of not measuring PA with multiple sensors. Given previous indications that patient care workers greatly overestimate the number of minutes of moderate or greater intensity PA that they complete during a work week in comparison to direct measurements (Umukoro et al., 2013), and because nurses report their work to be more strenuous the more often they work in non-neutral positions (Freitag et al., 2014), the results suggest that a combination of accelerometers secured to several body locations may provide more representative estimates of physical work demands than a single, waist-worn PA monitor. However, some other work has suggested that the benefit may be minor (Swartz et al., 2000). Ultimately, the results of the current study provide further evidence of the need to carefully evaluate PA measurements in the context of the methods used to obtain the data (i.e., single site vs. multiple site sensor placement).

The results of this study must be interpreted in the context of several limitations. First, all PA and posture measurements were made during a single work shift. Four to twelve measurement days are typically recommended for reliable accelerometer estimates of habitual daily PA (Berlin et al., 2006; Trost et al., 2000; Welk et al., 2012). Additionally, posture variability between days within subjects has been observed to be of the same order of magnitude as that between subjects, suggesting that 'typical' workdays do not exist and multiple days of measurement per subject are preferable (Wahlstrom et al., 2010). Inclusion of additional measurement days, therefore, may have provided more accurate estimates of both PA and posture. However, PA measurements in this study were comparable to those reported by other investigators who obtained PA data over an entire work week (Arias et al., 2012; Umukoro et al., 2013). Thus, it is expected that the single day of data collection was reasonably representative of the postural and PA demands required of the nurses.

Second, the results are limited to a relatively small sample of young registered nurses working in two medical surgical units in a Midwestern academic hospital. Nurses and nursing assistants in other patient care settings may have different work characteristics than those observed in this study. Home health care and long-term care nurses, for example, may not have access to mechanical patient lifts and other aids that may help to reduce musculoskeletal symptoms and injuries among nursing personnel (Evanoff et al., 2003; Li et al., 2004). Future research should characterize the working postures, movement velocities, and PA of a broader range of nursing personnel with larger sample sizes to facilitate the development of maximally effective intervention strategies.

Third, nurses in this study did not wear a wrist-worn PA monitor. Many modern PA monitors including the wGT3X-BT provide valid summary metrics of the quantity and intensity of PA when worn on the wrist (Taraldsen et al., 2012; Troiano et al., 2008; Van Remoortel et al., 2012). Recent research has also indicated that PA metrics obtained with commercially available PA monitors positioned on the wrist are strongly correlated with dynamic humeral motion parameters, but not static parameters (Acuna and Karduna, 2012). While wrist-worn PA monitors may not provide the posture and movement velocity information of interest to this study, they may provide more accurate estimates of the energy expenditure of nurses because of their greater ability to detect movements of the upper body. An alternative approach to IMUs and PA monitors for directly measuring energy expenditure is through the use of heart rate monitors. Heart rate is correlated with oxygen consumption (i.e., VO2) and is, therefore, useful for measuring PA (Freedson and Miller, 2000; Strath et al., 2000). Heart rate variability has also been observed to be a reliable marker of autonomic activity associated with cardiac risk and MSDs in some occupational studies (Hallman et al., 2014a, 2014b; Soares-Miranda et al., 2014). Heart rate monitoring is not without limitations, however. Changes in temperature, humidity, and emotional stress, among other factors, may all cause an increase in heart rate without an increase in PA (Freedson and Miller, 2000). Heart rate monitors must, therefore, be used with caution when evaluating energy expenditure.

Finally, this study did not assess several job stressors commonly associated with MSDs among nurses including physical workload (e.g., high forces during manual patient handling), mental workload (e.g., information overload), time pressure, and emotional workload (De Castro, 2006; Hoonakker et al., 2011; Kiekkas et al., 2008). Each of these stressors may contribute to the large discrepancy in self-reported and direct measurements of PA among patient care workers observed in other studies (Umukoro et al., 2013). Large biomechanical loads during patient transfers, in particular, are a known risk factor for MSDs among patient care workers (Marras et al., 1999). The lack of biomechanical loading assessment is an important limitation of this study. Future research evaluating this broad spectrum of work demands in a controlled laboratory environment or using systematic observation of field-based activities are needed to gain a better understanding of the association of work demands and MSDs among nurses.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was supported (in part) by a pilot project grant from the Healthier Workforce Center for Excellence (HWCE) at the University of Iowa. The HWCE is supported by Cooperative Agreement No. U19OH008858 from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)/National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). The contents are solely the responsibility of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of the CDC, NIOSH, or the HWCE. The authors would like to express their appreciation to the nursing personnel who participated in this study and the administration who supported this research.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

