@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Usability and perceived usefulness of personal health records for preventive health care: A case study focusing on patients' and primary care providers' perspectives

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined the usefulness and usability of a Personal Health Records (PHR) application.


                        
                        
                           
                           Multiple methods with observations, think-aloud, surveys, interviews, focus groups.


                        
                        
                           
                           Patients found tailored health recommendations useful.


                        
                        
                           
                           Patients asked more informed questions to their providers due to the system.


                        
                        
                           
                           Care providers interested in PHR due to useful content and patient activation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Personal health records

Usefulness

Usability

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Personal Health Records (PHR) are electronic applications for individuals to access, manage and share their health information in a secure environment. The goal of this study was to evaluate the usefulness and usability of a Web-based PHR technology aimed at improving preventive care, from both the patients' and primary care providers' perspectives. We conducted a multi-method descriptive study that included direct observations, concurrent think-aloud, surveys, interviews and focus groups in a suburban primary care clinic. Patients found the tailored health recommendations useful and the PHR easy to understand and use. They also reported asking useful health-related questions to their physicians because of using the system. Generally, care providers were interested in using the system due to its useful content and impact on patient activation. Future successful systems should be better integrated with hospital records; put more emphasis on system security; and offer more tailored health information based on comprehensive health databases.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Each year, thousands of people suffer from potentially preventable illnesses such as heart attack, stroke and cancer. In addition to claiming lives and reducing individuals' quality of life, these illnesses also result in millions of dollars in health care costs (Peterson and Dragon, 1998; Avorn and Shrank, 2008). Screening can prevent a considerable amount of these illnesses and reduce costs (Salkeld, 2006). The number of recommended preventive screening tests has increased in the last decade, but patients' compliance with recommended health screening rates still remains low (Manne et al., 2002; Weinberg et al., 2004). In 2003, the seminal paper of McGlynn and colleagues indicated that patients receive only 55% of the recommended preventive care based on a survey of a random sample of 6712 adults in 12 metropolitan areas in the US (McGlynn et al., 2003). Based on CDC's recent report, for example, only 59% of patients in the US receive the recommended colorectal cancer screening tests (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012). These low rates may partially be due to a lack of awareness by clinicians and patients, inadequate reinforcement mechanisms for patients with regards to compliance with the recommended preventive screening guidelines, limited access to high quality of care, and financial barriers (Mosca et al., 2006).

Patient-centric health information technologies (HIT) are becoming increasingly popular (Perlin et al., 2004; Sunyaev et al., 2010). To offer better care at lower costs, HIT needs to support and facilitate patient-centered care rather than focusing on isolated physician and clinician tasks (Walker and Carayon, 2009). If designed well, HIT can educate patients on health care topics, give reminders to ensure timely screening, and provide support mechanisms for patients to facilitate their preventive screening decisions (Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care in America, 2001). Personal Health Records (PHR) are an HIT that can play a significant role in improving patients' knowledge of and attitudes toward their health care (Powsner, 1998; Brennan, 2000). The Markle Foundation (2003) defines PHR as “an electronic application through which individuals can access, manage and share their health information in a private, secure, and confidential environment.” International Standards Organization (ISO) (2009) indicated: “The Personal Health Record of an individual is a repository of information considered by that individual to be relevant to his or her health, wellness, development and welfare, and for which that individual has primary control over the record's content.”

PHR can improve health care, including preventive care, through educating and engaging patients in their own health care (Krist and Woolf, 2011; Tang et al., 2006), and as a result transforming them into ‘more activated patients’ (Von Korff et al., 1998; Lorig et al., 1996). Patient activation aims to help patients develop the skills, knowledge and motivation to become an effective participant in their health (Hibbard et al., 2004, 2005). It has been linked to better health outcomes and lower costs (Bodenheimer et al., 2002; Britto and Wimberg, 2009). PHR can increase patient activation (Eriksen and Ursin, 2004; Goth, 2008; Ueckert et al., 2003) and improve communication between patients and caregivers (Ueckert et al., 2003) (Eriksen and Ursin, 2004; Steele and Lo, 2009). These studies make it clear that patients are more likely to make good decisions and take actions to promote their health if they become active participants of their own health care (Bourgeois et al., 2008; Ueckert et al., 2003).

In the early stages of health information systems, PHR-like systems were not always Web-based (Tang et al., 2006; Srinivasan, 2006). While there are still various platforms supporting PHR systems, including free-standing/PC-based, universal serial bus (USB)/portable storage-based, and mobile/smart phone-based platforms, Web-based systems have so far shown their dominancy (Steele and Lo, 2009). Unlike Web-based health portals, which in most cases consist of a collection of standard information on health issues and illnesses and user-created discussion boards (Weingart et al., 2006). PHR systems typically allow users to manipulate their own health information, and therefore have the potential to better satisfy their health information needs and positively impact health behaviors (Malamateniou and Vassilacopoulos, 2010). PHR can motivate patients to take the recommended preventive screening tests and to improve compliance with drug and other therapies by providing them with either tailored recommendations and education or electronic reminder mechanisms (Palen and Aalokke, 2006; Krist et al., 2011). These recommendations and reminders can lead to more informed patient–caregiver interactions and cost savings. PHR can help family members manage the health information of specific groups such as children, elderly, or terminally disabled patients as well (Greenhalgh et al., 2010; Bourgeois et al., 2008).

PHR systems can also improve quality of health care by supporting care providers' work. For example, they can help in closing the health information gap between patients and providers by making the “episodic” nature of care more continuous (Ball et al., 2006) as well as facilitate patient education and shared decision-making.

Although PHR have great potential to improve health care (Tang and Lansky, 2005; Scherger, 2005), in particular preventive care (Kahn et al., 2009; Krist et al., 2011), to date there is limited evidence supporting a positive impact of PHR on health care from patients' as well as caregivers' perspectives (Tang et al., 2006; Zuckerman and Kim, 2009). A small number of studies identified barriers to acceptance and widespread usage concerns about privacy, security and confidentiality of health-related data, feasibility of integration of PHR to electronic health records (EHR), accuracy and completeness of data entered, and usability and usefulness of PHR systems (Denton, 2001; Liu et al., 2011; Tang et al., 2006; Hargreaves, 2010). For PHR to gain widespread use, it needs to be accepted and adopted by both patients and care providers, as similar technology acceptance and adoption issues were reported in other areas (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000). It is therefore important to study factors that may potentially affect PHR acceptance from both the patients' and care providers' viewpoints. This will guide us on how to design and implement PHR that will meet the needs of both stakeholders, and will increase the likelihood of success.

There is a knowledge gap in the literature regarding patient and care provider perceptions, attitudes and preferences toward any type of HIT (Angst and Agarwal, 2009), in particular PHR (Baird et al., 2011). A number of studies focused on usability and usefulness issues from both patient and provider perspectives (Montague, 2010; Martin et al., 2011), but they focused on medical device design, rather than HIT. Furthermore, previous studies evaluated PHR from either patients' (direct users of PHR) or providers' (indirect users) perspective, which is only part of the picture. More work is needed to understand the use of PHR systems as a tool that can complement the traditional care, as well as their impact on patients, providers, organizations and health care systems based on human factors and ergonomics concepts and methods (Nazi et al., 2009).

Based on the above factors and the well-known Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) (Davis, 1989; Davis et al., 1989), we argue that high-usability and usefulness of patient-centric HIT can be valuable in improving patients' compliance with the recommended guidelines and medical outcomes. Fig. 1
                      presents the overarching conceptual framework guiding our study, which was adapted from the TAM. The framework indicates that a patient's or care provider's attitude toward the PHR system can be determined by two constructs: perceived usefulness and perceived usability. Instead of the construct “perceived ease of use” included in the original TAM model, the modified framework uses the construct of “perceived usability.” Due to the broader range of the usability term that includes ease of use as well as a number of other concepts (Nielsen, 1993), perceived usability was chosen as one of the main constructs. Nielsen (1993) defines a high-usability interface as an interface with high learnability, efficiency, memorability and satisfaction, and one with a low number of errors. In the context of this study, perceived usability refers to the “degree to which using this particular PHR system will be free of effort.” We define perceived usefulness as “the degree to which a patient or provider believes that using the PHR would increase compliance with preventive screening and lifestyle changes.” The conceptual framework postulates that if patients and providers have a more positive attitude toward the technologies they use (in terms of usefulness and usability), their acceptance, intention to use, and eventually their actual use of these technologies will also be higher.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the value (i.e., usefulness and usability) of a specific patient-centered information technology in improving awareness of (for patients) and compliance with (for both patients and care providers) preventive care guidelines. Using a case study, we specifically aimed at determining patients' and providers' perceptions regarding (1) whether a PHR system can be useful in improving patient–care provider interactions, preventive health screening, and compliance with healthier lifestyle behaviors; and (2) the key usability factors of such a system. For the specific technology, we used a Web-based, secure system, MySafe-T.Net, developed as a PHR with the primary aims of (1) improving preventive care and preventive screening rates and (2) changing patients' lifestyles to improve their health. MySafe-T.Net's secondary aim is to serve as a health information repository.

Making the technology useful and easy to use for both patients and care providers is a challenging goal, yet not exclusive to PHR systems. Health care is filled with situations in which there are different types of users for the same technology (Carayon et al., 2010). Care is often provided in complex socio-technical environments (Buckle et al., 2006; Carayon, 2010). Hence, (re)designing technologies based on human factors engineering, specifically usability and usefulness, principles by taking into account the overlapping, complementary, and sometimes conflicting needs of multiple players is crucial if we want to improve overall systems performance.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

MySafe-T.net was designed with the goal of preventing future health conditions such as high blood pressure, obesity and cancer and leading people to live a healthy life style by increasing patient activation. MySafe-T.net is aimed at increasing patients' compliance with preventive screening tests (e.g., colorectal cancer screenings, cholesterol screenings) and lifestyle changes (e.g., physical exercise, eating habits) recommended by the US Preventive Services Task Force based on an individual's profile including demographics, personal and family health histories, lifestyle and health habits (Shea et al., 1996). It can be used by people of various ages and clinical conditions, including healthy users. The system provides patients with an interactive environment to access their own health records via a Web browser. During the initial use, the system asks each patient to provide information on five main categories including demographics, personal health history, family history, lifestyle, and health habits (Appendices A1, A2 and A3). It develops an individual profile based on this information, and then applies the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (2007) preventive health screening recommendations to this profile to produce prevention and lifestyle change (e.g., frequency and intensity of physical exercise) recommendations tailored to each person based on their individual risk factors (Appendix A4). MySafe-T.net also provides individualized educational Web site links (Appendix A5) based on each patient's profile. The recommendations are updated when the patient makes changes on their stored profile.

Using the system, the patient can print a “letter for the care provider” and share this letter with their physician and other care providers. This letter includes information about the patient's demographics, own and family health histories, and the recommended preventive screening tests and lifestyle changes based on their profile. This feature was designed with the goal of improving the communication between patients and care providers and increasing shared decision-making.

The study was conducted at a Minnesota suburban primary care clinic affiliated with a nation-wide institution. We collected data from both patients and care providers. The clinic coordinator contacted 36 consecutive patients who had made an appointment at the clinic for an annual physical exam within a two-week window in February 2008, described the study briefly and gave the contact information of the research assistant (MG) to those interested. Twenty-nine patients contacted the research assistant, who provided detailed information about the study and checked each patient's eligibility for participation. The inclusion criteria included having scheduled an annual physical exam at the time of the study, having a moderate level of experience with computers and the Internet, and being 21 years of age or older. Of the 24 eligible patients, 22 agreed to participate. Two patients declined due to scheduling issues. The assistant obtained consent from these patients on the phone and instructed them to arrive at the clinic 2 h before their scheduled appointment. Each participant was paid $70 as an incentive at the end of their visit. Sixteen out of the 22 recruited patients participated in the follow-up phone interview within two weeks after their clinic appointment. All study procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the involved institutions.

We also recruited eight care providers (four out of six primary care physicians and four out of five medical assistants) employed in the same clinic. Physicians were included in the study due to their important roles in providing preventive care including recommending, ordering and interpreting the results of preventive care screening, providing lifestyle change recommendations, and prescribing medications to patients. Medical assistants almost always interact with the patients before the physicians on the day of the annual physical exam, take medical histories including those related to preventive care, record vital signs, prepare patients for examinations, and convey information important for the exam to physicians. The information included in the PHR overlaps significantly with the information physicians and medical assistants need from patients during the annual physical exam.

We used a multi-method approach (Johnson et al., 2007) for answering the research questions. We collected data via observations, concurrent think-aloud method, two types of patient interviews (one immediately after the tasks and one follow-up within 2 weeks of the annual exam), a patient survey, and two caregiver focus groups. Table 1
                         summarizes the data collection methods along with their respective completion times, participant types (patients or care providers) and research questions addressed.

The assistant first introduced herself and escorted the patient to a room with computer and Internet access where she provided information and instructions about the study. The patient was asked to complete eight tasks detailed in Table 2
                            (sample screen shots in Appendix A) and was instructed to “think-aloud” while she/he was completing the tasks, known as the concurrent think-aloud method (Van den Haak et al., 2003). This method allowed us to examine in more depth the perceived usefulness and usability issues concerning the system. After the patient completed entering the required information to develop the personal profile (demographics, personal and family health history, medications and recent screenings), the system provided tailored preventive screening and lifestyle change recommendations. The patient was then asked to review these recommendations and visit at least three Web sites recommended by the system. It also automatically printed the “letter for the care provider” which the assistant asked them to share with their medical assistant and the primary care physician at the beginning of their examination. During the experimentation, the research assistant observed participants' interactions with the system and took notes on automation surprises, confusion over instructions, overlooked site functions, and other potential problems. Next, patients were asked to complete a written survey and participate in an interview. They were then informed that they could login and use MySafe-T.net any time within the next two weeks to update their information, review the recommendations, or receive new recommendations. The experimentation took about 1 h to complete. A follow-up phone interview was conducted around the two-week mark.

In order to determine the overall user perceptions concerning the usability and usefulness of the system and to complement the findings from the qualitative studies, we conducted a survey among the patients. The Personal Health Records Survey (PHRS) is a paper-based survey aimed at determining patient perceptions regarding MySafe-T.net. It measures eight major constructs presented in Table 3
                            with corresponding dimensions, used measures, number of items, and Cronbach's Alpha values. Thirty-eight of the 51 survey items had seven-point Likert scales as response categories ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Two items (on mental demand and effort) had 10-point scales (Low to High), and the rest consisted of demographic questions. The items that measured usability were in part based on the framework developed by Lin et al. (1997), and the perceived usefulness measures were based on the framework by Davis (1989) and Davis et al. (1989).

Following the survey, patients were asked to participate in a short semi-structured interview conducted by the research assistant. The interview guide (Appendix B) was developed based on the conceptual framework guiding the study (Fig. 1, Davis, 1989; Davis et al., 1989; Lin et al., 1997). The goal of the interview was to pursue a one-on-one interaction with each patient to get more in-depth information (compared to the survey) about the positive and negative perceptions of usefulness and usability of the MySafe-T.net and the underlying factors for these perceptions. The usability questions were based on Nielsen (1993) and Shneiderman (1992) and Lin et al. (1997), and the usefulness questions, including ease of use and mental demand, were based on Davis's (1989) framework on perceived usefulness. All interviews were digitally recorded and transcribed.

A follow-up phone interview with each patient was conducted about two weeks after the experiment. Sixteen of the 22 initial participants agreed to participate in the phone interview; 3 could not be reached after 4 attempts to contact via phone, and the rest declined to attend due to their busy schedules. During this interview, the research assistant inquired about (1) whether the patient used the system since their physician's visit and why or why not; (2) how the physician and the medical assistant reacted to the “letter for the care provider; ” and (3) whether they found the system useful and usable/easy to use in the long-term and why or why not. The assistant took detailed notes during the interview.

We conducted two focus groups with care providers after completing data collection from the patients, one with primary care physicians and one with medical assistants. All recruited care providers provided care to one or more patients who participated in the study, which allowed them to examine the “letter for the care provider” that the patients shared with them as part of the study (at least twice) before participating in the focus groups. The focus group technique was used to allow moderated interactions between care providers and to give providers an opportunity to enhance each other's ideas and opinions concerning the system. Both focus groups were moderated by a human factors engineering expert (APG). The care providers did not use MySafe-T.net in practice. However, conducting the focus groups after the patient experiments ensured that providers had seen the “letter for the care provider” for at least two patients. They were also provided with a detailed demonstration of the system at the beginning of the focus group by the moderator. The moderator asked questions using the focus group guide in Appendix C. The sessions were recorded using a digital voice recorder and transcribed. Each session took under 1 h to complete.

We limited our quantitative analysis to descriptive statistics due to the limited sample size as well as the supporting nature of the quantitative data. After data from the surveys were manually entered, standard data checking and verification were performed, and descriptive statistics including means and standard deviations were calculated.

To identify patients' and care providers' perceptions about the value of MySafe-T.net, we analyzed the data qualitatively via the following four methods: (1) as part of the survey collected by one open-ended question, (2) semi-structured face-to-face patient interviews immediately after the experiment, (3) follow-up phone interviews with patients within two weeks after the experiment in the clinic, and (4) care provider focus groups. We used qualitative, directed content analysis using a deductive reasoning approach supplemented by inductive reasoning (Hsieh and Shannon, 2005). The overall analysis was guided by the conceptual framework in Fig. 1 (deductive approach). The top level categories in the coding structure were “perceived usefulness” and “perceived usability.” Although we started our data analysis with these two major categories, we allowed any additional “top-level” categories as well as sub-categories under each major category to emerge from the data (inductive approach). The coding structure was developed by two human factors engineers (AAO, APG) using a consensus approach. The combined deductive and inductive approaches ensured that we stayed focused on the research questions of interest (perceived usefulness and usability of PHR in improving compliance with preventive screening and life style changes), while it allowed us to identify specific characteristics of this type of PHR systems important for user acceptance based on the data (Hsieh and Shannon, 2005; Patton, 2002). Once the classification scheme was developed, the data were coded by one author (AAO) and then reviewed independently by the other author (APG).

Based on the results obtained, all authors convened and developed proposed PHR design characteristics.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The patient sample was gender-balanced (50–50) and mostly in good or very good health (Table 4
                        ). The majority of the participating patients accessed the Web on a regular basis, mostly from their homes, with half of them accessing it more than 3 h per week. Table 5
                         provides demographic information concerning the care providers.


                        Table 6
                         presents the descriptive statistics for all items in the PHRS, except demographics questions, which are presented in Table 4. The internal reliability of the survey was measured through three pairs of duplicate questions. The Cronbach's Alpha values for these pairs were 0.90, 0.93, and 0.81, which were acceptable (Cronbach, 1990). Additionally, Cronbach's Alpha values were calculated for each of the seven survey sections (Table 3). The coefficients were high, with four constructs having a value higher than 0.90, and only one construct being slightly below 0.80 (Section E), providing evidence for adequate reliability (Cronbach, 1990). The highest scores from each section are discussed next in descending order.

Patient perceptions regarding the usefulness of the system (Section A) were mostly positive, with all seven questions scoring higher than 4.9 on a 7-point Likert scale (1 representing “strongly disagree” and 7 representing “strongly agree”). Patients indicated that care providers could keep a better eye on their health (Item 4) with the help of MySafe-T.net. They found the “Resources” page (Item 7) and the system overall useful (Item 5), as well as the information on the system relevant (Item 1). Patients' perceptions concerning the usefulness of the “Recommendations” page (Item 6) and usefulness of the recommendations provided by the system (Item 2) were also rated highly. Patients also gave high marks to the perceived security and trustworthiness of the site (Section B), as the confidence in entering confidential information, the perceived trustworthiness, and perceived technical reliability of my Safe-T.net (Items 8, 9, 10) received high scores.

Section C focused on the perceived impact of the system on personal health management. Patients welcomed the potential help offered by the MySafe-T.net in enabling them to be more in charge of their own health (Item 16) and in having more informative conversations with their physicians (Item 12). They felt more informed regarding health risks due to family heritage through MySafe-T.net (Item 15). Their interest in collecting information from the system before their next physician's visit and the MySafe-T.net's helpfulness in better complying with the recommended preventive health screenings received more moderate scores (Items 11 and 13). Participants indicated the system helped them have a better understanding of the consequences of not following a healthy life style (Item 19). While still positive, scores were lower regarding the system's helpfulness in starting and maintaining life style changes (Item 14) and whether the system gave them a better understanding of the consequences of not getting timely screenings (Item 18). Results indicated the positive informational and educational characteristics of the system while scores concerning sharing of this information and making it a more integral part in their interactions were lower. Patients were less willing to make radical changes in their lifestyles based on what they learned from MySafe-T.net (Item 14). Section D included three questions that were duplicates of previous questions for calculating the Cronbach's Alpha coefficients (Table 3).

As part of Section E, patients found the system easy to use (Item 23) and the screens well-designed (Item 26). They had no difficulty understanding MySafe-T.net's content (Item 29) and found the designs consistent (Item 32). Overall, perceived user performance and satisfaction levels with the system were very high. The majority of the patients found screen instructions understandable (Item 30), screens well-designed (Item 27), and the PHR interesting (Item 28) and fast to work on (Item 31). Participants mostly did not think they made a lot of mistakes (Item 24) and there were too many task steps (Item 25). No significant usability problems for MySafe-T.net were detected.

Participants' overall satisfaction with the system (Item 36) was fairly high (about 82% of perfect score). They would recommend the system to others (Item 33), thought the system was a good use of their time (Item 34), and wished to continue using it (Item 35). Mental demand (Item 39, 10- point scale) and overall perceived effort to complete the tasks (Item 40, 10- point scale) produced moderate scores, which indicate that the system requires a moderate level of effort.

Positive patient perceptions regarding the system were categorized as information tailored to individual patients, continuity of care, patient activation and improved communication with care providers. Negative perceptions and improvement suggestions included use of medical terminology that cannot be understood by lay people easily, need for more tailored and individualized information, and difficulty in remembering personal and family medical histories. Details are presented below.

During the interviews, 8 patients reported that they found the “tailored” and “informative” nature of the system based on medical and family history helpful and informative-more informative than generic sites-as evidenced by the following quote.
                                    “I like this system because when you put in all your information, then it takes you to specific Web sites that pertain to your issues or disorders. It is more informative than other systems I have seen because it is more personal.” (Patient #4)
                                 
                              

Five patients indicated that MySafe-T.net has the potential to improve patient safety by giving them more control over their own health information and by functioning as a reliable repository of preventive health-related information. They can use the information in MySafe-T.net as they move across different care systems and care providers, which can result in more reliable and timely information transfer over the continuum of care. Patients found it useful that the system can alert their physicians of possible medicine interactions, prevent duplicate entries, and provide another medium for communication with their care providers.

Based on the information they learned from MySafe-T.net, ten patients indicated they have additional questions for their primary care physicians regarding some tests, and the system allowed them to easily remember these questions. The system is “a nice place to start the doctor's visit on” (Participant #9). It made communication with care providers easier, particularly due to the tailored recommendations and patient education provided, as exemplified by the following quote.
                                    “I should have a certain test done in five years, but this system told me, because of my family history, that three years would probably be more appropriate for me. I want to talk to my doctor about this.” (Patient #17)
                                 
                              

Other positive items identified by the patients included MySafe-T.net (1) focusing on key information, “nuts and bolts,” avoiding unnecessary details; (2) acting as a reminder for things they should do such as eating better and exercising; (3) being useful because it allows them to track their health record and see possible health dangers; (4) being easy to use and self-explanatory.

Three patients indicated the system could provide more specific information tailored to patients' conditions. For example, two patients had multiple results for a specific test and the system allowed them to enter only one value:
                                    “[…] when I was in the preventive health screening test section, I was only able to enter the results of my most recent cholesterol.[…] However, my cholesterol was higher couple years ago but the system did not allow me to enter this information.” (Patient #14)
                                 
                              

While generally patients indicated the system was easy to use, three patients reported not understanding one or more of the terms used in the MySafe-T.net. For example, one patient did not understand the term “tubal ligation” when completing her medical history, while another had a hard time with the instructions for entering her medication information. Also, one patient indicated: “I know I am allergic to eye polytron hydroxy, but I did not know which category classified that…” (Patient #8).

Two patients had some difficulty remembering their own and family medical histories in enough detail to enter into the system:
                                    “The matter is trying to remember what your background is, what your family's background is. […] It is a good tool as far as […] things you probably should know about and you can always add them in later.” (Patient #20)
                                 
                              

Overall, interviews indicated that MySafe-T.net was perceived by patients as a useful and easy to use system. To improve the acceptance of such a system, emphasis should be given to providing tailored information and recommendations to patients, and using a language that can easily be understood by laypeople.

Of the 16 participants who agreed to participate in the follow-up phone interview, nine indicated that they used the system in the two weeks since their physical exam. All nine used it to access information and resources, and two used it to update their profiles and review the recommendations based on their updated profiles. In the interview, participants were presented six statements and were asked to rate their agreement with those statements on a 7-point Likert scale. Participants moderately agreed that using the system allowed them to have a more informative conversation with their physicians (Mean = 4.1.4, Std. Dev. = 1.88).

Three participants indicated that the physician and/or the medical assistant found the printout potentially useful, with one medical assistant indicating it would make “things easier.” Four patients indicated they found the output useful during their conversations. One patient and one physician indicated the preventive screening information was useful, and two indicated the doctors became quite interested in how the printout was produced and asked for more information. One physician read directly from the care provider letter and discussed each item with the patient. One patient became interested in the electronic nature of the system and started using the clinic's own electronic charting system after their experience with MySafe-T.net. One indicated MySafe-T.net should send optional monthly reminder e-mail alerts for refilling their medications, updating their information, and going to their upcoming laboratory tests and doctor's appointments.

There were few negative comments from patients in the follow-up interviews. One patient found the system “irrelevant” to their health, one indicated the system was not accurate in its recommendations, and two indicated they were “too young” or “too healthy” to use it. Another one indicated that it could be useful if it could be shared between different hospitals. In spite of these few negative comments, all but three patients who participated in the follow-up interviews stated they would be willing to use the system on a regular basis.

Overall, both the participating primary care physicians and the medical assistants indicated that the system can improve quality and efficiency in primary care clinics. Physicians found several functions of the system useful, including medical histories of patients and their families, tailored preventive screening recommendations, and medical education provided to patients, as evidenced by the following statement:
                              “I think that the history part they enter is nice to have. I can see someone I didn't know walking in with one of these [letter for the care provider], that would be really helpful.” (Physician #3)
                           
                        

Both the physicians and medical assistants found the “letter for the care provider” helpful as it provided preventive care screening recommendations based on each patient's condition. Two physicians noted that patients who used the system had more detailed questions during the examination. Other positive points included the time-saving aspect of the system, the system being a “health motivator” in both motivating patients to learn more about their health and to keep a healthy lifestyle, and being a “limited but good technology aid.” (Physician #3)
                              “Finally something to save me time. […] I don't have to explain them everything, I mean everything, […] with this.” (Physician #2)
                           
                           
                              “Maybe they can go look up [the Internet] to help them get informed and be healthy, good health motivator.” (Physician #3)
                           
                        

Regarding how to further improve MySafe-T.net, they recommended including both generic and brand-name medications for patients to enter, have pop-up boxes providing more information on conditions, tests and medical terms, and automatically link to some information on best practices for better patient education. One physician indicated the system should connect to EMR (electronic medical records) “automatically” and “bi-directionally.” One physician wanted to see the exact screening dates appearing in this kind of EMR-integrated system.
                              “It would be nice if they could … [be] potentially integrated with any EMR. So, for both directions, the patient could still maintain their own record … when they go from place to place.” (Physician #2)
                           
                           
                              “If it is connected, I could go over [the patient's] screening dates and tell them what [screening] they soon need.” (Physician #3)
                           
                        

The suggestions were enhancement-focused and for “how to make [the system] better.” (Physician #2). One negative comment included the system being “not for everyone and difficult.” (Physician #1) Table 7
                            summarizes our recommendations regarding both the structural and content-related PHR design characteristics based on this study, along with the information on which part of the study those recommendations were deduced from.


                           Table 8
                            presents a set of proposed design characteristics as a result of our analyses of the qualitative and quantitative data obtained from patients and care providers. It should be noted that the characteristics on Table 8 are not the result of rigorous testing, as our study primarily aimed at understanding the usability and usefulness issues of a PHR system based on a specific case study. However, the data we collected allowed us to provide some insight on the design features that are desired by patients and care providers, based on their needs, limitations and motivations. The recommendations mostly focus on practical issues such as personalized structure, flexibility in the number of patient entries and interoperability with other systems, as well as possible future expansions of the system, such as creating push notifications (in the form of e-mails and other tools), and syncing with the patients' electronic medical records. The proposed design features can be used as a starting point to develop PHR design guidelines produced from patient and caregiver perspectives.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

We examined a particular Web-based PHR system for critical factors concerning perceived usefulness and usability from both the patients' and providers' perspectives in a case study. User perceptions regarding the usefulness of this PHR system were high, with users showing interest in keeping their health records online and using them to get educated on health care issues. Patients reported that they were more aware of the relevant preventive health screening tests and procedures after using the MySafe-T.net. They found the tailored recommendations for preventive screening and lifestyle changes helpful. Furthermore, both patients and care providers generally found MySafe-T.net a good reminder of health issues and a relevant information resource. Patients valued the information that motivates them to get screenings and tests on time, as well as having their health information recorded electronically and be easily accessible. Patients also pointed out simplicity as a positive design factor. Furthermore, some patients indicated that the PHR system contributed to improved communication with their health care providers, allowing them to have more effective conversations and ask targeted questions. In addition, participating patients and care providers also expressed a relatively high level of trust in the system with keeping their private information secure and confidential. Although patients found the system useful and usable, they also stated that they would feel uncomfortable relying solely on the system's recommendations regarding their preventive health care. Patients' unwillingness to make important health care decisions based on the information they gathered from the site can be seen as one of the strengths of the system, as the aim of MySafe-T.net is not to replace but complement primary care visits. Patients should consult their physicians before making critical decisions related to their health care. Additionally, radical health behavior change is hard to achieve and in general requires multi-level interventions on multiple behaviors (Ory et al., 2002). The system is perceived as an informational tool rather than a tool offering guidelines on health behaviors and lifestyle choices. This view can guide researchers in developing better ways to present health information.

In general, care providers found the system promising for improving preventive care. They indicated that having it as a patient's (incomplete) medical information resource is useful, and the system provided some information they otherwise did not know about the patients. They saw the “letter for the care provider” as a “time saver.” While patient Internet portals are relatively common (Weingart et al., 2006), the unique characteristics of this system included providing more tailored, evidence-based content and a higher level of interactivity. Overall, patients and care providers showed substantial interest in adopting MySafe-T.net on a permanent basis.

The study also revealed several areas that can be focused on to improve the usability and usefulness of such a system. While patients valued the information obtained from the system, they reported that the system would be more valuable with even more tailored information. Furthermore, several patients found some of the terminology confusing and unfamiliar, and did not like the system's high reliance on one's memory. These problems are difficult to overcome. One potential solution is to integrate the system with the patients' medical records, which is known to be challenging from financial, legal and technological perspectives (Angst and Agarwal, 2009; Bourgeois et al., 2008; Baird et al., 2011).

Although care providers found the “letter for the care provider” helpful, some of them also indicated that this feature may be not suitable for every patient. Furthermore, care providers indicated that some pieces of important information was lacking in the system such as the information on generic medications. An ideal system would therefore need a more comprehensive database of medications, illnesses, health statuses and other information types.

Overall, using a multi-method approach and evaluating MySafe-T.net from both the direct and indirect users' perspectives provided valuable and in-depth information regarding the positive and negative design characteristics of such a system. A PHR system can be useful for both patients and care providers and used by patients on a regular basis as a reliable information resource and health education tool. This finding is parallel to the findings by Denton (2001) and Pratt et al. (2006) who indicated that a well-presented electronic environment can increase PHR use and motivate patients to manage their health information. The findings support and build upon the health care literature by determining the role PHR can play in making patients more active participants in managing their own health. A usable and reliable Web-based system that presents relevant content on maintaining a healthy lifestyle, improving communication with caregivers, and emphasis on preventive health screening can be adopted by patients. The key for high adoption is to design a user-friendly and relevant system that can provide tailored and comprehensive, yet easy to understand recommendations to patients based on scientific evidence. We focused on preventive care due to the literature indicating that employing PHR may improve patient awareness of preventive care guidelines and compliance rates with the recommended preventive screening tests and other related measures. Human factors research shows that for a technology to positively affect compliance and performance, one of the first requirements is for the technology to be accepted as useful and usable (Karsh et al., 2006; Krist and Woolf, 2011). A PHR that is perceived as useful and usable, in turn, may result in improved health outcomes (Kahn et al., 2009). In this study, however, we did not evaluate the impact of a PHR on patients' long-term behavior change (e.g., increased compliance with recommended diets, increased medication adherence) and outcome measures on improvements in preventive care (e.g., reduced morbidities). Future research should evaluate such impact.

The methodological contribution of our study mainly lies in the multi-method approach and the patient-centric design of the experiment. The quantitative methodologies allowed us to determine patients' views of a PHR system with a focus on preventive screening with regards to well-known constructs that affect technology acceptance (for example, Denton, 2001), while the qualitative methodologies allowed us to determine patients' and caregivers' attitudes on the usefulness of a PHR system focused on improving preventive care and suggestions on how such systems can be improved both content- and usability-wise in future designs. Additionally, there are a limited number of studies in the literature that evaluated patient-centric HIT so far using a human factors engineering approach. Our study was aimed at understanding the perceptions of usability and usefulness of PHR systems based on a specific system from both the patients' and caregivers' perspectives. Findings from this case study can help researchers in operationalizing usefulness and usability in future PHR design and evaluation studies. Human factors research needs to take multiple users for the same technology/interface into consideration in many health care settings (Carayon et al., 2010), and qualitative (Gurses et al., 2009; Karsh et al., 2006) and quantitative (Miller et al., 2006) methodologies may need to be used together for investigating different user groups' perspectives on such systems.

Experiences with many of the technologies introduced into health care, especially information technologies, have been mediocre at best (Karsh et al., 2010). Most of the health information technologies have been developed under the assumption of a linear and predictable nature of work in health care (Gurses et al., 2011). However, health care is, by its nature, team-based, non-linear, event-driven, complex, and full of deviations. Given the complex and safety-critical nature of health care, more systematic and science-based approaches (Leveson, 2001) that build upon strong partnerships among product developers, human factors and usability engineers, clinicians, patients, and regulators are needed. With the move from paper to electronic record environments, this type of partnership is a must, not an option to improve quality and safety of health care.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

This study had several limitations. First, we used a particular PHR as a case study, and our findings may not be generalizable to other PHR systems. A wide variety of Web-based PHR systems are currently available that may vary in the features they offer. Our study focused on the usability and usefulness issues involving a specific PHR. Due to the fragmented nature of currently available PHR designs, we did not fully assess how similar MySafe-T.net's features are to those currently available in other PHR systems. Our study also did not evaluate in-situ or long-term PHR usability or perceptions of usefulness. For assessing more general perceptions of health consumers regarding PHR systems, different methods (e.g., a large-scale survey of health care consumers who have used PHRs) will need to be used with a larger sample size. Second, due to the exploratory nature of our study, we did not evaluate the PHR system after it has been used on a long-term basis by patients and care providers. Rather, participants indicated their opinions concerning the system after a structured examination of it (with a follow-up interview). It is possible that participants may have additional and/or different opinions after using the system on a long-term basis.

Third, our sample size may be viewed as relatively small for collecting data via a questionnaire. However, we considered a sample size of 22 as adequate due to the exploratory nature of the study that focused on determining current general trends and attitudes toward a PHR system aimed at improving preventive care. Additionally, we contacted thirty-six consecutive patients who called the clinic for an annual physical exam appointment, resulting in a fairly high response rate of 61%. The survey helped determine the potential usefulness and usability issues concerning the system, and complemented the data obtained through qualitative methods. It should be noted, however, that a higher number of participants that have a broader spectrum including different ailment severities and types, as well as different age and education levels, could have helped in identifying new design characteristics or refining the existing ones for the Web-based PHR systems to make them appealing to a broader population. With this sample size, participant diversity may not have been adequately captured to further generalize our findings. Also, there is a body of work focusing on PHR adoption differences due to culture (Hartley, 2004; Fuji et al., 2008; Urowitz et al., 2008; Kahn et al., 2009). Our study did not consider the role of culture in PHR adoption. Additionally, while our case study was based on a PHR system focused on preventive health, we did not measure the impact of PHR on health outcomes. Finally, 16 out of the 22 patients invited participated in the follow-up interviews, and it is possible that those who did not participate in the follow-up may have different views about the system.

@&#FUTURE WORK@&#

While the PHR system was found useful, patients indicated they prefer an even more tailored system. The recommendations and resources are useful, but sometimes rely on external links. An agent-based approach, where intelligent programs would do searches for relevant information in similar patterns to humans (Luck and D'Inverno, 2001), may increase the accuracy of the recommendations and resources, and the information the site provides can be enhanced with more comprehensive databases that can be integrated into the system. Moreover, a future system can interface with the provider-based electronic health records of the patients and combine the two information sources. PHR systems may also expand to mobile environments, and the concept of technology acceptance may go through some changes while being adapted to health care environments (Holden and Karsh, 2010).

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was funded by the Medical Industry Leadership Institute of the University of Minnesota. Dr. Ayse P. Gurses was supported in part by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality K01 grant #HS018762. We would like to thank Dr. David Moen and the participating primary care clinic care providers for their support of the study. Supported by Dept. of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration, Health Services Research and Development Service (CDA 11-201/CDP 12-255). The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of the Department of Veterans Affairs or the United States government.


                     
                        
                           A1
                           
                              The past medical history screen.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           A2
                           
                              The cholesterol data entry screen.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           A3
                           
                              The family history screen.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           A4
                           
                              Updated screening recommendations based on risk factors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           A5
                           
                              Link to the relevant web site is provided.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           A6
                           
                              Lifestyle recommendations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

(Usability questions are marked with [1] and usefulness questions are marked with [2].)
                        
                           1
                           Do you find the system easy to use? Why or why not? [1]

Would you use this system to learn more about and get recommendations on preventive health screening? [2]

If you had control over the design of a perfect computer tool to help you with your health care management, specifically related to preventive health screening and lifestyle choices, what would it be like? What would be on it and why? What issues are important to you that you would like the developers of these tools to consider? [1, 2]

You seemed to like ... [noted during session]... what did you like about it? [1,2]

What were the major positive aspects of the system? [1,2]

What were the major difficulties you had with this system? [1,2]

In your opinion, how can this system be improved? [1,2]

If this system were available to you at home, would you use it on a regular basis? Why or why not? [1,2]

Do you plan on asking your physician any questions based on what you have learned for this web site? Yes No If yes what are you planning to ask? [2]

What other suggestions do you have to improve this system? [1,2]

(Usability questions are marked with [1] and usefulness questions are marked with [2].)
                        
                           -
                           What are your thoughts about this Web site? Would you recommend it to your patients? To your colleagues? Why or why not? [2]

Do you have any concerns about this Web site? If so, what? [1,2]

How do you think this Web site can affect (1) patient activation (2) patient-physician communication, (3) shared decision-making, (4) compliance with preventive screening, (5) changes in lifestyle choices (e.g., regular exercise, healthy diet, smoking cessation)? [2]

If you had control over the design of a perfect information tool for preventive health screening, what would it be like? What would be on it and why? What issues are important to you that you would like the developer to consider? [1,2]

What are your thoughts about the “letter to the doctor” functionality of the system? How do you think this letter can help you? How would you like to modify it? [2]

What is the process for informing patients about preventive health screening? [2]

What do you do to improve the lifestyle choices of the patients? Do you think this Web site can help you? How? [2]

If you had all the resources you needed, how would you improve your current methods to discuss preventive screening? [2]

What would be most helpful for you at your practice to improve your ability to introduce and discuss preventive health screening with patients? [1,2]

What would be most helpful for you at your practice to improve your ability to introduce and discuss lifestyle choices with your patients? [1,2]

Do you feel it is feasible for your patients to use this Web site? [1,2]

@&#REFERENCES@&#

