@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Developing a comprehensive approach to risk management of musculoskeletal disorders in non-nursing health care sector employees

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           High prevalence of discomfort levels are evident in the health care sector.


                        
                        
                           
                           WMSD risk in the health care is predicted by physical and psychosocial hazards.


                        
                        
                           
                           Risk management of WMSDs must address physical and psychosocial hazards.


                        
                        
                           
                           A toolkit approach is proposed to improve risk management of WMSDs in health care.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Work-related musculoskeletal disorders

Risk management

Psychosocial hazards

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study of selected jobs in the health care sector explored a range of physical and psychosocial factors to identify those that most strongly predicted work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSD) risk. A self-report survey was used to collect data on physical and psychosocial risk factors from employees in three health care organisations in Victoria, Australia. Multivariate analyses demonstrated the importance of both psychosocial and physical hazards in predicting WMSD risk and provides evidence for risk management of WMSDs to incorporate a more comprehensive and integrated approach. Use of a risk management toolkit is recommended to address WMSD risk in the workplace.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The aetiology of work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) is now known to be very complex, with risk influenced by varying combinations of a diverse range of psychosocial hazards in addition to the more widely recognized hazards associated with physically demanding work (Côté et al., 2009; Eatough et al., 2012; Marras et al., 2009; National Research Council, 2001). Despite extensive evidence of the importance of psychosocial hazards, workplace interventions intended to reduce WMSD risk continue to focus primarily on controlling physical hazards arising from the performance of particular manual handling tasks. In fact, research evaluating various WMSD risk management interventions shows that the most effective interventions are those that take a multidisciplinary approach and address “organisational”, “technical” and “personal/individual” issues (European Agency for Safety & Health at Work, 2008; Fray and Hignett, 2013; Hignett, 2003).

Health care work has been identified as high risk for developing WMSDs (Tuller et al., 2010). Australian data on work-related injuries (which include WMSDs) show that the health and community services sector has one of the highest claims rates (Safe Work Australia, 2013). Most attention has been directed towards nursing— as the largest occupational group in the health care sector— in terms of mitigation of risks associated with WMSDs. However, the health care sector employs a large range of occupations, including paramedics, care assistants, theatre support staff, maintenance, food services, and cleaning staff (Hignett, Fray, et al., 2007) all of which require further attention to reduce risks associated with WMSDs. These occupational groups—clinical and non-clinical—play a key role in the delivery of high quality health care and a systematic approach to reducing WMSD risk should be seen as integral in attempts towards improved patient care. As such, the focus of the current study is directed towards non-nursing occupational groups. More specifically the current study aims to identify key predictors of WMSD risk in these occupational groups, and these findings will support the development of a risk management toolkit.

People employed in the healthcare sector occupy a wide range of jobs, including both clinical and non-clinical roles, and undertake a range of physically demanding tasks that have been linked to the development of WMSDs (Aasa et al., 2005; Fray and Hignett, 2013; Long et al., 2012). These employees also work in complex and demanding environments and are faced with a range of non-physical hazards or psychosocial factors that are typically less well identified and managed than physical hazards (NIOSH, 2009; Schoenfisch and Lipscomb, 2009). A systematic approach to addressing issues in the health care sector is needed given the complexity of system (Carayon, 2012; Hignett et al., 2013). Whilst new roles emerge for ergonomics and human factors practitioners, further work is required to improve management of existing issues such as WMSDs, particularly in the occupational groups who have not been extensively explored.

Traditionally, WMSD risk management in health care has focussed on reducing exposure of nurses to physical hazards involving handling of patients, through programs such as “No Lift” (Engkvist, 2006). Significant reductions in WMSD claims have been reported in some instances following the introduction of No Lift (Department of Human Services, 2002). Holterman et al. (2013) reported on links between physical hazards and subsequent low back pain in health care workers employed in the aged care sector. However, much less focus has been given to non-clinical areas such as food services, patient transfer, and cleaning, which also expose staff to range of hazardous activities and associated risks (Simon et al., 2008). Restructuring and budget cuts in the health sector mean that fewer staff are available to complete necessary work (Westgaard and Winkel, 2011).

Paramedics have been participants in some studies (Aasa et al., 2005; Hignett, Griffiths, et al., 2007; Studneck and Mac Crawford, 2007) and were included in the study reported here. Focus on musculoskeletal disorders has generally centered on physical aspects of the role, such as patient lifting and moving equipment and patients. However, Aasa et al. (2005) examined the role of physical and psychosocial factors in paramedics and found links between level of psychological demands and neck-shoulder complaints. Hignett et al. (2007a,b) also analysed management of musculoskeletal disorders in two ambulance services, but this study was focused on post-injury management rather than prevention strategies, which were the focus of the current study.

A small number of studies targeting employees in non-clinical areas have reported psychosocial hazards as an important factor in the development of WMSDs (Unge et al., 2007; Waters et al., 2006). Michie et al. (2004) undertook an intervention aimed at improving the autonomy and the level of support provided to hospital cleaning staff in order to reduce absenteeism, and reported a small short-term reduction in sickness absence. Carrivick et al. (2005) used a participative approach to reduce risk and severity of injuries from manual handling activities in hospital cleaners. Whilst they found a significant reduction in injuries, their focus was principally on reduction of risks associated with physical not psychosocial factors.

Jobs within the health care sector vary widely and are likely to demonstrate different hazard profiles in relation to WMSDs. Thus, it is important to understand what each job entails and address the hazards relevant to that job to maximise effectiveness of risk reduction strategies. Development of a risk management tool that can be used by a range of occupational groups is the basis for the current study. The survey tool that forms the basis for the toolkit is described and implemented in the health care sector.


                        Fig. 1
                         depicts the conceptual framework of the current study. It was developed from an extensive literature review (Macdonald and Evans, 2006), builds on previous models (e.g. Carayon et al., 1999; Kuorinka and Forcier, 1995; National Research Council, 2001) and has been used to design and validate the survey employed in the present study (Macdonald, Evans and Armstrong, 2007).

The physical demands of task performance are usually the most obvious work-related cause of MSDs. Hazards of this type are task-specific, stemming from the postures adopted (static and dynamic) and forces exerted during task performance, which in turn are influenced by the design of workstations and tools, characteristics of objects handled, such as their weight, size and shape, and more general characteristics of the task itself.

WMSD risk is influenced by how work is organised and how tasks are combined to create whole jobs. Work organisational hazards may include high workload, high work rates, inadequate personal control or autonomy, role conflicts, lack of variety, social isolation, inadequate rest breaks, excessively long working hours, night shifts, and so on. Many of these factors can increase exposures to external loads and related physical hazards as well as increasing the likelihood of workers experiencing chronic fatigue and/or prolonged stress. Occupational groups such as paramedics have extended working hours and night work and so are highly exposed to this groups of hazards (Aasa et al., 2005).

The term ‘psychosocial hazard’ is often used to include the organizational factors described above, particularly in relation to risk of psychological injuries and mental health problems. However, for WMSD risk management it is useful to distinguish effects of work organization and job design from effects of work's social context, including the attitudes and behaviours of managers, supervisors and co-workers. Psychosocial hazards have been categorized in a variety of ways based on different theoretical frameworks (Leka et al., 2011). According to the European Framework for Psychosocial Risk Management (European Agency for Safety & Health at Work, 2008), psychosocial hazards include factors related to: job content, workload and workplace, work schedule, control, organisational culture and function, interpersonal relationships at work, role in the organisation, career development, and home–work interface.

The importance of psychological stress and its physiological and behavioural correlates in WMSD aetiology is now widely acknowledged. The individual's ‘stress response’ is multidimensional, including a complex physiological dimension along with behavioural, cognitive and affective dimensions (Cox, 1978). Consistent with this finding, a 1995 model of work-related determinants of WMSD risk included a ‘patho-physiology’ component which included “distress with hormonal, endocrine and immune system response” (Kuorinka and Forcier, 1995), and more recent research has confirmed the critical impact of stress in WMSD aetiology (Marras, 2008).

Stress is sometimes presented as a psychosocial hazard affecting the risk of various occupational health problems including MSDs. However, at the workplace level where a key goal is to identify and control risk from work-related hazards, it is arguably more useful to view stress as a product of such hazards, which, in combination with individual factors, partially mediates the effects of workplace hazards on WMSD risk (Eatough et al., 2012), as indicated by a dotted line in Fig. 1. Job satisfaction, which has been shown to mitigate WMSD risk (Schoenfisch and Lipscomb, 2009) may play a similar mediating role.

The model includes individual factors, which evidence suggests are significantly related to WMSD risk (Widanarko et al., 2011). Widanarko et al. studied the prevalence of WMSDs in a New Zealand sample by age, gender, body region and occupational group; they reported that prevalence of MSDs was related to occupational group and men working in health and community sectors reported more symptoms than women. Organisations cannot normally select employees on the basis of their age or gender, but they can ensure that work required of people in a particular job is matched to their capacities and skill levels, thus reducing WMSD risk.

WMSDs include many different clinical diagnoses, but the reliability of such diagnoses is poor. In a workplace context the specific diagnosis of a WMSD has few if any practical implications for preventative risk management (Wells, 2009). A recent consensus statement by the International Commission on Occupational Health Scientific Committee on Musculoskeletal Disorders concluded that the goal of workplace risk management should simply be to prevent or reduce musculoskeletal discomfort that is at risk of worsening with work activities, and affects work ability or quality of life (Hagberg et al., 2012). That is, regardless of clinical diagnosis, the focus of workplace WMSD risk management should be on reducing levels of musculoskeletal discomfort and pain.

The conventional approach to OHS risk management has been to focus on hazard management – identifying hazards, assessing risk from each identified hazard, and taking any necessary steps to control risk from each hazard separately (Macdonald, 2012b). In addition, focus has primarily been on the reduction of physical hazards rather than on addressing psychosocial hazards. The current study seeks to identify key physical and psychosocial hazards in relation to WMSD risk in the health care sector. These results will then be used to provide support for the development of a more comprehensive approach to risk management of WMSDs.

@&#METHODS@&#

Two large hospital networks (Organisations 1 and 2) and one ambulance service (Organisation 3) in Melbourne, Australia participated in this study. The occupational groups involved in the study were selected in consultation with senior Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) personnel in each organisation, based on their relatively high levels of WMSDs relative to other groups. Occupational groups included in the study were Patient services assistants (PSA), Food services (FS), allied health (AH), Sterile processing service (SPS), Environmental services (ES) and Paramedics; participant demographics are shown in Table 1
                        . Surveys were completed by 1348 employees across the three organisations; response rates and participant demographics for occupational groups within each organisation are shown in Table 1. The average response rate across all groups was 37%.

Ethics approvals were obtained through La Trobe University (FHECC11/54) and the healthcare organisations involved.

Based on a review of research evidence identifying the main causes of WMSDs, a survey tool was developed that addresses risk from both psychosocial and manual handling hazards (Macdonald and Evans, 2006) and is based on the conceptual framework presented in Fig. 1. The tool has been trialled previously in two high-risk Australian industry sectors (manufacturing and storage) (Macdonald, Evans and Armstrong, 2007). Results of the trial confirmed the importance of quantifying workplace psychosocial hazards, since these were found to predict strongly both discomfort/pain levels (a proxy for WMSD risk) and self-reports of taking time off work due to such pain.

In the current study, discomfort/pain rating (both frequency and severity) was recorded separately for five body regions (see Fig. 2
                        ). Frequency was recorded on a scale of 0–4 (never to almost always) and severity from 1to 3 (mild, moderate or severe). Scores were calculated for each body region by multiplying frequency and severity. These scores were summed to form an overall score out of a possible 60. This score is used as a proxy for WMSD risk, and has been validated in a previous project (Macdonald, Evans and Armstrong, 2007). Other studies have supported the relationship between discomfort and future pain development (Hamberg-van Reenen et al., 2008).

Participant demographics for the three organisations are shown in Table 1.

Psychosocial hazards were assessed using a slightly modified version of the Work Organisation Assessment Questionnaire (WOAQ) (Griffiths et al., 2006); the modification entailed removal of two items on work-life balance, which pilot testing had shown were difficult to understand, these were replaced with a single item included. Cronbach's alpha for the resulting 26-item scale was .94.

Participants' exposure to physical hazards was measured using a validated 12-item scale (Macdonald, Evans and Armstrong, 2007). The 5-point response options ranged from never, or hardly ever to almost all of the time. Cronbach's alpha for the scale was .84.

Single-item measures of job satisfaction and work-life balance were also included. The 5-point response options ranged from very dissatisfied to highly satisfied.

Analysis was conducted using SPSS (IBM, Version 20). Initially, variables were examined for accuracy of data entry, missing values, and distributions and to identify that the basic assumptions of multivariate analysis were met (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2005).

In Organisations 1 and 2, data were collected via a paper-based survey. Eight cases were removed in Organisation 1 due to missing demographic and job status data. In Organisation 2, 9 cases were removed due to missing data. In Organisation 3, data were collected via an online version of the survey and submission was possible only after all questions were answered, so there were no missing values. For items with missing values on less than 5% of cases, the missing value was replaced with sample mean scores (by organisation) (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2005), regressions were tested with and without missing values prior to final analysis. In all regressions, identification of outliers was undertaken and models were retested with outliers removed prior to finalising the models presented here.

Bivariate relationships between the discomfort score and all other variables were examined and following exploratory analysis the following variables were selected for the final analysis: age, gender, physical work, WOAQ, job satisfaction and work-life balance. Variables were selected based on the conceptual framework (Fig. 1) and also taking into account practical considerations; a key aim of the study was to develop a short useful survey tool for use in organisations.

Variables were entered in a five stage hierarchical regression as indicated in Table 2
                        . Dummy variables were used for job categories (i.e., AH [allied health] and PSA [personal carers]) and for organisations.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A hierarchical 5 step multiple regression was performed with discomfort score as the dependent variable. Organisation and job categories were entered as dummy variables, with age, gender, physical work, WOAQ, job satisfaction and work-life balance as independent variables. Table 2, which includes standardized regression coefficients, (?), R, R
                     2,, Adj R
                     2, Δ R
                     
                        2
                     , and F score, shows the results of this analysis.

Age and gender were entered in the first step, followed by dummy variables for the organisations and six job categories (Models 2 and 3). As Organisation 3 only contained one job category, it was included with jobs rather than with organisations. In step 4, WOAQ and Physical demands were added and in the final step job satisfaction and work-life balance were added. In addition, a backwards deletion regression was undertaken. The most parsimonious model was selected and is presented here.

Age, gender, WOAQ, physical demands, job satisfaction and work-life balance all significantly and independently contributed to the final model, and explained approximately one quarter of the variance in discomfort score. The size and direction of the results suggest that increasing age, being a woman, low WOAQ score, high physical demands, low job satisfaction and low levels of work-life balance were significantly associated with increased levels of discomfort. R for the final model of the regression was significantly different from zero, F(2, 1090) = 23.79, p < 0.001.

Although Organisation 1 contributed significantly to the model, the later addition of jobs and other independent variables accounted for the variance initially associated with it, and it was not significant in the final model. In terms of jobs, only paramedics were significantly different from the other occupations in the final model. Although the dummy variable indicating allied health was initially significant, once workplace factors were accounted for, it did not contribute significantly to the final model.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

A central aim of this study was to examine key predictors of WMSD risk in health care sector employees. Employees who were older, women, and experienced high levels of physical and psychosocial hazards reported higher levels of discomfort than their counterparts. In addition, those with low levels of job satisfaction and poor work life balance were more likely to report relatively high levels of discomfort. The relationship between high discomfort and both low job satisfaction and poor work-life balance is an important finding and provides support for the direction and structure of future risk management of WMSDs. The dummy variables for organisation were not included the final model and only one of the job categories (paramedics) remained, but this result requires further exploration.

A secondary aim of this study was to determine key measures of WMSDs risk that could form part of a future hazard surveillance survey for WMSDs, forming part of a risk management toolkit. For this to be practicable, the survey tool needs to be short but provide enough data for organisations to be able to develop effective risk management strategies based on the results, and to this end, the measures analysed and described in this paper achieve this goal. The inclusion of WOAQ (Griffiths et al., 2006) which has been used elsewhere was an important part of the survey tool development process.

The job category of paramedics was retained in the final model and their discomfort scores were low in comparison to those of other occupational groups; this was a surprising result given the high physical loads to which they are exposed (Aasa et al., 2005). Of note is that paramedics also reported the highest percentages of people taking time off due to their discomfort levels, suggesting that when they have musculoskeletal problems they are unable to work. Taking time off may be the only resort available to paramedics because of the type of work they undertake, which often involves moving patients and equipment and extended shift lengths. Hence, a “healthy worker” effect may have operated, such that respondents to the survey were those least affected by WSMDs (Pearce, 2007).

Belonging to the allied health occupational group was close to statistical significance in the final model (p = 0.7) and with a larger sample size may have been retained. This group reported the lowest discomfort score of all the groups in the study and there are several possible explanations for this. The allied health group were a heterogeneous mix made up of social workers, occupational therapists, physiotherapists and podiatrists; these groups have very different roles, both from each other and from the other groups in the study, and are exposed to different hazards in terms of WMSD risk. This group also had a younger mean age than other groups.

The results of the study support the conclusion that different job categories require separate consideration in relation to workplace management, indicating that there are differences between jobs in WMSD risk have been documented previously (Oakman and Chan, 2013). This study provides evidence that addressing both types of hazards should be incorporated into new strategies for risk management health-care sector employees.

For health and safety outcomes arising primarily from just one type of hazard, risk can be estimated in terms of both the severity of the hazard and the extent of exposures to it. For multi-hazard conditions such as WMSDs, risk depends on the particular combination of hazards present. It has been shown that these hazards can be additive or interact to affect WMSD risk substantially (Ahlgren et al., 2012; Bernard, 1997; Marras, 2008; National Research Council, 2001). This means that the extent of a particular hazard exposure, if considered independently of other hazard exposures, is not necessarily a good indicator of WMSD risk. Consequently, WMSD risk cannot be adequately assessed by evaluating each potential hazard separately, which is the approach adopted in hazard-focused risk assessment, and commonly undertaken by many organisations. The current study examined the contribution of a range of hazards and found that physical and psychosocial hazards both contribute to WMSD risk levels.

The results from this study provide further evidence to support a more comprehensive approach to management of WMSDs than is generally the case, and clearly demonstrate that focusing only on physical hazards or only on psychosocial hazards will not fully address WMSD risk. In order to manage multiple hazards such as those relating to WMSDs, risk management requires a holistic, multidimensional approach, founded on evidence-based models of causation and taking account of the particular combination of hazards present in a given situation (Macdonald, 2012b). One such approach involves the use of a risk management toolkit for WMSDs (Macdonald and Oakman, 2013).

The World Health Organisation (WHO) concept of a toolkit states that it should be practicable and provide user-friendly advice for non-experts to apply in ordinary workplaces, without expert assistance; any necessary training or guidance materials should be included within the toolkit. It should explain basic WMSD risk management requirements and the general processes to be followed, based on a specified conceptual model grounded in current research evidence (Macdonald, 2012a).

A toolkit for WMSD risk management should assist such users to work through the full risk management cycle within their own workplace, as shown in Fig. 3
                        , which posits worker involvement as central to the risk management process – consistent with a ‘participative ergonomics’ approach (Cole et al., 2005; Haines et al., 2002). Several reviews of participatory interventions have found them to be successful in reducing negative health outcomes (Cole et al., 2005; Rivilis et al., 2008).

Furthermore, other research on links between workplace interventions and health outcomes has found that health can be improved through improving social and organisational support at work and increasing employees' control and autonomy (Bambra et al., 2007; Westgaard and Winkel, 2011). This evidence provides further support for a participative approach to the use of a risk management toolkit.

A key part of the toolkit approach would involve regular hazard surveillance of employees to identify key hazards in relation to WMSD risk. Results from these surveys would be used to identify the most important and relevant hazards to employees in their respective occupational groups and form the basis for development of risk controls. The survey tool outlined in this study is intended for use in this manner.

However, a critical next stage is that interventions developed in this manner are evaluated, so that informed decisions making can be used to inform policy and procedures relating to the risk management of WMSDs. There is a dearth of evaluation research of this type (Tuller et al., 2010). Fray and Hignett (2013) provide an example of a tool for measurement of patient interventions that may have be adapted for use outside of clinical areas. However, the intent of the current study is to focus on those occupations that may not be directly involved in patient handling.

The cross sectional nature of the study is a limitation and as such causal inferences cannot be made. This sample is collected from hospital sector employees potentially limiting the generalisability of the results. However, the organisations in the study comprise two large public hospitals and a large ambulance network and so results are highly likely to be relevant and applicable to other public hospital and paramedic services. Further work will examine these results in comparison to occupational groups in other sectors to ascertain the similarities and differences in predictors of WMSDs in different sectors. Future studies should preferably incorporate a longitudinal approach is suggested in particular to examine interventions addressing all relevant hazards and their effectiveness in reducing WMSD risk.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study found that both physical and psychosocial hazards contribute independently to WMSD risk levels. Therefore, effective risk management of WMSDs must incorporate both types of hazards if it is to successfully reduce overall prevalence of this type of disorder. To achieve this aim a new approach to risk management is proposed – a toolkit that assist organisation to identify and address the most relevant WMSD risks.

In addition, the degree to which WMSD risk management needs to be customised and at what level this needs to take place either at organisation, sector or job level requires further investigation. This is an important next step so that organisations can more accurately target resources at reduction of risks associated with WSMD.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research is supported in part by funding of a Development Grant from WorkSafe Victoria and the Transport Accident Commission (TAC), through the Institute for Safety, Compensation and Recovery Research (ISCRR).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

