@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effect of firefighters' personal protective equipment on gait

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Wearing firefighting boots is a major contributor to firefighters' gait change.


                        
                        
                           
                           An increase in flexing resistance of the boots restricts normal foot motions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Increased flexing resistance of the boots elevates gait instability.


                        
                        
                           
                           Increased gait instability in stiff boots can increase traumatic injury risk.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Firefighters

Foot

Gait

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The biomechanical experiment with eight male and four female firefighters demonstrates that the effect of adding essential equipment: turnout ensemble, self-contained breathing apparatus, and boots (leather and rubber boots), significantly restricts foot pronation. This finding is supported by a decrease in anterior-posterior and medial-lateral excursion of center of plantar pressure (COP) trajectory during walking. The accumulation of this equipment decreases COP velocity and increases foot-ground contact time and stride time, indicating increased gait instability. An increase in the flexing resistance of the boots is the major contributor to restricted foot pronation and gait instability as evidenced by the greater decrease in excursion of COP in leather boots (greater flexing resistance) than in rubber boots (lower resistance). The leather boots also shows the greatest increase in foot contact time and stride time. These negative impacts can increase musculoskeletal injuries in unfavorable fire ground environments.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Firefighting is one of many physically demanding occupations, where daily tasks often occur in dangerous environments (Coca et al., 2010). Wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) is the only, irreplaceable protection for firefighters who are exposed to multiple hazards. Firefighters' PPE includes turnout coat, pants, boots, hood, gloves, self-contained breathing apparatus and helmet, which are governed by NFPA (National Fire Protection Association) 1971 and 1981 standards. These items of PPE are designed and certified by following NFPA's rigorous requirements and testing methods to protect firefighters from not only flame and high heat, but also from exposure to hazardous liquid, physical, and electrical hazards. Boorady et al. (2013) reported that the enhanced protection of PPE has greatly reduced burn injuries.

However, recent literature (Chiou et al., 2012; Punakallio, 2005; Sobeih et al., 2006) reported that wearing PPE poses additional adverse effects, such as restricting movement and impeding firefighter job performance. Smith (2008) found that added weight and bulkiness of PPE for enhanced protection led to increased mobility restriction and physical strains. Park et al. (2010) reported that impaired body balance and mobility restriction are the most significant contributors to musculoskeletal injuries such as slips, trips and falls. These injuries accounted for 27.6 percent of firefighters' on-duty injuries in 2003 (Sobeih et al., 2006). NFPA (2014) also reported that the number of US firefighters' fireground injuries in 2012 from sprain and strain (55%) is greater than burn injuries (7%), thermal stress (6%), and toxic gas inhalation (4%). Such fireground injuries account for 25% of the total injury-related time lost for firefighters (Cloutier and Champoux, 2000). Physically demanding environments in conjunction with cumbersome PPE further increase challenges placed on personal balance control systems while working on unfavorable fireground with typically low visibility in damaged building structure (Punakallio, 2005; Sobeih et al., 2006). Hence, firefighters' locomotion and body balance are critical to safety and job performance.

A review of the literature identified the negative effect of PPE on firefighters' locomotion and work efficiency. Physiological studies show that heavy and bulky PPE is a dominant factor contributing to fatigue with increased energy expenditure, causing more injuries (Chiou et al., 2012). Punakallio (2005) and Park et al. (2010) concluded that the self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) was the single-most influential piece of firefighting gear effecting balance. Park et al. (2010) further demonstrated that the weight of SCBA is closely related to the risk of slipping trauma. Taylor et al. (2011) found that footwear had a greater impact on firefighter exertion than other equipment, such as SCBA and turnout ensembles.

Studies that specifically investigated the impact of firefighters' boots on physiological stress and job performance found the weight of firefighter boots to significantly increase physiological stress. Neeves et al. (1989) reported that wearing heavier rubber boots resulted in greater negative impact on firefighters' performance as compared to lighter weight leather boots, because of the greater fatigue associated with energy expenditure while wearing rubber boots. However, the recent study by Huang et al. (2009) found conflicting results. Their study showed that, when wearing rubber boots, firefighters were more effective in resisting fatigue and had increased force production than when wearing leather boots. The study did not find evidence of greater fatigue in rubber boots than in leather boots, although the rubber boots (2.93 ± 0.24 kg) weighed more than leather boots (2.44 ± 0.21 kg). Although the impact of the turnout ensemble, SCBA, and boots on firefighters' performance has been studied, the available data is insufficient to draw a consensus on the level of negative impact of those factors. The current body of literature has not investigated the incremental impact of wearing each item (turnout ensemble, SCBA, and boots) on body balance and gait pattern.

Considering the importance of firefighters' locomotion and dynamic body balance on unfavorable fireground, this study aimed to 1) investigate impacts of wearing each item (turnout ensemble, SCBA, and boots) on gait by using plantar pressure sensor technology, and 2) identify contributing factors that affect gait, which may serve as practical implications to improving design of PPE for enhanced gait performance and improved body balance.

Human gait is achieved through a biphasic forward movement of the center of gravity of the human body, in which stance phase and swing phase movements alternate. Stance phase refers to the time period when the foot is in contact with the ground for foot pronation (heel strike–mid stance–toe off), bearing the body weight and maintaining body balance. Swing phase indicates the time period when the foot is not in contact with the ground (Gage, 2004). Normal gait consists of approximately 60% stance phase and 40% swing phase with about 20% of the time spent in the double support phase, where the two feet are in contact with the ground at the same time (Perry, 1992).

Literature indicates additional weight and footwear characteristics as external factors affecting body balance and gait pattern. Additional weight on the body amplifies dynamic instability, pulling the new center of mass (body mass + added weight) away from the original point, located inside the pelvis, without load carriage (Gronqvist et al., 1989; You et al., 2001; Regia-Corte and Wagman, 2008; Park et al., 2013). Therefore, the center of gravity of the total system, which is a vertical projection of the center of mass of the system on the ground, moves away from the base of support (Gronqvist et al., 1989; You et al., 2001). This has been found to increase dynamic instability, causing greater risk of traumatic injuries such as falling and slipping (You et al., 2001). Therefore, the human body automatically alters the gait pattern in order to maintain balance by increasing the stance phase and double support time (Birrell and Haslam, 2010; Kinoshita, 1985; Park et al., 2013).

The characteristics of footwear such as fit, footwear morphology, and flexing resistance constitute another external factor. For example, looseness of the footwear makes the foot slide forward and causes the foot to be squeezed in the toe area, which lead to joint and tissue deformation. This results in impaired foot function and altered gait (Goonetilleke, 2012). In addition, wearing footwear with a high outsole (e.g. high-heeled shoes) changes range of motion of the foot by limiting foot abduction, eversion and medial rotation (Goonetilleke, 2012). An increase in heel height also induces excessive weight bearing on the forefoot. These two factors resulting from the height of the outsole leads to a significant change in gait pattern and also leads to disturbed body balance, and increased risk of ankle sprain and rapid fatigue (Goonetilleke, 2012). Similarly, wearing footwear with high flex resistance due to stiff materials or poor construction can cause mechanical binding and poor interaction between foot, footwear, and the ground that can impair foot function and alter gait (Cikajlo and Matjačić, 2007).

Gait analysis has been done in several ways using biomechanical measurement technologies such as three-dimensional motion analysis systems and force plates. In addition, analysis of the dynamic change in plantar pressure distribution is widely used to diagnose gait changes and balance control problems (Abdul Razak et al., 2012). By calculating the timing and duration of the plantar pressure detected on a specific part of the foot, current technology is capable of assessing changes in stance phase, swing phase, double support, stride time, walking velocity and other spatiotemporal parameters of gait. Specifically, the center of plantar pressure (COP) has been used as an indicator of changes in gait and body balance related to fall injury risks in biomechanics (Maki et al., 1994; Stel et al., 2003).

COP is the point where all ground reaction forces, acting on the foot when it is in contact with the ground, are balanced (Harris and Smith, 2007). COP is considered to be concentrated and representative of the total force by the foot required to move the body forward while maintaining balance during walking. It is a calculated value based on the amplitude of plantar pressure and the location of the individual pressures under the plantar foot (Harris and Smith, 2007). In normal walking, COP travels from the middle of the heel, passing through the midpoint towards the big toe, creating a bow shaped trajectory as shown in Fig. 1
                         (Harris and Smith, 2007). Restricted foot movement resulting from external stimuli such as poorly designed footwear, decreases the anterior-posterior (AP) and the medial-lateral (ML) excursion of COP trajectory (Fig. 1).

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

To identify changes in gait in different PPE configurations, a series of human performance tests were conducted. With institutional review board approval, eight male firefighters (age: 28.6 ± 8.3, height: 183.5 ± 3.8 cm, weight: 85.5 ± 15.7 kg) and four female firefighters (age: 31.5 ± 13.5, height: 170.8 ± 7.6 cm, weight: 68.3 ± 14.3 kg) were recruited from the North Eastern region of the U.S. All participants were structural firefighters with an average of 6.58 years of experience and had no history of any orthopedic or muscular disorders or surgery or deformities. Only right-handed volunteers were recruited to control for possible influence of dominance on movement patterns. Three of the participants were career firefighters, while the remaining nine participants were volunteer firefighters.

Five different garment conditions were tested (Fig. 2
                        ).

Garment condition G1 includes each participant's own short sleeve T-shirt with shorts, running socks and previously broken-in running shoes that they have worn in order to allow for the participants' natural body movements. Garment condition G2 includes wearing the participant's own turnout coat and pants, on top of G1, without gloves and tools. Garment condition G3 includes additionally wearing SCBA, without gas in the air bottle and face mask. Garment conditions G1 through G3 were designed to identify the incremental impact of wearing turnout gear (G2) and SCBA (G3) while wearing the running shoes. Conditions G3 through G5 were designed to identify the impact of footwear design while wearing turnout gear and SCBA. Garment conditions G4 and G5 included the same garment configuration as G3, but also firefighting rubber boots (G4) or leather boots (G5) instead of the running shoes. All participants wore the same styles of rubber and leather boots, which were certified to the 2007 edition of NFPA 1971, Standard on Protective Ensembles for Structural Fire Fighting and Proximity Fire Fighting.

To ensure the proper boot size, multiple sizes of new rubber and leather boots were offered to each participant 1–2 weeks before the experiment. In the standardized fitting process, participants were asked to don their entire PPE including the SCBA and helmet with the prospective boots. While wearing the socks normally worn with the PPE ensemble, they walked for 3 min to determine adequate comfort and fit. The process was repeated if necessary with different sizes of boots until the proper size was identified. The method was repeated for both the rubber and leather styles. This process was performed to control for possible impact of poor footwear size on foot movement and gait pattern. Each participant was instructed to wear both new pairs of rubber and leather boots for a minimum of 3 h before the experiment in order to familiarize participants with the given boots. This process was done to minimize the possible impact of wearing new footwear on gait pattern in the experiment. The researchers recorded the characteristics of each PPE item used in G1through G5 as summarized in Table 1
                        .

Considering the research purpose of identifying changes in gait pattern, the researchers measured the longitudinal flex resistance of the footwear based on ISO 17707, Footwear–Test methods for outsoles–Flex resistance, as shown in Fig. 3
                        . The footwear (running shoes, rubber boots, and leather boots) was placed on top of two folding plates with the creasing point of the footwear located at the hinge (folding point) of the two plates. The forefoot section of the footwear was firmly fixed and weight was added until the rear section of the footwear flexed to 30° from the base (Fig. 3). The applied weight for the 30° longitudinal flex was then converted to a force unit.

The running shoes had the least resistance, the rubber boots had the next highest level of resistance, and the leather boots showed the highest resistance as shown in Table 1.

In each garment condition, an in-shoe plantar pressure sensor (F-scan Inc., Boston, MA) was placed on the insole of both the left and right test shoes to measure plantar pressure distribution for the calculation of the center of plantar pressure (COP) trajectory and measurement of gait pattern. After donning PPE items and test shoes, the participant was instructed to walk, starting with their left foot, 10 m in a straight line on a level wooden floor at a self-preferred speed. The task was repeated three times for each of the five garment conditions. The four sequential steps from the third to the sixth step (2 steps of the right foot and 2 of the left foot) were included in the analysis to capture normal walking pattern. This process excluded the initial and terminal steps as they do not represent normal walking patterns. AP excursion of COP (cm), ML excursion of COP (cm), and COP velocity (cm/sec.) in each step during the walking trials were measured at 30 Hz to assess changes in foot function. In order to identify changes in AP/ML excursion of COP in different PPE configurations without the undesirable confounding influence of individual foot size, the two variables were normalized, thus expressed as a percentage of each participant's foot length, instead of actual length. Stride time (sec.), stance phase (%) and double support (%) were analyzed to assess changes in gait pattern. To control for the possible effect of garment order on foot function and gait pattern, each participant was randomly assigned to a balanced-block design of garment conditions.

A mixed models analysis was performed using SPSS (version 20). The experimental design was repeated measures because each firefighter was measured repeatedly with five different garment configurations for three walking trials for two steps on each side (left and right side). Responses of the mixed model are normalized anterior-posterior excursion of COP, normalized medial-lateral excursion of COP, COP velocity, stride time (sec.), stance phase (%) and double support (%). Fixed independent variables of interest are gender, garment and their interaction. The models also control for side, step order and order of garment configurations as fixed effect. Participants, garment configurations nested in participants, and walking trial nested within garments and participants, are random effects in the model. Post-hoc pairwise comparisons using Bonferroni correction were conducted when the garment effect or its interaction with gender was significant. All statistical tests were done at the 0.05 level of significance.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results of the statistical analysis are summarized in Table 2
                     .

No significant effect of the order of garment testing conditions was found on any dependent variables.

A significant garment effect was found (p < 0.001) as shown in Table 2. Estimated means of normalized AP excursion in Table 2 shows that normalized AP excursion decreased as the weight of garment increases from G1 through G3 while wearing the same running shoes. Comparing the normalized AP excursion in G3, G4 and G5 conditions, normalized AP excursion further decreased in G4 and G5 (Table 2). Note that in conditions of G3, G4, and G5, subjects wore the same garment and SCBA, but different footwear: running shoes in G3, rubber boots (with low stiffness and high collar) in G4, and leather boots (with high stiffness and low collar) in G5. In those three conditions (G3 through G5), wearing boots resulted in decreased AP excursion, G5 having the lowest value. There was no significant difference in normalized AP excursion between male and female firefighters as shown in Table 2.

A significant garment effect was found (p = 0.001) as shown in Table 2. The data trend showed the same decrease in excursion of COP trajectory in medial-lateral direction as found in normalized AP excursion, with increase in garment weight (G1 ∼ G3) and with wearing boots (G4 and G5). Comparing the footwear conditions in the same garment configuration in G3 through G5, wearing boots with greater stiffness appeared to decrease ML excursion.

A significant garment effect was found (p < 0.001). Wearing boots in G4 and G5 significantly decreased COP velocity. The Bonferroni pair-wise comparison post-hoc test indicated that wearing the rubber boots (G4) and the leather boots (G5) significantly decreased COP velocity compared to wearing running shoes in G1 through G3. Furthermore, leather boots (G5) produced the lowest COP velocity.

A significant garment effect was found for stride time (p < 0.001). Wearing boots (G4 & G5) significantly increased stride time as supported by significant mean differences found by the Bonferroni post-hoc comparisons (Table 2). Wearing the leather boots (G5) showed the greatest stride time, indicating the slowest motion of walking. However, wearing turnout gear (G2) and SCBA (G3) did not influence stride time.

A significant garment effect was also found for stance phase (p < 0.001). Table 2 shows that as firefighters wore turnout ensemble (G2) and SCBA (G3), stance phase increased. Bonferroni post hoc test shows that stance phase in the leather boots (G5) with the greatest flex resistance was significantly greater than the stance phase in the rubber boots (G4). The greatest stance phase found in the leather boots (G5) implies the greatest increase in foot-ground contact time and the greatest decrease swing time off the ground. A significant gender effect was observed in stance phase (Table 2); Female firefighters have relatively lower stance phase, in all conditions.

A significant garment effect was also found in double support phase (p < 0.001). The estimated means in Table 2 show an increase in double support from G1 through G3, as the weight of garment increases by adding turnout ensemble (G2) and SCBA (G3). In particular, post-hoc test shows that double support while wearing SCBA (G3) is significantly greater than while wearing base garment (G1) (Table 2). Comparing double support in different footwear conditions in G3 through G5, wearing the leather boots (G5) showed the greatest double support (Table 2).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study demonstrated that the incremental impact of wearing firefighting turnout gear, SCBA, and boots significantly changes the gait pattern. Conditions G1 through G3 were designed to identify the incremental impact of wearing turnout gear and SCBA with running shoes. Conditions G3 through G5 were designed to identify the impact of footwear design on foot function and gait patterns, worn with turnout gear and SCBA. Compared to the base garment in G1, wearing turnout gear (G2) and adding SCBA (G3) slightly increased foot restriction. This was evidenced by decreased normalized AP/ML excursion and COP velocity. Wearing turnout gear (G2) and carrying SCBA (G3) increased stance phase, which indicates the feet increased the contact time on the ground for stable walking in weight bearing conditions in G2 (7.13 ± 1.06 kg) and G3 (15.23 ± 1.06 kg). Kinoshita (1985) confirmed that an increase in weight on the body increases the feet's contact time on the ground to maintain body balance and stability in walking, which is the human body's natural protective reaction to the weight bearing conditions. Park et al. (2010) demonstrated an increase in the weight of SCBA is positively associated with the risk of slipping injuries. SCBA is the heaviest item (8.1 kg in this study) placed on the back, while turnout gear weighs about 5.75 kg covers the body in a relatively uniform manner. Considering the heaviness of SCBA placed on the back, SCBA contributes to change in firefighters' center of gravity, which results in disturbance of body balance during walking while wearing bulky and heavy turnout gear which significantly limits the firefighters' range of motion (Coca et al., 2010; Park et al., 2010; Punakallio et al., 2003). Therefore, reducing the weight of SCBA is expected to decrease change in normal gait and help maintain stable walking.

We found greater differences in gait pattern among conditions G3, G4, and G5 while wearing different footwear with the same turnout apparel and SCBA, than while wearing G1, G2 and G3. This indicates that the impact of footwear on gait appears to be greater than the impact of turnout ensemble and SCBA. The findings of this study indicate that wearing firefighter boots (G4 and G5) significantly changes the gait pattern when compared to running shoes. Comparing design features between rubber (G4) and leather (G5) boots, the leather boots are lighter and they have a shorter collar. Note that sole heights were almost identical in the two boots and all participant firefighters ensured the proper size before the testing. Leather boots (G5) featuring the greatest flex resistance, induced the greatest resistance to natural foot pronation as evidenced by the lowest normalized AP/ML excursion of COP, and COP velocity in all five conditions.

Similarly, footwear with greater flexing resistance increased the foot contact time on the ground as supported by a significant increase in stance phase, double support and stride time in G4 and G5. These results imply that the greater flex resistance and its resultant limited foot pronation lead to greater instability and slower motion while walking. To account for this, the human body increases the foot contact time on the floor as a protective adaptation in an attempt to maintain dynamic stability. Previous studies (Birrell and Haslam, 2010; Kinoshita, 1985; Park et al., 2013) demonstrated that increased foot contact time through increased stance phase and double support is a natural human body's reaction to avoid injuries due to increased instability while walking. In this study, as a result of the restricted foot pronation, the leather boots (G5) produced the longest contact time of the foot on the ground and stride time. The findings of this study indicate that the flexing resistance of the footwear may be a dominant factor in foot function and gait, considering that the leather boots (G5), featuring the highest flexing resistance, showed the greatest impediment to foot function and gait despite their lighter weight and shorter collar than the rubber boots (G4). Hence, our findings suggest improving flexibility of the footwear as a possible design solution for enhanced foot function and efficient gait. This approach requires not only the use of flexible materials, but also considerations of construction for the boots to flex along with the foot, without much strain due to mechanical binding or resistance. Firefighter needs in footwear necessitate finished products to be constructed with ridged outsoles, metal toe caps, and metal shanks, so the finished boots have different levels of flex resistance. These components, which dictate the flexibility of the boot, contribute to increased puncture/collision protection for the wearer, but the findings of this study clearly show that higher flexing resistance contributes to decreased stability by inhibiting normal foot movement. Replacing metal toe caps and metal shanks with composite materials could be a solution, which may provide the same level of protection and greater flexibility, reducing physical strain and mechanical resistance.

There was no significant interaction between gender and garment for any of the dependent variables, which indicates that the impact of firefighters' PPE on male and female firefighters' gait pattern across five garment conditions are not significantly different in normal walking for short period of time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study identified design features impeding firefighters' locomotion and explored a biomechanical method to evaluate the impact of PPE. As compared to the turnout gear and SCBA, the findings demonstrated that wearing boots with high flex resistance (the selected leather boots in this study) lead to greater negative impacts on gait. Boots with high flex resistance increase walking instability. Improving boot design for less restrictive foot movement and gait, while maintaining the same level of protection, should be emphasized as a top priority of PPE designs.

This study has a few limitations. The small sample size (n = 12) requires caution to generalizing the findings to larger populations. Although the boots were standardized, the turnout gear was not and this may be viewed as limitation of this study. We designed the experiment so that each firefighter could wear their own turnout jacket and pants in an effort to limit a garment effect of wearing new and unbroken in gear. Visual documentation noted only minor variations of fabric type, design detailing, and construction between the firefighter's entire turnout ensembles. We also measured the weight of each firefigher's turnout ensemble to ensure differences of turnout gear were minimal. We found the weight of each turnout gear to be very similar (as shown in Table 1).

We investigated changes in gait with two common boot styles available in the market, for normal walking in lab conditions. It is likely that different construction practices use by footwear manufacturers may distinguish other differences in flexing resistance between footwear material types (rubber and leather). In addition, accounting for different firefighter postures and locomotion, such as crawling, “duck walking”, or dragging a charged hose line on the fire ground could reveal additional findings related to footwear function not examined in this research. Future studies should explore additional design features affecting firefighters' performance in more active tasks and for a longer duration, which may provide more practical implications. Measurement of flex resistance was taken for boots and running shoes. In particular, each participant wore the given boots for a relatively short period of time before the experiment. Longer use of boots may lower flex resistance in rubber and leather boots, which suggests the need for investigating change in flex resistance over time and its impact on firefighters' performance for future research. Investigating the impact of boot fit on gait performance and comfort perception may also provide additional meaningful information. This study measured only a few kinetic variables of gait and foot function. Further investigation of kinematic variables will provide additional meaningful information.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This research was supported in part by the Cornell University Agricultural Experiment Station federal formula funds, Project No. NYC-329832 received from the National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) United States Department of Agriculture (NYC-329832). Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in the publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) or the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

