@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The influence of body mass on foot dimensions during pregnancy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study used a time-series approach to measure women’s feet during pregnancy.


                        
                        
                           
                           After 20 weeks of pregnancy, occurrence of pregnant women’s foot discomfort generally increased.


                        
                        
                           
                           During pregnancy, women’s foot size increased, whereas the height of arch decreased.


                        
                        
                           
                           Body mass accounted for more than 90% of the variation (R
                              2) in foot dimensions during pregnancy.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Pregnancy

Foot dimensions

3-D scanner

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In this study, a time-series approach was used to measure women's feet to accurately analyze changes in foot size and body mass during pregnancy. One-hundred women who were pregnant for the first time were asked to respond to questions on subjective complaints of foot discomfort listed in a questionnaire. Among these 100 women, a sample of 30 was obtained and used to measure the women's feet from the twentieth week of the gestation period until labor. The data (from 5 of the 30 women) were used to establish a prediction model for the influence of body mass on changes in foot size during pregnancy. The results indicate that the women subjectively complained that their shoes were too tight, resulting in foot discomfort. From the twentieth to the thirty-eighth week of pregnancy, the average increase in foot length, width, and back foot surface was 0.86 cm (3.6%), 0.25 cm (2.6%), and 18.36 cm2 (11.9%), respectively. The height of the arch decreased by an average of 0.52 cm (−24.2%). Body mass accounted for more than 90% of the variation (R
                     2) in foot dimensions during pregnancy and, thus indicated satisfactory predictive ability. The prediction model developed in this study can serve as a reference for clinical applications and shoe design to prevent women from experiencing extreme discomfort in their feet during pregnancy.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

During pregnancy, because of the normal accumulation of fluid and fat, a woman's body mass increases by an average of 10–16 kg (Alvarez et al., 1988; Hytten and Chamberlain, 1991; Wetz et al., 2006; Ochsenbein-Kplble et al., 2007; Gaymer et al., 2009). Increased body mass enlarges the contact area between the arches of the feet and the ground (Fabris et al., 2006). This enlargement consequently increases plantar pressure (Hills et al., 2001; Drerup et al., 2003; Fabris et al., 2006; Karadag-Saygi et al., 2010) and results in foot discomfort and other foot symptoms (Robinson et al., 2010). From a physiological perspective, increased body mass during pregnancy may cause an increase in foot volume, which is closely related to foot length, foot width, and height of the arch (Nyska et al., 1997; Bird et al., 1999; Foti et al., 2000; Wetz et al., 2006; Gaymer et al., 2009). The enlarged contact area between arches and the ground may also change the foot structure and decrease the arch height (Nyska et al., 1997). From the perspective of foot orthopedics, an accumulation of soft tissues is responsible for the increased foot swelling and foot volume that occurs during pregnancy (Alvarez et al., 1988). The negative effect of ill-fitting shoes on muscles and bones was reported to overburden the toes, forefeet, arches, and ankles, and can lead to foot conditions and foot pain (Xiong et al., 2009).

Although previous research has suggested that pregnancy changes foot dimensions, accurate measurements of these dimensions are lacking. In general, the dimensions and shape of pregnant women's feet exhibit swelling that becomes evident after 13–35 weeks of pregnancy (Alvarez et al., 1988; Gabriel et al., 2013). In a previous study, the feet of pregnant women were measured once every 3 months and a significant increase in foot length, width, and volume was observed. However, long intervals between measurements render the accurate assessment of changes problematic (Wetz et al., 2006).

Foot swelling, particularly at the later stages of pregnancy, causes a poor fit between a pregnant woman's feet and her shoes, and results in foot discomfort. Furthermore, pregnant women are susceptible to foot diseases (Gilbert, 2002) and may experience it difficulty in choosing suitable shoes, which may hinder their ability to walk and conduct daily activities (Fabris et al., 2006; Ribeiro et al., 2011). Because foot comfort depends on the fit between a person's feet and shoes, several researchers have attempted to design shoes that reduce the burden and impact on feet to enhance foot comfort (Light et al., 1980; Chen et al., 1994; Hodge et al., 1999).

The impact of shoes on the feet of pregnant women is a factor that may be easily overlooked (Cernekova and Hlavacek, 2005). Shoes are not currently designed to prevent or reduce foot discomfort experienced by pregnant women; in other words, most pregnant women wear shoes that do not fit properly, resulting in foot discomfort (Bamigboye and Hofmeyr, 2006). Therefore, foot pain may be correlated with shoe design (Broch et al., 2004). As previously mentioned, previous research has indicated that an increase in foot length, width, and volume occurs during pregnancy, and that the measurement of these changes is complicated by the lengthy interval between measurements. In the current study, a time-series approach was used to measure these changes, assess the relationship between foot shape and body mass during pregnancy accurately, and explore how changes in foot dimensions lead to foot discomfort.

@&#METHODS@&#

The condition of women's feet during pregnancy was investigated using a subjective self-report questionnaire and objective foot dimension measurement. Gestational age was divided into Gestation period I (GI, weeks 12–19), Gestation period II (GII, weeks 20–28), and Gestation period III (GIII, weeks 29–38). The defined gestation stages were also adopted by Hirst et al. (2012). Generally, pregnant women do not notice changes in their feet until GII, and foot discomfort becomes most evident during GIII (Kline and Stein, 1984). Therefore, we surveyed women's subjective symptoms and measured their feet once every 2 weeks during GII and GIII.

We used a 2-stage design for sample identification (Fig. 1). At Stage 1, 100 women who were pregnant for the first time were asked to respond to questions on complaints of foot discomfort listed in a questionnaire. At Stage 2, the foot dimensions of 30 of these women were monitored from the twentieth week of the gestation period until labor. A 3-D foot scanner was used to measure the foot dimensions. Repeated measurements were highly difficult to obtain because the pregnant participants were not always available for every measurement; therefore, we collected complete data on the foot dimensions of 5 of the 30 pregnant women biweekly, from the twentieth to the thirty-eighth week of pregnancy.

The women recruited for this study were from the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital in Taoyuan, Taiwan. All the participants were Chinese residents of Taiwan. The selection criteria included being in GI, being 20–40 years of age, having no history of foot disease, being pregnant for the first time, and not being at a gestation stage where disease and addictive substances could easily cause problems (i.e., cigarette smoking, alcohol intake, and illicit or abused drugs). The mean and standard deviation (SD) for age, height, and body mass of the 30 participants at the start of the study were 28.9 (4.8) years, 159.4 (4.5) cm, and 50.4 (6.8) kg, respectively. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital in Taiwan (No: 97–2538B).

We used a 3-D scanner to capture images of the participants' feet, which were monitored until postpartum. Most of the participants did not receive foot scan at regular intervals (once every 2 weeks). The average rate of women who were measured during GII and GIII was 65.3%. Among the 30 participants, only 5 women received regular foot scan. The mean (SD) age, height, and body mass of the 5 participants at the start of the study were 28.5 (4.3) years, 159.2 (3.8) cm, and 50.3 (6.5) kg, respectively. The foot measurements of the participants were calculated using the root mean square error. The errors in foot length, foot width, and arch height for the two participant groups ranged from 0.018 cm to 0.082 cm (0.35%–0.82%), which were within ±1 mm, and complied with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 20685:2010 standards (ISO, 2010; i.e., the maximum error in foot dimensions was less than 2 mm). The error in back foot surface area measurements was 1.632 cm2 (1.08%).

The weeks in which we collected the questionnaires data for the 3 stages were week 16 (GI, weeks 12–19), week 25 (GII, weeks 20–28) and week 35 (GIII, weeks 29–38). We used a structured questionnaire to assess the fit between pregnant women's feet and their shoes. The questionnaire included 3 parts: (1) basic information: height, body mass, age, and gestational age; (2) foot disease history: foot discomfort, location of discomfort, and change in shoe size; foot measurements were divided into forefoot, midfoot, and rearfoot (Au and Goonetilleke, 2007); and (3) shifts in the location of discomfort during pregnancy. The questionnaire was developed by the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital in Taoyuan, Taiwan.

A Gemini 3-D foot scanner (Industrial Technology Research Institute of Taiwan) automatically scanned, analyzed, and calculated the foot dimensions. The entire image capture process took less than 1 s. The scanner recorded each participant's right foot dimensions using a 3-D camera with a spatial distribution of 1 mm. A typical sample of a foot scan in this study is shown in Fig. 2
                        . The accuracy of the foot measurements were all within 1%, which were assessed by Yu and Tu (2009). The 4 measurements were foot length, foot width, height of the arch, and back foot surface area (Fig. 3
                        ), which have been used in previous studies (Burnfield et al., 2004; Yu and Tu, 2009).

One hundred pregnant women participated in the questionnaire survey. The feet of thirty of these women were subsequently monitored for their dimensions from the twentieth week of pregnancy to just before labor. From these, complete data sets were obtained for 5 women from the twentieth to the thirty-eighth weeks of pregnancy. During each measurement, the right foot was measured twice. Prior to participating in the study, the participants were thoroughly informed of the research process and were required to sign a consent form.

For the measurements, each participant was instructed to pose in a manner that facilitated the collection of accurate measurements. As illustrated in Fig. 4
                        , the participants first stood to have the medial and lateral aspects of their right feet measured. While we measured the foot length, width, and height of the arch, the participant's right foot was bearing mass. The participant was then asked to sit, and her right foot was measured for the back foot surface area while the foot was not bearing any mass.

Feet dimensions may change throughout the course of a day (Alvarez et al., 1988). To control the swelling of the feet that might occur during the day, measurements were performed between 14:00 and 17:00 whenever possible.

The data obtained from questionnaires and scan measurements were statistically analyzed using SPSS 19.0 software at a significance level of 0.05. Paired t-tests were used to examine the differences in the changes in body mass and foot dimensions among 3 pregnancy stages (n = 5). We investigated the relations among body mass, foot dimensions, and the shifts in the location of foot discomfort experienced by the pregnant participants through discontinuous observation during the gestation period. The foot dimension data obtained from the 3-D scanner was then input into SPSS program to correlate the weeks of gestation with changes in foot dimensions. We also employed the stepwise regression method to establish a prediction model of the impact of body mass on foot dimensions (n = 5). By using the biweekly measurement data, differences and percentages of the changes that occurred during GII and GIII were evaluated.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Foot problems experienced by the participants throughout the GII (week 20–28) and GIII periods (week 29–38) included foot discomfort and changes in foot dimensions and shoe size. Table 1
                         shows that the regions of foot discomfort shifted during pregnancy. The participants who perceived a gradual reduction in discomfort in the forefoot region comprised 40.0% of the participants in GI (week 12–19) to 26.7% in GIII, whereas an opposite trend was observed in the midfoot and rearfoot regions. Midfoot (in GIII) and rearfoot discomfort (in GII) was reported by 63.3% and 56.7% of the participants, respectively. Thus, during GIII, nearly two thirds of the participants perceived midfoot discomfort. Table 1 also indicates changes in the women's shoe size. During GI, 30.0% of the pregnant group had a shoe size smaller than size 22.5, and only 10.0% of the women wore shoes larger than size 24.5. During late gestation, only 10.0% of the women retained their former shoe size less than 22.5, whereas the latter one dramatically increased to 43.3%.

The foot measurements for the initial 30 participants were observed to increase gradually from the beginning of the twentieth week until the thirty-eighth week as body mass increased (Table 2
                        ). During this period, however, complete data on the foot dimensions of 5 of the 30 pregnant women were collected. For the 5 participants (complete biweekly follow up) who were measured consistently between the twentieth and thirty-eighth week, foot length, foot width, back foot surface area, and body mass increased by an average of 0.86 cm (3.6%), 0.25 cm (2.6%), 18.36 cm2 (11.9%), and 9.05 kg (14.9%), respectively (Table 1). By contrast, the height of the foot arch decreased by an average of 0.52 cm (−24.2%) during this time. Figs. 5 and 6
                        
                         respectively show the biweekly changes in body mass and foot dimensions of the 5 pregnant women from the twentieth to the thirty-eighth week of pregnancy. During this period, the foot length, foot width, back foot surface area, and body mass all increased, whereas the height of the arch decreased.

Regarding changes in foot dimensions during GIII, foot length, foot width, and back foot surface area increased by an average of 0.57 cm, 0.17 cm, and 10.84 cm2, respectively (Table 1). However, the decrease in height of the arch averaged −0.39 cm, with a significant change in −19.3% among the participants (p < 0.05). During this period, the increase in body mass was an average of 6.11 kg. The results of the t-test for paired groups indicated that all foot dimensions changed significantly between GII and GIII (all p < 0.05).

We used the stepwise regression method to establish a prediction model for the impact of body mass on foot dimensions. The results revealed significant correlations among body mass, weeks of pregnancy, and foot dimensions (p < 0.05). The explanatory abilities of the variances of these models ranged from 91.5% for foot width prediction to 98.3% for back foot surface area prediction, as shown in Table 3
                        .


                        Table 4
                         shows the predictive error and linear regression equations for foot dimensions based on body mass and weeks. It ranges from 0.34% to 0.87% for GII, and from 0.46% to 0.98% for GIII. This indicates that the reliability of estimating foot dimensions by using body mass and weeks for GII and GIII was almost identical.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The patterns of self-reported foot discomfort among the pregnant participants indicated that during GII and GIII, the occurrence of foot discomfort in various regions of the pregnant women's feet generally increased, except in the forefoot. Foot pain has been associated with an increase in plantar pressure in pregnant women (Nyska et al., 1997; Morag and Cavanagh, 1999; Burnfield et al., 2004; Gaymer et al., 2009; Karadag-Saygi et al., 2010). The change in plantar pressure has been postulated to result from the pregnancy-related increase in body mass (Nyska et al., 1997; Gaymer et al., 2009). During this period, most of the participants reported that they changed to larger shoes to reduce discomfort in the forefoot and to prevent the foot from being squeezed by the shoes. Tight shoes press against pregnant women's feet, thereby increasing discomfort in the toes and increasing the possibility of foot joint pain (Godfrey, 1987).

During their pregnancy, the participants reporting midfoot discomfort increased from 46.7% to 63.3%. By contrast, the corresponding height of the arch decreased from −5.9% to −19.3%, and the greatest decrease was observed during GIII. In general, midfoot plantar pressure increased significantly during late gestation (Gaymer et al., 2009). One possible reason is that the decrease in arch height placed additional pressure on the back foot surface area (Gaymer et al., 2009), thus increasing the percentage of midfoot discomfort experienced by the women. The pressure was greater against the arch than that against other parts of foot and, thus, the discomfort in the arch was most noticeable when the pregnant women put on shoes (Lee and Han, 2005; Witana et al., 2009). The percentage of rearfoot discomfort during GIII was also high, indicating that wearing larger shoes did not reduce heel pain (Witana et al., 2009). When standing, the body mass of a pregnant woman is primarily concentrated on her heels (Cavanagh et al., 1987). As pregnant women gain more mass, their heels bear more pressure (Evrim et al., 2010). Rearfoot discomfort in the late GII period was more severe than that in GIII. This might be because the pregnant women exercised less and moved more slowly as the period of parturition drew nearer (Cernekova and Hlavacek, 2005; Witana et al., 2009).

The biweekly foot measurements of the 5 participants indicated that their foot dimensions increased gradually during pregnancy. Previous studies have reported an increase in foot dimensions during pregnancy (Alvarez et al., 1988; Wetz et al., 2006), and the results of the present study confirmed an increase in foot length and width. Previous studies have also reported a slight and subtle decrease in the height of the arch, suggesting that mechanical loading most likely accounts for these changes (Wetz et al., 2006). However, we determined that the decrease in arch height was substantial and pivotal. Pregnancy results in an increase in the plantar contact area (Gaymer et al., 2009). An increase in midfoot plantar pressure accompanied by an increase in plantar contact area has also been observed in obese individuals (Hills et al., 2001; Drerup et al., 2003; Birtane and Tuna, 2004; Fabris et al., 2006; Gaymer et al., 2009). The results of the present study indicated that the increased body mass of pregnant women substantially changed foot length, width, height of the arch, and the back foot surface area (p < 0.001), which is consistent with the results of previous studies (Alvarez et al., 1988; Bird et al., 1999; Foti et al., 2000; Hills et al., 2001; Drerup et al., 2003; Birtane and Tuna, 2004; Wetz et al., 2006; Fabris et al., 2006; Gaymer et al., 2009). However, the changes in height of arch differed from those observed in previous research (Gabriel et al., 2013). In this study, during foot dimension measurements, the participant was requested to sit, and her right foot was then measured for the back foot surface area while the foot was not bearing any mass (Fig. 4). This could have caused the difference in the height of arch measurements. Moreover, these changes were more substantial during GIII than in GII. Consequently, we concluded that an increase in body mass influences foot dimensions and the area of discomfort. Previous studies have demonstrated that increased body mass increases the contact area between the arches and the ground, thus causing a decrease in arch height and arch angle. As more mass is placed on the feet, changes in foot dimensions become more evident (Tsung et al., 2003).

One recent study adopted multiple regression analysis for tracking the changes in the foot dimensions of children of both genders, and demonstrated that relationships exist among gender, height, and body mass when predicting forefoot width and foot length (Stewart et al., 2007). To understand the changes in the foot dimensions of pregnant women, another study adopted the simple regression method for predicting foot dimension changes based on the number of weeks of pregnancy (Drey et al., 2005). Their regression model could precisely predict the changes in foot dimensions. In the present study, we used stepwise regression to establish the associations between foot dimensions, weeks of gestation, and body mass. The proposed model included more detailed measurements of changes in foot dimensions compared with those of previous studies. The results of the current study may serve as a reference for future verification, clinical applications, and the design of pregnant women's shoes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors thank the National Science Council of the Republic of China, Taiwan, for providing financial support for this research (Grant No. NSC-96-2213-E-182-001). The authors thank Judy Perry for her editorial assistance.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

