@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A methodology using in-chair movements as an objective measure of discomfort for the purpose of statistically distinguishing between similar seat surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           ICM can compare similar seats.


                        
                        
                           
                           Threshold selection and sitting duration is important.


                        
                        
                           
                           ICM and discomfort appear related.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Discomfort

Comfort

In-chair movement

Sitting

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study presents a method for objectively measuring in-chair movement (ICM) that shows correlation with subjective ratings of comfort and discomfort. Employing a cross-over controlled, single blind design, healthy young subjects (n = 21) sat for 18 min on each of the following surfaces: contoured foam, straight foam and wood. Force sensitive resistors attached to the sitting interface measured the relative movements of the subjects during sitting. The purpose of this study was to determine whether ICM could statistically distinguish between each seat material, including two with subtle design differences. In addition, this study investigated methodological considerations, in particular appropriate threshold selection and sitting duration, when analysing objective movement data. ICM appears to be able to statistically distinguish between similar foam surfaces, as long as appropriate ICM thresholds and sufficient sitting durations are present. A relationship between greater ICM and increased discomfort, and lesser ICM and increased comfort was also found.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Although measuring sitting comfort or discomfort using subjective measures appears to be an intuitive, practical and cost effective method, it does have its limitations. For example, it is difficult to reliably distinguish and rank well designed chairs with subtle design differences with purely subjective feedback. From a chair designer or user perspective, an objective method that could predict the level of discomfort after a period of prolonged sitting would allow for better informed decisions to be made about chair design features, that may in-turn impact on innovation and ultimately user health. In terms of possible objective measures that warranted further investigation, in-chair movement (ICM) appeared to show most potential due to its role within the current models of comfort and discomfort (Vink, 2012).

Comfort, as it is currently understood, is a subjective concept that appears to be difficult to measure (Zemp et al., 2015; Vink, 2012). Comfort has been defined as a pleasant state or relaxed feeling of a human being in reaction to its environment (Vink, 2012). Comfort appears to be most influenced by the presence of discomfort, with increased discomfort leading to no or reduced comfort being experienced (Helander and Zhang, 1997). However, a reduction of discomfort does not necessarily bring about feelings of comfort (Kolich, 2008; Vergara and Page, 2002; Helander and Zhang, 1997; Zhang et al., 1996). Softness and firmness may both positively influence comfort, with firmer chairs which incorporate high side supports generating a sporty feel while softer chairs are considered to be more luxurious (Kamp, 2012). Psychosocial factors (e.g. helpful flight attendant) appear to be important drivers of comfort while physical factors appear to drive discomfort, which in turn inhibit comfort (Vink, 2012). Since non-physical factors appear to be able to influence the perception of comfort, it appears that comfort and discomfort are processed via different neurological pathways (Vink, 2012).

Discomfort has been defined as a perceived unpleasant state of the human body in reaction to its physical environment (Vink, 2012; Helander and Zhang, 1997). Discomfort is understood to reflect an early noxious perception (perceived as pain) related to the biomechanical load applied to the musculoskeletal system (Madeleine et al., 1998), and be an expression of sensations such as tension, fatigue, soreness, pain and numbness (Søndergaard et al., 2010; de Looze et al., 2003). Discomfort also appears to be related with sitting postural changes, with a positive relationship between discomfort and the frequency of postural changes over time during computer work (Fenety and Walker, 2002; Vergara and Page, 2002; Liao and Drury, 2000). Cushion firmness, pressure distribution and user mobility may modify the perception of discomfort probably as a consequence of increasing tissue ischaemia (Corlett, 2006; Mehta and Tewari, 2000; Zhang et al., 1996; Ng et al., 1995; Gross et al., 1992; Viano and Andrzejak, 1992).


                        Fig. 1
                         outlines a model of comfort and discomfort proposed by Vink 2012 that has been strongly influenced by previous models of comfort and discomfort developed by previous workers in the field (Helander and Zhang, 1997; de Looze et al., 2003 and Moes, 2005). The model illustrates how the interaction between the user, seat, task and environment leads to the perception of sitting comfort and discomfort. This model indicates that, at least from a qualitative perspective, in chair movement may result from either inadequate comfort or excessive discomfort. Interaction (I) with the environment as a result of contact (including non-physical contact such as a visual stimuli) between the human, the product and its usage may result in internal human body effects (H) such as tactile sensations, body posture change and muscle activation. The perceived effects (P) are influenced by the human body effects, but also by expectations (E). These are interpreted as comfortable (C) or you feel nothing (N), or it can lead to feelings of discomfort (D). Discomfort in turn could result in musculoskeletal complaints (M). The circle around E-C suggests that expectations (E) may be linked to comfort (C). If discomfort is too high or the comfort not good enough, there is a feedback loop to the person who could do something like shifting in the seat, adapt the product or to change the task or usage (Vink, 2012).

Seat manufacturers appear to still rely strongly on subjective evaluations as the main indicator of seat comfort and discomfort: probably as a consequence of both the subjective and non-quantitative nature of comfort and discomfort and the absence of a proven objective method for their assessment (Kolich, 2008; Helander and Mukund, 1991). Previously assessed objective factors include anthropometry as well as the measurement of postural, biomechanical and physiological parameters. Peak pressure on the seat pan, pressure distribution on the backrest and the pressure pattern changes all appear to be reliable objective measures for quantifying comfort or discomfort, however their validity remains unknown (Zemp et al., 2015). Differences in seat material properties and geometry appear to strongly influence pressure distribution measurements, resulting in the need to re-calibrate pressure mats for each chair when comparing different types (Zemp et al., 2016) making this method commercially less-viable from the economic and sales staff perspective. Although many methods for subjectively assessing comfort and discomfort have been reported in the scientific literature, the use of numerical rating scale (NRS) was chosen primarily for its ease and scope of use, its repeatability, and its parity with the visual analogue scale (Johnson et al., 2010; Morris et al., 2007; Lundeberg et al., 2001).

Frequent ICMs appear to reduce the risk of developing discomfort and are considered to be an indicator of sitting discomfort (Hiemstra-van Mastrigt et al., 2015a, b; Søndergaard et al., 2010; Fenety and Walker, 2002; Vergara and Page, 2002; Aaras et al., 2000). Sitting in chairs with obvious design differences (e.g. wooden versus padded) appear to significantly affect ICM in most cases (Fenety et al., 2000; Mark et al., 1985) but not all (Jensen and Bendix, 1992). As chair users subconsciously change posture to minimize discomfort while sitting, discomfort does not seem to be obviously perceived unless the chair severely compromises (e.g. hard flat surface) basic design criteria (Helander and Zhang, 1997). In non-disabled persons, sitting posture appears to change approximately every 9 min in the sagittal plane and every 6 min in the frontal plane (Linder-Ganz et al., 2007) with subcutaneous tissue oxygenation increasing on average by 2.2% with each posture adjustment (Reenalda et al., 2009), highlighting the benefits of ICM on tissue health (Kim et al., 2012) and its potential relationship to neurological activity from receptors in the compromised tissue.

Recent literature has highlighted the importance of reducing the reliance on subjective evaluations with respect to vehicle seat design and determining an objective means of quantifying discomfort that is able to statistically distinguish between similar seat surfaces (Le et al., 2014). The purpose of this study was to determine if it were possible to statistically distinguish between different user–seat interfaces (with subtle differences in design and materials) using objectively derived ICM data. In addition, this study aimed to determine any methodological considerations, in particular appropriate threshold parameters and sitting duration selection, when analysing ICM data and how they may affect the outcomes.

@&#METHODS@&#

Twenty one volunteers were recruited using information sheets distributed to undergraduate students at the University of Glamorgan. Volunteers were given a verbal explanation of the research protocol and if still interested, were asked to sign consent forms. Ethical approval was gained from the School of Applied Sciences ethics committee at the University of Glamorgan. Subject selection was based on the volunteer being asymptomatic, healthy and between 18 and 40 years of age. Subjects were requested to and wore similar loose fitting clothing for all 3 sitting experiments.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The methodology used in this investigation was informed by previous related investigations by the authors (Cascioli et al., 2011a, 2011b; Liu et al., 2011). Employing a cross-over controlled, single blind design, each subject was allocated an order of seat material presentation based on a Latin square design (Williams, 1949), to reduce impact of potential order effects. Three wheelchairs (Invacare Ben 9+; supplied by Red Cross UK) were used at a time, with each chair being fitted with a different cushion. Each cushion was covered with the same material, preventing the subjects from seeing the seating material and thereby reducing their expectations in terms of seat comfort. There were advantages to using static wheelchairs as seats which included: a “modular” design where the seating surface could be easily exchanged without impacting on any other design variables of the seat, the presence of adjustable foot rests, which lent the ability to control for idiosyncratic variations in leg length differences. The foot-rest level was adapted to suit individual leg lengths with the same number of peg holes maintained for each subject in all 3 sitting experiments.

In order to manage the low risk that subjects could become self-conscious about their sitting movements and potentially affect the results, the volunteers were not informed about the details of the measurements being made. Confirmation that all subjects had been to the toilet and were able to remain seated for the full duration of the study without interruption was received. Volunteers were instructed to sit in their usual way and to quietly look out of a large one way window without interacting with each other. Due to the relatively short duration of the study, no remarkable behaviour was noted that may have biased the results.

At the beginning of the sitting experiment, a 20 min timer was started which triggered the sensors to begin capturing data. The subjects remained standing for a period of 1 min while the sensors captured readings without interaction and when this time had passed, they were asked to sit down for the remaining 19 min.

Subjects completed a comfort and discomfort rating questionnaire at the end of each sitting period. No additional verbal instructions were given to the volunteers on how to complete the questionnaire and no subject appeared to have difficulty with completing the questions. Arrangements were then made for the subject to return on another day at approximately the same time to undertake a further series of measurements using a different wheelchair cushion. This process was repeated until all subjects had sat on each of the three wheelchair cushion types. All data was captured within 8 days.

The wheelchairs were fitted with one of the following seat interfaces (approx. 430 × 484 × 77 mm): foam cushion (medium density contoured foam, Invacare, UK), foam cushion (medium density straight foam, Invacare, UK) and wooden surface, all fitted with identical black covers and placed on a thin wood board to provide support. Four 609.6 mm “Trimmable Strip” single zone force sensing resistor (FSR) (Interlink Electronics, CA, part number 408) sensors were cut to 300 mm with 150 mm of the sensor in contact with each quadrant, 120 mm from the front and 90 mm from the back, on each cushion surface (Fig. 2
                        ). To avoid any possibly inaccurate measurement caused by air gap between pressure sensors and foam cushion, sensors were fixed directly to the cushion surface using the self-attached adhesive. The sensors were connected to an ADC11/12 Data Acquisition System (Pico, UK) linked to a laptop via a USB cable. A graphic user interface was constructed using Lab Windows software (National Instruments, USA) incorporating a timer set to 20 min. Acquisition rate for the outputs from each sensor was set at a sampling frequency of 10 Hz. Data acquired from each of the four sensors were assigned to its own corresponding channel (column) in Microsoft Notepad.

The comfort and discomfort questionnaire was an evenly spaced, 11-point descriptor-anchored numerical rating scale (NRS; Hiemstra-van Mastrigt et al., 2015a, b; Groenesteijn et al., 2009; Kyung et al., 2008a, 2008b; Carcone and Keir, 2007; Vergara and Page, 2002; de Looze et al., 2003; Fenety and Walker, 2002) that was used to assess perceived Discomfort (0 = None; 10 = Worst Imaginable), Comfort (0 = Worst Imaginable; 10 = Best Imaginable) and Support (0 = Worst Imaginable; 10 = Best Imaginable). Regarding discomfort, a separate rating was required for each of the following regions: Head, Neck, Arms-Hands, Mid Back, Lower Back, Hip, Buttocks, Legs, and Overall Discomfort. The reason for separately rating comfort and discomfort is based on the current models of comfort and discomfort (Vink, 2012; Moes, 2005; de Looze et al., 2003; Helander and Zhang, 1997) which suggest that comfort and discomfort are distinct entities that should be measured independently.

Raw data (in mV) was sampled at 10 Hz and each channel was normalized based on the maximum value of each signal. As the absolute value was not important and it was easier to interpret signals with similar means; signals that were offset were scaled to have the same mean value of 0.5 mV.

In-chair movement (ICM) was defined the sum of all data points (4 channels) that were either above or below a pre-defined threshold value, starting from the time when the first channel (of 4) deviated from its horizontal pathway (Fig. 3
                        ; A and B) up to the 18 min (1080 s) mark. In order to reduce the risk of selecting an arbitrary threshold value that may not be appropriate for the outputs of this study, a range of thresholds were tested at 2% intervals as follows (Fig. 3; C): 6% (<0.47; >0.53); 8% (<0.46; >0.54); 10% (<0.45; >0.55); 12% (<0.44; >0.56); 14% (<0.43; >0.57); 16% (<0.42; >0.58); 18% (<0.41; >0.59); 20% (<0.40; >0.60).

ICM was calculated by counting the total number of data points, each representing 0.1 s, from all four channels containing a value above or below the defined threshold parameter. For example, at the 10% threshold, the total number of values greater than 0.55 or less than 0.45 was counted in all four channels over the duration of the experiment and represented as a percentage (Fig. 3).

A Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to determine normality of the ICM data and paired t-tests (2 tailed) were used for comparing the ICM between groups. Wilcoxon Signed Ranks testing was used to compare the subjective scores between the groups. Due to the comfort and discomfort data being ordinal in nature, a non-parametric analysis (Spearman's) was chosen to examine for any association between the subjective and objective data in this study (SPSS v17). An alpha level of <0.05 was considered as indicating significance and data is presented as means ± 1 standard deviation.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Twenty one volunteers (12 male, 9 female) with a mean age of 25 ± 5 years (Min: 21; Max: 40), height of 1.73 ± 0.10 m (Min: 1.54; Max: 1.91), body mass of 74 ± 15 kg (Min: 50; Max: 104), and body mass index (BMI) of 25 ± 4 kg m−2 (Min: 19; Max: 35) successfully completed the experiment. Upon initial review of the data, it was noted that most subjects did not make contact with the seat at exactly 60 s after being asked to be seated, and since the timer program stopped data capture after 20 min, the duration of sitting data was found to be slightly different between subjects. Further examination of the data determined that all subjects were in contact with the seat for at least 18 min. Therefore to ensure that data analysis was based on the same duration of sitting, the sitting data from each subject was only analysed for the 18 min immediately following contact with the seat.

A summary of the data described in this section (mean ± 1 standard deviation; ICM values for all three surfaces at each threshold) can be found in Fig. 4
                           . An increase in the threshold parameters resulted in a lower ICM value due to the inclusion of only those movements large enough to exceed the set threshold. At the 20% threshold only the largest of movements were able to exceed the threshold. Conversely, at the 6% threshold, a large amount of data was able to exceed this threshold, including many very small movements. ICM was on average highest in wood, followed by straight foam, followed by contoured foam. As the threshold increases, ICM data that exceeds this level decreases.

Significantly higher ICM (p < 0.01) was found at all thresholds between the wood and both foam surfaces. Significantly higher ICM (p < 0.05) was found when the straight foam was compared to the contoured foam surfaces at the 14%, 16%, 18% and 20% thresholds. No significant differences were found at the 6% and 8% thresholds, and a trend was found at the 10% and 12% thresholds (data presented in Table 1
                           ).

A comparison of ICM by individual subject on all seat surfaces at the 16% threshold may be found in Fig. 5
                           .

A summary of the mean values, including standard deviations (SD) for the group as a whole, of ICM for the wood, straight foam and contoured foam surfaces at various stages of sitting duration is shown in Fig. 6
                           . As can be seen in this chart, ICM appears to progressively decrease for the first 15 min of sitting, to be subsequently followed by an increase. On average, ICM was greatest when sitting on wood, followed by straight foam and contoured foam, respectively.

Significantly higher ICM (p < 0.05) was found when comparing the wood to both foam surfaces between 1 and 18 min of sitting. Significantly higher ICM (p < 0.05) was also found when comparing the straight foam to the contoured foam after 18 min of sitting. However, up to 17 min the difference between these foam surfaces for all sitting durations was not significant, showing at best a trend (p < 0.1) in that direction (data presented in Table 2
                           ).

A summary of the mean values (±1 SD) of the subjective parameters (NRS: 0–10) for subjects sitting on wood, straight foam and contoured foam can be found in Table 3
                        .

Significantly lower ratings for mid back (p = 0.011), low back (p = 0.026), buttock (p = 0.002), overall (p = 0.034) and average discomfort (p = 0.001) were found in subjects sitting on straight foam compared to wood. Significantly higher ratings of comfort (p < 0.001) and support (p < 0.001) were found in subjects sitting on straight foam compared to wood. Significantly lower ratings for neck (p = 0.026), mid back (p = 0.006), buttock (p < 0.001), overall (p = 0.003) and average (p = 0.007) discomfort were found in subjects sitting on contoured foam compared to wood. Significantly higher comfort (p < 0.002) and support (p < 0.002) ratings were found in subjects sitting on contoured foam compared to wood. Significantly higher (p = 0.026) leg discomfort was noted in subjects sitting on contoured foam compared to straight foam. See Table 4
                         for detailed information.

Significant correlations were found between the objective (ICM) and subjective (Neck, Buttock, Overall and Average discomfort; Comfort; Support) measures used in this study. Significant correlations were also found within the subjective measures of comfort and discomfort. Although significant, it is also important to note that the strength of these relationships is moderate (in the range of 0.4). Refer to Table 5
                         for detailed correlation results using ICM data calculated at the 16% threshold level.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Based on the results presented in Table 1, the selection of an appropriate threshold level for ICM appears to be an important factor for distinguishing between the similar foam surfaces. A possible reason for why the lower thresholds (6, 8, 10, and 12%) were unable to show significant differences may be due to excessive data (“noise”) that was included in the calculation that prevented the larger movements from being distinguishable. As the threshold increased (14%, 16%, 18%, 20%), it was statistically possible to distinguish between the similar foam surfaces, with the lowest p value (p = 0.03) found at the 16% threshold level. At these higher thresholds, much less data was being included in the calculation with only the largest of movements being able to exceed these threshold levels. In the case of the contoured foam, only 2.9% of the ICM data was exceeding the 20% threshold and in order to prevent the exclusion the little remaining ICM data, the threshold calculations were capped at this level. In comparison, 14.8% of the ICM data was exceeding the 20% threshold on the wooden surface and if this surface was not being compared to the contoured foam surface, it may have been possible to successfully push the threshold higher than 20%. Threshold values may also be dependent on other factors such as the sensors selected, their placement at the user–seat interface and the resolution of measurement of the sensors. Future investigations using different sensors and locations of measurement may need to consider other threshold values to resolve significant differences between similar seating surfaces.

In terms of how these results may be practically used towards the selection of an appropriate threshold in future studies that compare different seating surfaces, Table 1 and Fig. 4 were examined further to determine if any general methodological advice for future study could be suggested. Since threshold selection did not appear to be as important for the wooden surface comparisons (differences were noted at all thresholds tested), examination focused on data involving the foam surfaces. Resolution of any significant differences between these similar surfaces was generally found between 14 and 20% threshold values, leading us to concentrate on this data. An additional consideration was that the contoured foam surface yielded the lowest ICM percentages (i.e. 2.9% ICM at 20% threshold), which lead to the high risk of yielding no data from this surface if the threshold was increased too high. Therefore, when determining a proposed approach to threshold selection, examining the ICM values of the surface generating the lowest ICM values appeared appropriate. Therefore, the range of ICM thresholds that were significantly different for similar surfaces in this study occurred between 7.1 and 2.9% 'for the contoured foam surface, and based on this, the following approach is suggested:
                              
                                 •
                                 Consider the seating surfaces being compared and select a threshold that seems reasonable (e.g. 16%).

Examine the ICM results calculated at the above selected threshold level and pay particular attention to the surface yielding the lowest ICM percentage.

If the ICM value is higher than 7% or lower than 3%, increase or decrease the threshold until the lowest ICM value falls in the range of approximately 3–7%.

The apparently better correlation between ICM and discomfort compared to NRS subjective rating scales may be related to the derivation of ICM being largely from subconscious behaviour by the chair-user in order to prevent or minimise the development of discomfort (e.g. resulting from skin ischaemia) probably based on neurological feedback or reflex activity (Luttmann et al., 2010; Helander and Zhang, 1997). Therefore it seems possible that ICMs may occur before discomfort is consciously processed, perceived and rated by the chair-user (Luttmann et al., 2010; Helander and Zhang, 1997). With this in mind, it would seem reasonable to suggest that seats which result in lower durations of ICM may be ranked higher (in terms of being able to minimise discomfort at either the conscious or subconscious level) than the seats that result in higher durations of ICM. Based on load redistribution at the buttock seat interface, one would intuitively expect the wood surface to be the least comfortable, the straight foam somewhere in-between, and the contoured foam the most comfortable of these 3 options. As shown in the results, ICM followed this trend well with wood resulting in subjects moving outside the defined parameters the most (15–54%), followed by straight foam in-between (7–33%), and contoured foam by the least amount (3–29%). ICM therefore appears to be capable of ranking the seat surfaces in a logical order (best to worst: contoured foam, straight foam, wood) that is consistent with the results of a previous study using rigid and contoured seats (Beard and Griffin, 2013).

When examining individual results presented in Fig. 5, it was noted that ICM data for some subjects did not follow the same trend as others. Although no obvious reason seems apparent, a possible explanation is offered. For subjects 11 and 16, it seems that they did not respond any differently in terms of ICM regardless of what they sat on. This finding suggests that perhaps a minority of people are less sensitive to the chair interface (i.e. contour and firmness) and are able to sit for a short to moderate amount of time with few movements compared to other people even on obviously different user–seat interfaces. It is not known how a longer sitting time (e.g. up to 1–2 h) may have affected these particular subjects in terms of ICM. For subjects 2, 9, and 13, the foam surfaces appeared to result in greater amounts of ICM compared to the wooden surface. Similar to the discussion above, based on ICM, a different minority of users appear to prefer the firmer wooden surface – at least for the shorter period of sitting (less than 20 min). It is worth noting, however, that based on this data, if a seat surface does come out as overall the best performer, this does not mean that all subjects will have followed (or will follow) exactly the same trend of ICM. On average, with all subjects sitting on all chairs, the findings significantly favoured the contoured foam followed by the straight foam followed by the wood. Therefore, ICM may potentially be useful in the objective evaluation and ranking of different chairs.

When comparing the use of ICM as an objective measure of discomfort to other objective measures such as EMG or sitting pressure, the following strengths are suggested: ICM appears to be able to statistically distinguish between similar seating surfaces; ICM demonstrated moderate correlation strength to the subjective measures of discomfort; ICM data is relatively easy to capture, requires relatively short durations of sitting and does not require a subjective interpretation component to provide significant results; and ICM represents a dynamic measure over the whole period of sitting. Weaknesses of using ICM include the limitations described below and the consideration of preferable objective measure alternatives (e.g. pressure mapping or EMG) that may be dependent on the stage of chair design. For example, pressure mapping to develop a seating surface that optimally distributes pressure (e.g. testing material deformation properties and contours of the user–seat interface) may be a better tool during the early stages of the design process (Zemp et al., 2015).

Based on the results presented in Table 2, at least 18 min of sitting is required before ICM is able to statistically distinguish between the similar foam surfaces. A possible reason for this may be due to the higher thresholds required to resolve differences between the similar surfaces which in turn limits the ICM data to the larger values that occur relatively infrequently on the similar foam surfaces. When comparing the wood to both foam surfaces, sitting duration appeared to be much less important with ICM statistically distinguishing between these surfaces after 1 min. For any future studies involving ICM it seems important to consider types of surfaces being compared and to allow for at least 18 min of sitting duration, with longer sitting times recommended.

Most of the subjective variables were able to statistically resolve differences between the wood and foam surfaces, however when comparing the contoured and straight foam surfaces, only leg discomfort was found to be significantly different (Table 3). It is unclear why a difference was found between the foam surfaces (with the contoured being associated with greater discomfort) but not between the wood and foam surfaces for leg discomfort. Since the foot rests were set to the same height (peg hole) for each subject to ensure that this variable remained constant for all 3 sitting experiments, it seems unlikely that footrest height was a cause for this difference in result. A possible suggestion is that the hardness of the wood surface resulted in a change of posture where the subject rotated their pelvis in such a way as to increase the load onto their buttock region and therefore away from the posterior thigh thus reducing leg discomfort. Regarding the difference in leg discomfort between the foam surfaces, it is possible that the shape of the contoured foam under the subject's thighs did not suit the shape of the subject or the posture they preferred to adopt, which resulted in the subject preferring a straight foam surface under their thighs.

Although these results highlight the limitations of relying on subjective measures as used in this study for the purpose of distinguishing similar user–seat interfaces, it should be noted that in the absence of a proven objective method for their assessment, seat manufacturers are likely to continue with subjective evaluations as the main indicator of seat comfort and discomfort (Kolich, 2008; Helander and Mukund, 1991).

The results presented here suggest that, overall, significant relationships exist between the subjective and objective measures used in this study (Table 4) and appear consistent with previous reports that have described increased ICM with discomfort (Søndergaard et al., 2010; Fenety and Walker, 2002; Vergara and Page, 2002; Aaras et al., 2000). As previously stated, the relationship between ICM and discomfort appears to be driven by user behaviour in response to minimising discomfort. In addition to the positive correlations between ICM and discomfort, the results of this study also showed significant negative correlations between perceived comfort and support, possibly suggesting that less ICM may indicate a lack of discomfort. In terms of what drives this relationship, it seems unlikely that a lack of movement results in comfort, but instead rather suggests a lack of discomfort which in turn allows for the existence of comfort (Vink, 2012).

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

It is acknowledged that the results need to be consolidated by incorporating an assessment of test retest reliability; however, study design precludes such an assessment. Further studies are warranted to establish the reliability of ICM and whether the methods used in this study are able to consistently rank similar seat surfaces. A further consideration is whether this method is suitable for other types of chair users (e.g. different body masses, ages, and persons with disability).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

ICM appears to be able to statistically distinguish between similar foam surfaces so as long as appropriate ICM thresholds and sufficient sitting durations are utilized. In addition, there appears to be a relationship between greater ICM and increased discomfort ratings, and lesser ICM and increased comfort ratings.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Welsh Assembly Government as part of a Knowledge Exploitation Fund Collaborative Industrial Research Project grant (CIRP Grant No. HE 05 COL 1006 to PWM). Zhuofu Liu was part supported by a grant from Harbin Scientific Innovation Project for the elite young researcher (Grant No. 2013RFQXJ003), Scientific Research Project of Education Department of Heilongjiang Province (Grant No.12541109, 12541140), and Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province (Grant No. F201421).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

