@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of elevation change on mental stress in high-voltage transmission tower construction workers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The task workload was similar between working surface heights.


                        
                        
                           
                           Workers perceived an increasing mental stress as working surface height increased.


                        
                        
                           
                           One possible reason for the stress is the sense of insecurity and uncertainty.


                        
                        
                           
                           Another possible contributor to stress is the working environment.


                        
                        
                           
                           The third possible explanation for the stress is visual issues.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

High-voltage transmission tower

Heart rate variability

Working surface height

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  High-voltage transmission tower construction is a high-risk operation due to the construction site locations, extreme climatic factors, elevated working surfaces, and narrow working space. To comprehensively enhance our understanding of the psychophysiological phenomena of workers in extremely high tower constructions, we carried out a series of field experiments to test and compare three working surface heights in terms of frequency-domain heart rate variability (HRV) measurements. Twelve experienced male workers participated in this experiment. The dependent variables, namely, heart rate (HR), normalized low-frequency power (nLF), normalized high-frequency power (nHF), and LF-to-HF power ratio (LF/HF), were measured with the Polar RS800CX heart rate monitor. The experimental results indicated that the task workload was similar between working surface heights. Tower construction workers perceived an increased level of mental stress as working surface height increased.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

For several decades, there have been more than ten thousand high-voltage transmission towers in Taiwan. Most of the towers need to be maintained regularly or rebuilt. The primary structure of a high-voltage transmission tower is a steel lattice, which is used to support overhead electricity conductors for electric power transmission. High-voltage transmission towers are built in a wide variety of shapes and sizes, with a typical height ranging from 60 to 70 m (Fig. 1
                     ). Because most of the high-voltage transmission tower construction sites are on remote, exposed mountainsides at an elevation of about 850 m, workers have to climb up and down the tower to lift all the steel components up and deliver them manually with a small winch, instead of using a crane. Slopes have been shown to have a negative impact upon worker productivity (Apud and Valdes, 1994) and workload (Kirk and Parker, 1993, 1994; Kirk and Sullman, 2001; Li et al., 1989; Sullman and Byers, 2000). Differences in physiological responses between high-elevation and ground-level workers have also been reported. For example, on bridge construction sites, the heart rate (HR) of those working at higher elevations have been reported to be 10–20 beats/min faster than those of ground-level workers (Mao et al., 2000). Some tasks that are easy at ground level become more difficult when performed in high-elevation workplaces (Steven and Mohamed, 1979).

Additionally, high-elevation workers might encounter some difficulties in physiological adjustment when performing heavy duties or delicate tasks. The effects of extreme weather conditions, such as thermal or cold stress and strong winds, on the work performance and safety of high-rise building construction workers is greater than those of ground-level workers (Hsu et al., 2008). As the thermal stress increases, workers have a natural tendency to reduce their work pace to keep their average heart rate within a relatively narrow range (Smith and Rummer, 1988; Vogt et al., 1983). As mentioned above, extreme climatic factors also expose tower construction workers to potential thermal stress disorders, including both hypothermia and hyperthermia, depending on the season. However, these findings provide somewhat limited understanding of the physiological phenomena, for only heart rate have been monitored in past experiments. Furthermore, the working heights and spaces in previous studies were quite different from those involved in high-voltage transmission tower construction.

As shown in Fig. 2
                     , while working on a high-voltage transmission tower with a typical height exceeding 60 m, workers have to stand on steel bars that are 15 cm wide to conduct the lifting, delivery, and assembly tasks manually. In previous studies of the effects of elevation on physiological measurements, the workers typically performed high-rise building construction activities upon flat and broad floors at heights up to 40 m (Chang et al., 2009; Hsu et al., 2008; Mao et al., 2000; Min et al., 2012). To date, few studies on extremely high tower constructions have been reported.

Fear of heights, or acrophobia, is characterized by marked anxiety upon exposure to heights, by avoidance of heights, and by interference in functioning caused by this fear (American Psychiatric Association, 1994; Choy et al., 2007; Curtis et al., 1998). The hazardous nature of tower construction work requires constant vigilance in order to prevent serious or fatal injuries. A multitude of factors need to be continually monitored and observed, with corrective action taken for sudden occurrences. If any one of these factors is misread, neglected, or incorrectly diagnosed, these workers may face serious injury or death. In the extremely elevated and rather limited standing space, workers suffer from acrophobia and the fear of falling, even when equipped with a safety harness. The combined effects of an elevated height and lack of scaffolding induce anxiety and subjective stress due to the fear and risk of falling, which has been shown to affect the neuromuscular performance (Adkin et al., 2000; Davis et al., 2009; Hauck et al., 2008). Based on the findings mentioned above, it would be expected that elevation would have an important impact on psychological phenomena of workers in extremely high tower constructions.

Numerous studies have demonstrated that heart rate variability (HRV) is sensitive to any change in mental or physical state, despite a minimal physical load (Garde et al., 2002; González-Camarena et al., 2000; Hjortskov et al., 2004; Mezzacappa et al., 2001; Myrtek et al., 1996; Pagani et al., 1991; Perini et al., 2000; Sloan et al., 1994; Zhong et al., 2005). When a person is exposed to a stressor, the sympathetic system of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) is activated (Van Praag, 2002). Once the stressor disappears, the vagal system decreases the heart and breathing rate. HRV refers to alterations in heart rate and provides quantitative markers of autonomic regulation (Malik et al., 1996). As many commercial devices now provide automated measurement of HRV, the cardiologist is provided with a seemingly simple tool for both research and clinical studies. HRV is a simple and noninvasive way to measure the response of the ANS to mental and physical demands. Several studies have shown that physical tasks (González-Camarena et al., 2000; Pagani et al., 1991; Perini et al., 2000), mental stress in laboratory experiments (cognitive demands, mental arithmetic) (Mezzacappa et al., 2001; Myrtek et al., 1996; Sloan et al., 1994), and both physical and mental loads (Garde et al., 2002; Hjortskov et al., 2004; Taelman et al., 2011) influence HRV indices related to the ANS. Furthermore, some recent studies have highlighted the fact that the analysis of HRV and its connection with anxiety may provide a useful field-based assessment tool (Filaire et al., 2010; Friedman, 2007).

The HF power of R-R variability is considered to be a function of cardiac parasympathetic nervous system activity to the heart (Pagani et al., 1988). The LF component of R-R variability, although not modulated by a single arm of the autonomic nervous system (Kingwell et al., 1994), is considered to be a representative index of sympathetic activity to the heart, especially when expressed in normalized units (Malik et al., 1996; Malliani et al., 1991; Pagani et al., 1986). The LF-to-HF power ratio of R-R variability is considered to be an index of the balance of sympathovagal input to sinoatrial node activity and has been found to be representative of sympathetic to parasympathetic balance in both physiological and pathophysiological conditions (La Rovere et al., 1998; Malik et al., 1996; Montano et al., 1994; Pagani et al., 1986, 1988).

Most research has revealed that higher mental stress/higher mental demand is associated with an increase of LF power and a decrease of HF power, and an increase of the LF/HF ratio (Cinaz et al., 2010; Durantin et al., 2014; Murai et al., 2008). However, Nickel and Nachreiner (2003) have argued that the LF band indicates general activation rather than task-specific mental demands. Pruyn et al. (1985) has demonstrated that social stress induced by an observer while the participant completed a memory task led to a decrease of HRV in the LF band. The results of Sonderegger and Sauer (2009) study indicated that the presence of observers as a social stressor influences HRV in the LF band in the opposite direction as the cognitive stressors. These findings reiterate the need for a greater differentiation between stressors that may have even opposite effects on different HRV bands. Berntson and Cacioppo (2004) stated that no single pattern of autonomic adjustments and associated changes in HRV will apply universally across distinct stressors. These results indicate that physiological reactions to different stressors may be varied (Jorna, 1992; Pruyn et al., 1985).

It is acknowledged that there has been some controversy in the literature about the sensitivity and diagnosticity of HRV and how the different types of stressors are related to HRV on the different frequency bands (Berntson and Cacioppo, 2004; Nickel and Nachreiner, 2003). Despite the ongoing debate, the research presented above provides some justification for using the LF frequency band and the LF/HF ratio as indictors of stress. For the purpose of this study in a field setting, it is assumed that either of the two measures may change as a result of the mental stress level, whether it is cognitive stressor related or ecological stressor related.

To contribute to the understanding of the psychophysiological phenomena of workers in extremely high tower constructions, and to establish some guidelines to ensure adequate protections for them, we carried out a series of field experiments to test and compare three working surface heights in terms of HRV. Based on these insights into high-rise building construction tasks, we hypothesized that HRV for construction workers would be susceptible to the effects of working surface height.

In summary, the purpose of the present study was to provide an investigation of the HRV of high-voltage transmission tower construction workers by comparing three heights of the construction platform in terms of frequency-domain measurements.

@&#METHOD@&#

The experiment was reviewed and approved by the Research Ethics Committee of National Taiwan University. All individual participants in this study gave written informed consent prior to their participation and were free to withdraw from the study without prejudice.

Twelve experienced male workers between the ages of 29 and 58 participated in this experiment (mean age = 42.17 years, SD = 9.56 years). Their mean high-voltage transmission tower construction experience was 7.83 years (SD = 4.02; range 2–15). All participants were healthy and had no musculoskeletal disorders that could detrimentally influence their performance. The demographic information for participants was shown in Table 1
                        .

Heart rate variability (HRV) was measured for the entire working day, including during rest and lunch breaks, with the Polar RS800CX (Polar Electro Oy, Kempele, Finland) heart rate monitor. The RS800CX consists of a pericardial heartbeat capturing and transmitting unit in a 2.5 cm wide chest band, and a receiver storage unit similar to a digital wristwatch. The electrode belt and transmitter support recording and processing of R-R intervals at a frequency of 1000 Hz and 2.4 GHz transfer between the belt and heart rate monitor.

The validity and reliability of the Polar heart rate measuring system for collecting heart rate variability data in humans at rest and during physical exercise have been studied (Nunan et al., 2009; Porto and Junqueira, 2009; Vanderlei et al., 2008). In particular, Weippert et al. (2010) demonstrated excellent agreement between Polar monitors and traditional ECGs when comparing simultaneous R-R interval recordings between the two devices.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

The present study used a repeated-measures design. The independent variable was the working surface height with three levels, 15, 35, and 55 m.

The participants in this study were twelve experienced workers in high-voltage transmission tower construction. None of the participants had previously experienced a fall or had musculoskeletal disorders that had restricted their activities in the preceding 12 months. The working surface heights were measured from the base of the transmission tower.

Heart rate (HR) Normalized low-frequency power (nLF), normalized high-frequency power (nHF), and LF-to-HF power ratio (LF/HF) were recorded as the dependent variables and computed after each task was completed. Spectral components for HRV analyses were expressed as both absolute units and normalized units, calculated as [absolute power of the components/(total power - very low frequency power)] × 100 (Goldberger, 1999; Rimoldi et al., 1992). Power in the high-frequency (HF) power (between 0.15 and 0.4 Hz), low-frequency (LF) power (between 0.04 and 0.15 Hz), and very low frequency (VLF) power (between 0.003 and 0.04 Hz) ranges was calculated for HRV. It is recommended that LF and HF be measured in normalized units (n.u.) (Malik et al., 1996; Malliani et al., 1991; Pagani et al., 1986), which represent the relative value of each power component in proportion to the total power minus the VLF component. The representation of LF and HF in n.u. emphasizes the controlled and balanced behavior of the two branches of the autonomic nervous system. Moreover, normalization tends to minimize the effect on the values of the LF and HF components of the changes in total power.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Before starting each experiment, the objectives and procedures were explained to the participants and a consent form approved by the Research Ethics Committee of National Taiwan University was completed by each participant. Afterward, the heart rate monitor was carefully attached to the chest of each participant.

During the first 15 min after the installation of the heart rate monitor, participants were asked to remain seated without moving, drinking coffee or tea, or smoking. After the 15 min passed, their heart rates were recorded for 10 min to determine the resting (baseline) heart rate.

The heart rate monitor was placed within a small plastic water-resistant container to protect it from the ambient climatic and harsh working conditions. This container, attached to the subject's belt on the rear waist region, had a transparent cover that enabled the researcher to check the status of the heart rate monitor. After measurement of their resting heart rate, participants climbed onto working surfaces set at different heights to conduct construction activities. The data were collected continuously between the 10th and 70th min. that workers conducted construction activities on each working surface height. The heart rate monitor data were transmitted to a laptop computer (Thinkpad V480s, Lenovo, Sijhih, New Taipei City, NC, Taiwan) via a bidirectional infrared interface using the Polar software Polar Pro Trainer 5 (Polar Electro Oy, Kempele, Finland) after the task.

The construction workers were mainly responsible for putting steel beams of different shapes and sizes together to construct the primary structure of a high-voltage transmission tower and further install other electrical components. The primary assembly process consisted of the following steps: lifting the materials and instruments up with a small winch, dragging the steel components to the predetermined locations, bolting the steel components into position, and moving on to the next assembly location. The workers conducted the identical high-voltage transmission tower construction activities according to the standard operating procedure (SOP) on each working surface height.

The recordings were analyzed with spectral technique via Fast Fourier transform in accordance with international guidelines proposed by Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing & Electrophysiology (Malik et al., 1996). The recorded heart rate data were controlled for eliminating artefacts as proposed by Berntson and Stowell (1998), using the Polar Pro Trainer 5 software (Polar Electro Oy, Kempele, Finland) for automatic and Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA) for manual artefact correction. The data were further processed using the Kubios HRV-analysis software (V2.2), developed by the Biosignal Analysis and Medical Imaging Group at the University of Kupio in Finland (Niskanen et al., 2004). Using the FFT Method, HRV was calculated in the LF, HF, and VLF bands and normalized units were calculated as described by previous studies (Malik et al., 1996; Malliani et al., 1991; Pagani et al., 1986).

A repeated-measures design analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to investigate the main effects of the working surface height on each of the dependent variables (HR, nLF, nHF, and LF/HF) with a significance level of 0.05. Specific post-hoc comparisons of independent variables were conducted with the Tukey HSD test. The confidence level for statistical significance was set at alpha equal to 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A repeated-measures design ANOVA was performed on the dependent measures of Heart rate (HR), normalized low-frequency power (nLF), normalized high-frequency power (nHF), and LF-to-HF power ratio (LF/HF). Effects of working surface height on the dependent variables are provided in Figs. 3 to 6
                     
                     
                     
                     .

There were no significant differences in heart rate between the working surface heights (F
                        
                           2,22
                         = 0.401, p = 0.675). Mean HRs (Standard Deviation) for the three heights of 15, 35, and 55 m, they were 102.83 (10.01), 100.25 (14.26), and 101.25 (11.25) bpm.

There were significant differences in normalized low-frequency power between the working surface heights (F
                        
                           2,22
                         = 10.117, p = 0.001). Mean nLFs and standard deviations for the 15, 35, and 55 m working surface heights were 58.73 (12.31), 50.38 (10.38), and 45.50 (11.51) n.u., respectively. Further post hoc Tukey HSD test results showed that the nLF of the 15 m working surface height was significantly higher than those of the 35 and 55 m heights.

There were significant main effects of the working surface heights (F
                        
                           2,22
                         = 10.092, p = 0.001) on normalized high-frequency power. Mean nHFs and standard deviations for the 15, 35, and 55 m working surface heights were 41.16 (12.21), 49.45 (10.35) and 54.33 (11.46) nu, respectively. Further post hoc Tukey HSD test results showed that the nHF of the 15 m working surface height was significantly lower than those of the 35 and 55 m heights.

There were significant differences in LF-to-HF power ratio between the working surface heights (F
                        
                           2,22
                         = 7.048, p = 0.004). Mean LF/HF ratios and standard deviations for the 15, 35, and 55 m working surface heights were 1.60 (0.664), 1.11 (0.464) and 0.93 (0.478), respectively. Further post hoc Tukey HSD test results showed that the nLF of the 15 m working surface height was significantly higher than those of the 35 and 55 m heights.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The main purpose of the present study was to investigate the psychophysiological phenomena of high-voltage transmission tower construction workers by comparing three working surface heights in terms of frequency-domain measurements of HRV. The working surface height had marked influences on the HRV measurements of workers during the construction activities. The effects of working surface height were clearly reflected in the nLF, nHF, and LF/HF ratio. In contrast, there were no significant differences in heart rate between working surface height.


                        Kirk and Sullman (2001) suggested that heart rate indices can be used as an effective means of determining the physiological strain of subjects in applied field situations. Using heart rate indices allows results to be cross-referenced to obtain an overall assessment of the workload of a task. The analytical results of this study indicated that there were no significant differences in heart rate between the working surface heights. These findings suggest that the task workload was similar between working surface heights. The workers conducted the identical high-voltage transmission tower construction activities according to the standard operating procedure (SOP) on each working surface height. All the task contents remain the same at each working surface heights, therefore, minimizing the effects of different movement and physiological stress. To compare with an equivalent task load in the literature, the mean working heart rate of the present study was 101.45 bpm, slightly lower than those reported by Kirk and Sullman (2001) (99.1–112.9 bmp) and Kirk and Parker (1993) (107–120 bpm). This overall average, falling at the lower end of the range, indicates that high-voltage transmission tower construction entails a relatively moderate task workload in comparison to cable hauler choker setting (Kirk and Parker, 1993; Kirk and Sullman, 2001; Rodahl, 2003).

The average pre-work resting heart was 82.28 bmp, and the overall mean for the ratio of working heart rate to resting heart rate was 1.25. This ratio is lower than those of steel workers, 1.28 (Vitalis et al., 1994); choker setting, 1.84 (Kirk and Sullman, 2001); nursing work, 1.45 (Fordham et al., 1978); and car assembly work, 1.45 (Minard et al., 1971). The difference between resting and working heart rate was 20.17 bpm. This difference is smaller than those for scaffolders (42.9), steel workers (41.5), formworkers (36.4), and electrician-plumbers (25.6) working on a 6- to 10-floor high-elevation construction site (Chang et al., 2009).

The ANOVA results showed that as the working surface height increased, nLF and LF/HF declined and nHF increased. Further post hoc Tukey HSD test results showed no significant differences in nLF and LF/HF when the working surface height exceeded 15 m. These findings indicate that high-voltage transmission tower construction workers perceived a different level of stress as working surface height increased. If we assumed that the ecological perception of height had increased the perceived stress of the workers, the decrease of LF and LF/HF found here seems to be inconsistent with what most research has revealed that, higher mental stress/higher mental demand is associated with an increase of LF power and a decrease of HF power, and an increase of the LF/HF ratio. On the other hand, it is interesting that our results seem to echo the results of Sonderegger and Sauer (2009) study, which indicated that the presence of social stressor such as observers may influence HRV in the LF band in the opposite direction as the cognitive stressors (Sonderegger and Sauer, 2009), although the relationship between the ecological stressor and social stressor is unknown. Based on our results, there is a reason to believe that working heights can be a mental stressor and it should not be neglected even with experience workers as Ross and Altmaier (1994) have noted that the magnitude of job stress determines workers' willingness to remain in their job, and that job stress is closely linked to occupational accidents.

It may be interesting to ask what may be the sources of the ecological stressor associated with the working height. Some further discussions are presented in the following. It should be noted that the variables discussed here were not manipulated in the study, but the discussion here may be informative to the practitioners and may shed light on future research directions. One possible reason for the stress due to height is the sense of insecurity and uncertainty. Given the hazardous nature of tower construction work, the workers must maintain vigilance, monitoring and observing numerous factors continually and taking immediate corrective actions for unexpected occurrences. A single mistake can cause serious injury or death. The stress arising from the sense of insecurity and uncertainty also results from their frequent changes of job or workplace (Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), 1991).

Another possible contributor to stress is the working environment. The HRV and HR have been shown to be closely related to thermal comfort sensations (Smith and Rummer, 1988; Vogt et al., 1983; Yao et al., 2009). To minimize ultraviolet exposure, most construction workers wear long-sleeved shirts and trousers, even in hot and humid weather. However, this clothing might cause heatstroke and prostration if body heat is not properly released or if the worker perspires excessively (Chen et al., 1998). Consequently, high-voltage transmission tower construction workers are required to ensure adequate water intake and rest in hot and humid weather. Levels of luminance and UV have been found to increase with increasing construction site height (Hsu et al., 2008). Therefore, workers working at successively increasing elevations require adequate protection against UV light while not increasing the body heat load. Stronger winds at higher working surface heights also pose a threat for high-voltage transmission tower construction workers. Safety concerns arise in strong wind conditions because working off balance or dealing with the fear of falling or flying objects can cause the workers extra stress.

The third possible explanation for the stress is visual issues. The magnitude of the change in CFF values and the prevalence of subjective fatigue symptoms showed that as workers experience visual fatigue at higher elevations, their physiological condition and instinctive fear might impair their capacities for judgment (Hsu et al., 2008). Therefore, it seems that visual fatigue among high-voltage transmission tower construction workers could be a life-threatening factor, one that should not be underestimated. In addition to visual fatigue, the differences within the visual field might be another concern related to visual issues. When standing at elevated surface heights, the eye-to-horizon distance may increase. Consequently, the inability to focus on close focal visual cues may contribute to postural height vertigo and increased postural sway, both of which can elevate stress (Bles et al., 1980; Brandt et al., 1978).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The current study tested the effects of working surface height on the HRV of workers during high-voltage transmission tower construction activities on a remote and exposed mountainside at an elevation of about 850 m. The results of the study show that the effects of working surface heights on HRV were significant, suggesting that high-voltage transmission tower construction workers perceive an increased level of mental stress as working surface height increases, due to several possible reasons, the sense of insecurity and uncertainty, the working environment, and visual issues. In the future, further investigation of the effects and ergonomic issues of working surface height and a broader range of physical and physiological measures should be applied to comprehensively enhance the understanding of the psychophysiological phenomena of workers constructing extremely high towers, and to establish concrete guidelines to ensure adequate protections for them.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was subsidized and supported by a Grant from the National Science Council of Taiwan, R.O.C. (Project No. NSC 102-2221-E-011-091-MY2), for which the authors are grateful.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

