@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Applying hierarchical task analysis to improving the patient positioning for direct lateral interbody fusion in spinal surgery

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The paper integrates HTA/EHI with business process management.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our approach identifies potential errors and selects alternative practices.


                        
                        
                           
                           We use patient positioning for spinal surgery as illustrative case.


                        
                        
                           
                           Observation was conduct to gain knowledge on current practices.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our approach is useful for novice and professional surgeons.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Business process management

Hierarchical task analysis

Human error identification

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The present study brings together for the first time the techniques of hierarchical task analysis (HTA), human error identification (HEI), and business process management (BPM) to select practices that can eliminate or reduce potential errors in a surgical setting. We applied the above approaches to the improvement of the patient positioning process for lumbar spine surgery referred to as ‘direct lateral interbody fusion’ (DLIF). Observations were conducted to gain knowledge on current DLIF positioning practices, and an HTA was constructed. Potential errors associated with the practices specific to DLIF patient positioning were identified. Based on literature review and expert views alternative practices are proposed aimed at improving the DLIF patient positioning process. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to use BPM in association with HEI/HTA for the purpose of improving the performance and safety of a surgical process – with promising results.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Hierarchical task analysis (HTA) seeks to provide an understanding of human–human and human–machine interactions (Rose and Bearman, 2012). HTA describes a system in terms of its goals. It begins with a main task defined by its intended goals and breaks down the main task into its components tasks. Each sub-task having a sub-goal to achieve – all of which taken together contribute towards achievement of the main task goal (Stanton, 2006). These sub-tasks may be further analysed to their constituent tasks and so on. Levels of analysis of a main task depend on complexity and required description of the task or goal (Lane et al., 2006; Phipps et al., 2008). Rules guide the sequence in which sub-goals are attained to achieve the ‘higher’ goal (Phipps et al., 2008) and, accordingly, higher levels in the hierarchy influence the manner in which lower levels behave (Shepherd, 2010). Task analysis is also a useful way of looking at how people interact with work processes and environments.

To date, HTA has successfully been used in association with human error identification (HEI) techniques to detect potential human errors (Rose and Bearman, 2012; Stanton, 2006; Stanton et al., 2009). HEI techniques are structured methods dealing with work processes, technologies and human factors to predict or detect human errors (Stanton et al., 2009). The ‘error mode’ taxonomy of an HEI is used to highlight potentially unforseen errors in the lowest level tasks of an HTA (Phipps et al., 2008; Shorrock and Kirwan, 2002; Stanton et al., 2009). Once the potential error or disruption is predicted, an error reduction strategy can be implemented (Shorrock and Kirwan, 2002). HEI has been widely used across the industry (Rose and Bearman, 2012), for example in aviation (Shorrock and Kirwan, 2002). Recently, HEI techniques have been successfully applied to predict potential disruptions and errors in healthcare services, including medication administration (Lane et al., 2006), anaesthesia (Phipps et al., 2008) and surgery (Joice et al., 1998).

In surgical settings, when a patient gets transferred into the operating room (OR) to have a surgical procedure carried out, several tasks should be accomplished – including patient positioning on the operating table. These tasks are shared between different members of the OR team – including surgeons, anaesthetists, and OR nurses. For the purpose of this paper, the way in which a task is planned to achieve its goal is referred to as ‘practice’. A practice can also be expressed in terms of the sub-goals and the plan via which these sub-goals are sequenced to achieve the higher goal. Different practices may be used to perform the same task. For instance, anaesthesia induction may be performed on the patient transfer trolley in an anaesthetic room adjacent to the OR or on the operating table in the OR depending on circumstance. From a human factors and ergonomic analysis perspective, each practice implies a range of potential errors with different consequences. Where more than one practices can be used to perform a task, it is commonly expected of the operating surgeon to select the practice producing minimal potential risk to the patient. Thus the question arises whether some of these practices have lower error potential – and hence whether such practices should be recommended as standards.

To address this question, in this paper we consider the OR as a business entity in which various business processes are performed to achieve the strategic target of the business entity; patient safety. This allows us to integrate HTA/HEI with the business process management (BPM) approach and to apply principles of BPM to select practices that can eliminate or reduce potential errors.

Prior to reporting our analyses and in order to provide a full rationale for our approach, we first explore the limitations of the current HTA/HEI approaches.

As described in the literature, HTA/HEI techniques examine the lowest level of HTA hierarchy for potential errors (Shorrock and Kirwan, 2002). Joice et al. (1998) classified errors captured by HTA/HEI techniques into two groups; ‘interstep’ errors and ‘intrastep’ errors. An iterstep error occurs when the operator (e.g. surgeon) fails to execute a sub-task or re-arrange its sequence; an intrastep error involves the failure of a surgeon to correctly execute an individual sub-task. These types of errors are reported in the surgical literature as ‘errors of execution’ (Kohn et al., 2000; Sevdalis et al., 2008; Wiegmann et al., 2007). However, the literature also points to another type of errors referred to as ‘errors of planning’ which occurs when a surgeon fails to select the most appropriate practice to achieve the task’s strategic goal, that is, patient safety. A specific practice in surgery may enhance capacity and performance in certain environments but may have no effect in others; for example, obtaining unobstructed images on both cross-table anterosterior and lateral views is essential for spinal surgery known as ‘direct lateral interbody fusion’, or DLIF (Arnold et al., 2012) but not needed for other procedures requiring lateral positioning of the patient. Further, a practice may lead to an error in a situation but the same practice may be necessary in another situation based on the patient’s physiological status, which differs from one patient to another. An example of this is allowing an awake patient to walk from a trolley to the operating table. This practice could create an error if the patient is obese (Philips, 2004). It is therefore difficult to identify real potential errors based on examining only lower-level tasks without examining practices used to achieve higher-level tasks.

What appears to be a key limitation of the current HTA/HEI approaches is that they typically identify potential errors in a predefined set of sub-tasks, rather than examining potential errors in practice selection (see example above). Another issue in HEI approaches is that they typically require a set of generic error modes as part of their error taxonomies – but these modes, as a result of examining individual lower-level tasks, may not necessarily identify the whole range of potential errors (Stanton et al., 2009; Stanton et al., 2005) – and there may even be difficulty in specifying a single mode for error (Joice et al., 1998). Such limitations of the current HTA/HEI approaches could be tackled by developing an error taxonomy that has the capability to identify practices with high potential risk to patient safety and to help in selecting alternative practices. This will be developed in the ‘Methods’ section.

In this paper, patient positioning for lumbar spine surgery referred to as ‘direct lateral interbody fusion’ (DLIF) is used as an illustrative case to demonstrate that our methodology can be used to support surgical safety and performance. It is important to note that in developing our methodology we have not intended to discard HTA/HEI techniques. We believe that examination of a practice should be carried out prior to the analysis of the lower-level tasks required to achieve the practice. Once practices that form a process are examined and improved using our methodology, traditional HTA/HEI can be effectively applied further.

In the sections that follow, we first start with the description of BPM and then explain the aims of patient positioning, followed by description of the DLIF surgery requirements. We discuss the methodology we used to improve DLIF and our findings. We conclude with a discussion of the research, including its limitations and applications to spinal surgery and beyond.

Some of the above limitations of HTA/HEI approaches can be overcome by considering major tasks conducted in the OR as business processes that require improvement or redesign. A business process is a structured set of activities (tasks and sub-tasks) designed to produce a specific output for a particular customer (Davenport, 1993). The emphasis on a ‘particular customer’ implies that the set of activities may vary according to the need and status of the customer. This definition fits the processes conducted in ORs, in which the ‘particular customer’ is the patient whose physiological status can affect the type and sequence of certain activities required for positioning. The business process concept allows treating obese or diabetic patients, for instance, differently from other patients.

Simple identification of a business process itself is of limited use; a technique or procedure is needed to improve or redesign the process. One widely known approach is business process management (BPM). BPM is defined as an organisational approach that encompasses the methods required to align business processes with strategic objectives and customers’ needs(da Silva et al., 2012). For surgery, the customer is the patient and a main strategic objective is the patient’s safety. Weske et al (2004) expanded the definition of BPM to include “using methods, techniques, and software to design, enact, control and analyse operational process involving humans, organisations, applications, documents and other sources of information”. It follows that BPM questions the status quo, identifies best practices for improving or redesigning value-added activities and eliminates non-value-added activities (Choong, 2013; Turner et al., 2004; Yin, 2010). An important aspect of BPM is that it considers information technologies and also information flow and communication problems (Choong, 2013; Hammer, 2010; Yen, 2009). Task analysis is also essential to achieve the aims of BPM – usually activity-based task analyses. Activity-based task analysis (or flowcharting) considers the physical task at hand and divides it into its components (sub-tasks). This is different from the goal-based analysis of HTA, in which a task is described by its goal, which in turn is divided into sub-goals. Using HTA within the context of BPM application is another novelty of our work.

Patient positioning comprises several major (first or upper-level) tasks, in which each task can be carried out using different practices. The lower-level tasks for each practice could be performed correctly as designed – however the practice itself may imply high potential safety risk, for which extra resources, effort, time and/or excess precaution is required to avoid error. For example, moving a patient from a trolley onto the operating table requires several lower-level tasks. The practice of moving a patient while the trolley is not adjacent to the operating table carries higher risk compared to the practice of moving the patient with the trolley adjacent to the operating table. The lower-level tasks for the former practice could be performed without errors but the practice requires extra resources and precautions. Currently available HEI taxonomies have not been designed to examine practices, as explained in Section 1.2, and accordingly we need to develop a taxonomy that examines practices rather than lower-level tasks. This is the main principle of our HTA/HEI error taxonomy. Within the framework of BPM, the error taxonomy should examine practices and allow selection of the best practices.

In order to do so, we developed an error taxonomy that comprises three interrelated sets of sub-taxonomies; practice selection modes, practice error modes and practice selection criteria. The ‘practice selection modes’ include a set of practices that possess high probability of direct safety risk to the patient (problematic practices) and, accordingly, require extra resources, precaution, effort, time and/or skill to perform the practice without errors. These practice selection modes also comprise suggestions for remedies and alternative safer practices. The second set of modes is the ‘practice error modes’, which identify potential errors that may occur from implementing a practice. It is possible that there is more than one alternative for replacing a problematic practice. To avoid error in selection, a set of ‘practice selection criteria’ is needed. The criteria should consider patient status, resource availability, risk reduction and the effect of the newly proposed practice on other practices used to perform the process.

To achieve the integration of HTA with BPM, the analysis for HTA should cover practices used to implement the process. At each level of hierarchy, a task is examined and if the task can be implemented by more than one practice, it will be analysed into its components. Otherwise, no further analysis is needed.

This paper considers patient positioning for DLIF. In order for BPM to be successful, the DLIF surgery requirements that require to be achieved during patient positioning should be identified. This is the subject of the next two sections.

Patient positioning for surgery aims to achieve patient safety across three dimensions: it exposes adequately the operative field for the surgeon, facilitates patient’s monitoring and minimises the risk of adverse physiological effects (Philips, 2004). Modern use of endoscopic or laparoscopic (‘keyhole’) surgical techniques adds a fourth dimension to the objective of patient positioning, that is, the positioning facilitates the use of the sophisticated instruments and technologies during surgery. There is a large number of positioning types – including supine, prone, lateral and lithotomy. Each positioning type has several variations with different levels of complexity. Patient positioning is usually selected before the day of surgery by the surgeon in consultation with the anaesthetist – thereby also entailing a communication aspect.

As mentioned earlier, the patient positioning for DLIF is used as an illustrative case to demonstrate the applicability of our methodology. DLIF requires lateral position (Arnold et al., 2012). However, patient positioning for DLIF is more complex than lateral positioning for other procedures due to specific requirements that should be achieved during positioning before the start of surgery as discussed in the next section.

The lumbar interbody fusion at L4-5 and above comprises a complete discectomy and preparation of plates followed by the placement of structural implant (Billinghurst and Akbarnia, 2009). Several approaches to lumbar spine surgery have been developed since the early 20thcentury. The anterior approach to the lumbar spine was first introduced in 1930s. The posterior lumbar interbody fusion (PLIF) was introduced in 1945. The laparoscopic lumbar discectomy was first described by Obenchain in 1991(Obenchain, 1991). The surgery was further enhanced in the mid-1990s by using laparoscopic anterior lumbar fusion (Daniel et al., 2002; Zuckerman et al., 1996). In these traditional surgical approaches, the patient is placed in the prone position.

The reported serious complications from these traditional approaches shifted surgical techniques towards minimally invasive surgery (MIS) (Ozgur et al., 2006) with the aim of minimising soft-tissue trauma associated with spinal surgery (Fessler, 2002). In 2001, DLIF was first reported, subsequently becoming increasingly preferred for lumbar spinal surgery (Anand and Baron, 2011; Arnold et al., 2012; Billinghurst and Akbarnia, 2009; Ozgur et al., 2006). The aim of DLIF is “to achieve a spinal fusion procedure via a lateral approach in order to avoid the major muscle groups in the back (posterior approach) or the organs and blood vessels in the abdomen (anterior approach)” (NICE, 2013). DLIF differs from traditional spine surgery approaches in that the patient is placed in a true lateral decubitus position rather than in prone position (Fig. 1
                     ). The surgery is relatively simple and involves minimal soft-tissue disruption. It decreases operative time, decreases the recovery period, and shortens hospital stay(Billinghurst and Akbarnia, 2009).

DLIF has a number of specific requirements that should be ensured during the patient positioning before starting the operation, as follows (Anand and Baron, 2011; Billinghurst and Akbarnia, 2009):
                           
                              1.
                              Maximising the gap between the iliac crest and the 12th rib in order to gain direct access to the disc space;

Obtaining unobstructed images of the disc space under interest on both cross-table anterosterior and lateral views;

Ensuring continuous neural monitoring.

Various practices can be used to achieve the first requirement, including inserting a large bag under the hip of the patient, flexing the operating table and/or using an elevated cushion attached to the operating table known as kidney rest (Anand and Baron, 2011). To achieve the second requirement, fluoroscopy is used repeatedly during positioning. This can be done with C-arm fluoroscopy perpendicular to the floor (Anand and Baron, 2011; Webb et al., 2010). Neural monitoring, including electromyography (EMG) is essential and mandatory to avoid potential risk of nerves injury (Arnold et al., 2012; Tohmeh et al., 2011). Several position readjustments may also be required in order to achieve the required correct position of the patient prior to commencement of the procedure (Webb et al., 2010). These requirements should be managed in a way that minimises adverse physiological effects. Nerve location is variable, reinforcing the second requirement to ensure positioning that allows having real-time fluoroscopic lateral images. Incorrect management of the first requirement may create excessive posterior location of the venous in one side relative to the other that may increase the risk facing patient vena cava and right common iliac vein (Kepler et al., 2011). In addition, DLIF bluntly splits the psoas fibres – a splitting technique that exposes the lumbar plexus and femoral nerves to potential injury (Benglis et al., 2009; Kepler et al., 2011). Further, the operative corridor is directly lateral to the disc and thus the aorta vena cava and iliac vessels are typically not visualised or at risk (Kepler et al., 2011).

@&#METHODS@&#

We proceeded in multiple phases. In the first phase, approval was obtained to carry out the study and make observations in ORs of a large academic hospital in Bangkok, Thailand. An expert working group was set up comprising three experienced OR nurses (R, S, J), a senior surgeon (TM), and a systems analyst with background in ergonomics and human factors (LH). A senior patient safety academic (NS) was an advisor to the group. During this phase, the literature on DLIF spine surgery was reviewed to explore practices used for patient positioning, surgery requirements and potential surgical errors.

In the second phase of the study, the expert working group identified the main tasks for DLIF. Brainstorming within the group was used to explore possible practices that may be used to achieve main tasks of patient positioning. The implementation and requirements of each practice were discussed, as well as the potential errors that may occur during the implementation of the practices. The output of this phase provided us with the required information to construct the initial HTA comprising the major tasks required to perform DLIF positioning, to construct practice selection and practice error modes, and to identify the practice selection criteria for the practice error taxonomy. During this phase additional input was provided by two senior urologic surgeons (DW, CD) from their perspective of hand-assisted nephrectomy – a procedure that also requires true lateral positioning like DLIF. Fig. 2
                      illustrates the key tasks required for DLIF and Tables 1–3
                     
                     
                      show the three parts of our practice taxonomy – namely the practice selection modes, practice error modes and practice selection criteria, respectively.

In the third phase of the study, DLIF surgery was observed in vivo in the OR by the first author (LH). Before the day of surgery, the hospital liaison officer obtained the consent of surgical team and introduced the observer to the surgeon and his assistant. During the observation, a senior OR nurse accompanied the observer and provided explanations as required. The surgeon also provided explanation for major tasks that he performed during patient positioning. Further, photos of the patient positioning were taken at each step of the process, which were reviewed after the observation. The observer also examined photos taken during DLIF surgeries previously conducted in the case hospital. Based on the information obtained, the detailed HTA for DLIF patient positioning was drawn. The HTA allowed the expert working group to identify the practices used to perform the main tasks of the patient positioning and to identify the problematic practices. These were also discussed in detail with the operating surgeon and his assistant to elicit their views.

Following the identification of problematic practices, we proceeded with the fourth phase of the study, where we identified alternative practices and selected the most appropriate practices via employing the criteria and answering the questions mentioned in Table 3. The operating and assisting surgeon were consulted again. The findings (alternative practices) were also presented and discussed with the Anaesthetists and Surgeons Committee at the hospital.

The project was approved and partly funded by the University of Southern Queensland, Australia. Ethical approval to carry out observations in ORs was been granted to the project principal investigator (LH) as part of an ongoing research programme on workflow analysis in ORs.

@&#RESULTS@&#

As part of constructing the HTA for DLIF, a DLIF surgery was observed to identify the current practices used. The operating table used for DLIF was a radiolucent, which could be tilted in two directions (head or foot) and flexed from its middle. C-arm fluoroscopy and EMG were available in the OR. The OR team comprised seven members: operating surgeon, surgical assistant, anaesthetist, assistant anaesthetist, scrub nurse and two circulators.

A large bag was placed near the middle portion of the operating table and the height of the table was levelled to suit the C-arm height and secured. The patient was brought to OR on a trolley. The trolley was moved adjacent to the operating table and secured. In compliance with the hospital procedure, the patient and the type of surgery were first identified. The surgeon spoke with the patient to ensure full patient consent, as per standard guidelines (NICE, 2013). The patient was subsequently anaesthetised on the trolley while in supine position. With the involvement of six members of the surgical team, the patient was lifted up using a draw sheet, and turned to lateral positioning, such that part of the large bag was under the patient hip.

The patient position was then adjusted. The hands of the patient were positioned using only an upper armboard while the lower arm was flexed with 90° at the rest over the operating table. Both legs were flexed with the upper leg flexed more than the lower one. Pads and supports were added to the back of the patient, between hands and between legs. The table was flexed and tilted and a fluoroscopy image using the C-arm was taken to ensure that the conditions for position were met. This step was repeated four times. The patient was padded and draped for skin preparation and surgery. A member of surgical team took photos of each step of the process for further analysis.

The tasks required to perform DLIF patient positioning are not limited to physically positioning the patient after anaesthesia. The surgeon and anaesthetist reviewed the positioning and the unique needs of the patient before the patient arrived to the OR. The operating table was prepared for DLIF patient positioning as part of OR setup activities. There is also overlap of tasks required for anaesthesia induction with those required for patient positioning. Positioning were adjusted several times to ensure the achievement of the surgery requirements. For these reasons, our HTA started from pre-operative activities until the patient is ready for skin preparation required for surgery, as shown in Table 4
                        . The practice selection modes and the practice error modes (Tables 1 and 2) were applied to examine practices used to perform the DLIF patient positioning and the potential errors that may emerged from the observed practices. The practice selection criteria (Table 3) were used to select optimal alternative practices.

The expert working group found that practices used to perform three high-level tasks were within the scope of problematic practices specified in Table 1 – as follows:
                           
                              (a)
                              Task B: Prepare the operating table. The practice used to perform the task requires placing a large bag near the middle flex point of the operating table (Table 4 – Task B2). This practice was identified as problematic practice in the practice selection modes (Table 1 – see practice code SB1 and practice code SB2).

Task E1: Moving the patient from trolly to operating table. This task requires lifting the patient, turning patient to lateral and place patient on the large bag (Table 3 – Tasks E1.1 to E1.4.5). The practices used to perform the task are within the scope of problematic practices codes ST4, ST8 and ST9 (Table 1). It may also lead to problematic practice code ST5. The transfer of the patient to trolley after the surgery creates same problematic practices (practice SA1 – Table 1).

Task F2: Ensuring the surgery requirements. This task requires C-arm fluoroscopy to ensure the achievement of the surgery prerequisites and flexing the operating table as required (Table 3 – Tasks F1.1 to F3). The patient positioning should carefully be studied and planned before surgery. Otherwise, this practice could be problematic (see practice code SC1 – Table 1)..

After identifying tasks associated with problematic practices, the expert working group applied the practice error modes (Table 2) to identify potential errors associated with these practices. These are summarised in the following section.


                        Task B2: Placing a large bag on operating table. Placing a large bag near the second flexion break of the operating table (task B2) is intended to be under the patient hip in order to achieve the DLIF prerequisites. The following potential errors were identified for the practice used to perform this task:
                           
                              1.
                              The bag may be larger or higher than needed. Having an inappropriate bag under the hip may damage tissues and prevent blood movements, (error types ED1 and ED3 – see Table 2).

The location of the bag may change during covering the operating table with a draw sheet or during movement of patient from the trolley to the operating table. This may create musculoskeletal injury, (error type ED2).

In an obese patient, the abdominal tissue may be extended over the bag and this will increase possibility of damaging the tissue, (error type ED1).

This practice requires extra operators (error type EE3), extra effort (error type EE1) and demanding excessive adjustments and checks (error type EE2).

Depending on the patient’s physiological status, the positioning prerequisites could be achieved by only flexing and tilting the operating table, i.e., without the need for having a bag under the hip (error type EM2 – Table 2).

This task may affect the task of flexing the operating table (task F1) – keeping in mind that swift flexion may create crush injury at the flex point of the operating table (error type ED3). In addition, extreme flexion may occlude the interior vena cava and causing various obstructions (Philips, 2004).


                        Task E1: Moving the patient from transfer trolley onto operating table. The practice used to perform this task carries the following potential errors:
                           
                              1.
                              The patient’s body may turn to other side as a result of heavy body weight causing sudden or improper torso movement, (error type ES4).

Higher potential of obstruction and dislodgment of IV infusion, cathedral and/or airways passage during performing this task, (error typesEO1 and EO2).

The patient may not be placed correctly over the bag. This may create musculoskeletal injury and damage tissues, (error types ED1 and ED2).

The bag could be dislocated during the patient’s movement.

The transfer may cause strong head movement, (error type ES1).

The tissue of the arm in the unaffected side could be damaged as a result of slipping the hand under the patient body, (error types ES3 and ED1).

Turning to lateral may cause legs to be crossed and damage leg tissues as a result of high frictions of both legs, especially for an obese patient, (error types ES2, ED1).

Possibility of the arms or legs to slide off the operating table, (error type ES3).

To reduce errors, this practice requires extra operators and effort, (errors types EE1 and EE3).

Further, this practice delays fixing the armboard and other attachments to the operating table until after moving the patient onto it. Such delay prolongs the patient positioning process. The delay may create occlusive pressure on blood vessels and nerves of the arms and legs, especially if the patient is obese (Philips, 2004).


                        Task F2: Ensuring that surgery requirements are met. Repeated use of the C-arm fluoroscopy to ensure the achievement of surgery requirements increases the potential risk of exposing to radiation. This risk may affect the patient as well as the OR team. Existing surgical literature emphasises three further safety risks associated with this task(Benglis et al., 2009; Kepler et al., 2011): These risks are as follow:
                           
                              •
                              Creating excessive posterior location of the venous in one side relative to the other (error type ED3);

Increasing the risk facing patient vena cava and right common iliac vein (error type ED3);

Exposing the lumbar plexus and femoral nerves to potential injury (error types ED3).

The following preliminary questions first arose during our consideration of alternative practices, which could replace the problematic ones described above:
                           
                              1.
                              Whether the patient should be anaesthetised on the trolley; and

What are the best practices for transferring the anaesthetised or unconscious patient from the trolley to the operating table?

ORs in many hospitals (e.g., in most UK and Australian hospitals) have a separate anaesthesia room adjacent to them. The anaesthesia room allows performing the pre-anaesthesia and anaesthesia induction while an earlier patient is still in the OR. Once the earlier patient is moved outside the OR (e.g., to the recovery room), the newly anaesthetised patient is ready to be transferred to the OR. Conducting anaesthesia induction in a separate room can save time for preparing the OR before surgery, thereby improving OR efficiency (Harders et al., 2006). From a BPM viewpoint, it is advantageous to perform the anaesthesia induction on the trolley where:
                           
                              a.
                              there is an anaesthesia room adjacent to the OR; and

there is another patient in the OR.

Otherwise, the patient will be brought to OR directly from the pre-operative area and the anaesthesia induction can be performed on the operating table.

When interviewed after the observed surgery, the operating surgeon stated that having the anaesthesia induction on the operating table has merits but he emphasised that he “never thinks about it” as he followed the steps of his surgeon supervisor during his training in the USA (where anaesthesia rooms are often unavailable).

Following the discussion of the above preliminary two questions and based on the question associated with first practice selection criteria (Table 3), several alternatives were identified by the expert working group to reduce the potential errors stem from the problematic practices, including the following:
                           
                              1.
                              Using the current practices but with a safer way for moving the patient from trolley to operating table.

Conducting the anaesthesia induction on the operating table. The patient should be turned to lateral later on. In order to achieve the surgery requirements and after answering questions associated with the practice selection criteria (Table 3), five practices emerged to achieve this alternative:
                                    
                                       (a)
                                       Relying on flexing the operating table.

Using practice (a) with inserting regular bag under the patient’s hip.

Using practice (a) with inserting inflatable bag under the patient’s hip.

Using operating table with kidney rest.

Using practice (d)with extra bag adjacent to kidney rest.

Conducting the anaesthesia induction on the trolley and then moving the patient to operating table on supine (in the case of having a separate anaesthesia room). The patient should turn to lateral later on.

Using navigation-assisted fluoroscopy instead of C-arm fluoroscopy.

It is important to note here that, unlike in traditional applications of BPM, suitable, preferable or best practice used to perform a task for DLIF patient positioning may differ from one patient to another depending upon the physiological status of the patient.

Alternative 1 comprises the following practices: having a large bag to be place on the operating table before positioning the patient, anaesthetised the patient on trolley and transfer the patient to the operating table with the patient hip over the bag. The patient safety for this alternative could considerable be enhanced if the alternative practices codes ST1 to ST8 suggested in Table 2 are maintained. To improve alternative 1, the following procedure is suggested:
                           
                              1.
                              Use a bag that fits exactly the width of the operating table. This will create no gap between the trolley and the operating table when the patient is moved to operating table (step 8 in the procedure).

Bring a draw board with the trolley.

Move the trolley attached the side of operating table where the patient back should be.

Lock up the wheels of the trolley.

Adjust the height of the trolley to be as the height of top level of the bag over the operating table.

Insert the draw sheet under the patient and over the bag on the operating table.

Roll up the patient to lateral.

Pull the patient to operating table in a slow motion. Insure the patient’s hip over the bag.

Be aware of any head movement and urinal bag.

Remove the board.

Unlock the trolley and move it away.

Anaesthesia induction can be performed on the operating table. The literature supports the feasibility of using this approach for DLIF (see for example (Anand and Baron, 2011; Arnold et al., 2012). The anaesthetist in consultation with the surgeon assesses the patient for mobility status; the conscious patient can be allowed to move to operating table while unconscious, anaesthetised, weak or obese patient should be lifted to the operating table with the help of at least four persons (Philips, 2004). Alternative 2 is applicable and can be used to achieve the surgery requirements. However, this alternative requires the following:
                           
                              (a)
                              There is no bag under the chest or hip of the patient during the anaesthesia induction process; and

The patient should be in supine position on the operating table.

For patients of smaller height, flexing the operating table may be enough to achieve the surgery requirements (alternative 2(a)). In other cases, a small bag may be required to be inserted under the patient’s hip (alternative 2(b)). Using an inflatable bag (alternative 2(c) could be seen as an option. However, an error of leaking or even bag blow up as a result of patient’s weight may create an adverse event. This alternative practice is thus excluded from consideration.

The hospital where the study was carried out (as most hospitals) has a number of operating tables with kidney rest. This could facilitate the achievement of the surgery requirements (alternative 2(d)). Anand and Baron (2011) stress usage of an operating table with kidney rest for most DLIF cases. They emphasise that with elevating the kidney rest, the maximum opening of the space between the ribs and the iliac crest can be obtained to gain direct lateral access to the disc space (Anand and Baron, 2011). However, in an obese patient, the abdominal tissue may also be extended over the bag and this will increase possibility of damaging the tissue (Arnold et al., 2012). An additional suitable bag should be inserted to handle the adnominal tissues (alternative 2(e)). This may not be suitable for all obese cases. Accordingly, the use of kidney rest should be evaluated before surgery.

The environment where the anaesthesia induction could be conducted on the transfer trolley in the anaesthesia room (alternative 3) has already been covered. However, this alterative was excluded from further consideration as there are no anaesthesia rooms attached to the ORs in the study hospital. Where anaesthesia induction is carried out on the patient transfer trolley, attention should be paid during transferring the patient from the trolley to the operating table.


                        Webb et al. (2010) recently studied the feasibility of using navigation-assisted fluoroscopy instead of C-arm fluoroscopy for DLIF (alternative 4). They concluded that using navigation-assisted fluoroscopy does not affect surgical time but it considerably reduces the risk of exposure to radiation. No doubt such technology requires considerable costs for purchasing the equipment and for training the surgical team. Nevertheless, it is worth considering the feasibility of using navigation-assisted fluoroscopy for safety reasons.

With a view to immediate implementation, and in order to reduce disruptions and potential errors stemming from observed practices, the patient poisoning for DLIF needs to be reengineered with the following changes in the positioning process:
                           
                              a.
                              Patient positioning requirements should be evaluated in advance before the day of surgery.

Careful evaluation should be given to obese patients, especially obese tall patients.

Alternative 2(a) or alternative (2(b) may be used for average weight, ordinary size patients.

It is preferable to use an operating table with kidney rest (alternative 2(d) or alternative 2(e)), even in cases that seem to be suitable for alternative 2(a) and alternative 2(b) (just-in-case provision).

Alternative 1 is to be used when other alternatives are not suitable.

Study the feasibility of using navigation-assisted fluoroscopy instead of C-arm fluoroscopy (alternative 4);

All other aspects and requirements of the DLIF patient positioning should be considered.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The main purpose of this study was to demonstrate the potential to improve patient safety of a range of existing approaches used in a novel combination in a sophisticated surgical environment where often unexplained deviation from planned activities occurs. To achieve our goal, we selected the patient positioning for lumbar spine surgery known as DLIF as an illustrative case. DLIF is a good example because it is a relatively new approach with limited literature, specifically on patient positioning. In addition, DLIF requirements make the patient positioning a complex process. Two techniques were selected: HTA/HEI and BPM. Whereas there are limitations in the sole use of HTA/HEI in complex surgical environments, we believe that the concurrent use of BPM principles help overcome these limitations. To the best of our knowledge, these techniques have not been used together so far to improve the safety and performance of a clinical process. We obtained positive findings – in that a set of recommendations emerged for amendments to the current clinical practices of patient positioning for these procedures, such that patient safety is enhanced.

As part of HEI, task analysis is typically used to analyse a work process. Task analysis can be prepared in different ways and HTA is a commonly used approach for HEI. Observation is usually used to record the implementation of the process and to break down the process into different tasks. Tasks are evaluated for potential error using human error taxonomy. Each HTA/HEI approach has different human error taxonomy. Lyons (2009) provides a comprehensive literature and compares 35 HTA/HEI approaches. Undoubtedly, many of these approaches are very effective in evaluating potential human errors in surgical environments – however, our study points to three main limitations:
                        
                           1.
                           HTA/HEI approaches examine lower-level tasks of planned and/or documented practices. It is possible that work may not be implemented with best available practices or that current practices require excessive resources, time, effort and precaution to avoid potential errors.

HTA/HEI approaches are very useful where the potential error stems from human–machine interaction. This may not always be the case in surgical environments, where human–human interaction plays a major role.

In applying the human error taxonomy for evaluating specific tasks, potential errors that stem from practices will remain the same in repeated executions of the task. This may not be the case in surgical environments. A specific task (or practice) may lead to an error in a situation but the same task (practice) may be necessary in another situation based on the patient’s physiological status, which differs from one patient to another.

In order to counter the first limitation, we considered OR as a business entity and employed BPM principles to develop a flexible human error taxonomy that can examine practices, detect the potential errors and select a safer practice taking into consideration the second and third limitations. This taxonomy, known as practice error taxonomy, comprises three interrelated parts; the practice selection modes, the practice error modes and the practice selection criteria. In order to demonstrate the validity of our methodology, the patient positioning for DLIF was observed and analysed. Many of the required tasks are generic and apply to all surgical procedures that require traditional lateral positioning, with relevant practices that are well developed and clearly explained in literature. However, we found that potential errors could emerge from practices used to perform tasks used to achieve DLIF-specific requirements. Excessive precaution and time were exercised by the surgical team to avoid these errors during positioning. Our methodology was found promising in identifying the problematic practices and in recognising alternative safer practices. Alternative practices were analysed and discussed thoroughly – including from the perspective of availability of resources in the hospital. As a result of this analysis, improvements to the work processes were suggested. The main contribution of our work is the development of methodology that overcomes the limitations of the current HTA/HEI approaches by developing a methodology that examines entire practices. Once the problematic practices are replaced with safer practices, the potential errors will be reduced. This opens the door to apply current HTA/HEI approaches more effectively.

Our report was presented to the Anaesthetists and Surgeons Committee (ASC) of the hospital, which took on board the suggestions and recommended immediate change in clinical practices for DLIF and further study.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Having only one DLIF observation may be considered as a main limitation. This was overcome in several ways:
                           
                              •
                              Researchers’ experience and skills: The researchers had good background in research related to errors and surgical flow – PM is experienced surgeon and the chair of Anaesthetists and Surgeons Committee (ASC) at the Bangkok Hospital. NS has observed large number of surgeries in ORs of UK hospitals (see for example (Sevdalis et al., 2007, 2008)). LH has observed large number of surgeries in ORs of Australian, Thai and Chinese hospitals, including surgeries using lateral positioning (see for example (Al-Hakim and Gong, 2012; Sevdalis et al., 2008)).

The method used: In addition to the observation, we relied on information obtained from the literature, the expert group, and the surgical team (the surgeon and his assistant).

Images taking during DLIF: LH examined images taking by a member of the surgical team during observed DLIF, as well as other DLIF surgeries previously conducted in the same hospital.

The input and feedback received from two senior urology surgeons at the hospital (DW, CD) who practiced lateral positioning in large number of surgeries.

Input from the Anaesthetists and Surgeons Committee (ASC) at the hospital: Positive feedback received from ASC was valuable in validating the proposed alternatives.

Non-clinical observers: It should also be noted that carrying out this type of study where non-clinical observers are allowed to assess surgeries in real-time is rather difficult, with researchers reportedly facing severe access constraints (Yin, 2009). This is a problem that was successfully overcome in this study.

The second main limitation is the scope of error taxonomy suggested in this study. We are working in developing more solid error taxonomy for future application. However, the study allows researchers to develop more robust error taxonomies that fit with the dynamic nature of surgical environment based on our findings.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The existing literature shows that HTA is an effective approach for breaking down tasks described by goals into their elements and that with the use of HEI taxonomies potential errors could be detected. However, HTA in association with HEI has the main limitation that it focuses on lower-level tasks. The accumulation of these tasks represents the practice used to perform the upper-level task. It is possible, however, that the practice may not the best possible way to perform the task. We employed the principles of BPM to overcome these limitations within a surgical setting. Our methodology examines entire practices (in our example, practices of patient positioning for surgery) in order to identify potential errors. It aims to recognise and apply best applicable practices that achieve the upper-level key objective of reducing potential errors and enhancing patient safety. DLIF patient positioning was used as an illustrative case. Observation was conducted to gain knowledge on current practices for performing DLIF positioning and a HTA was constructed. Potential errors associated with tasks and practices specific to DLIF patient positioning were identified. Literature was reviewed, and with expert input alternative practices were proposed. Our methodology was found promising. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to use BPM in association with HEI/HTA for the purpose of improving the performance and safety of a surgical process. Future research could use our methodology to improve and redesign other surgical flow processes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The project has been partially sponsored by the University of Southern Queensland and approved by the Institutional Review Board and Ethic Committee at Bangkok Medical Center (BMC), Thailand. Sevdalis is affiliated with the Imperial Center for Patient Safety and service Quality (www.cpssq.org), which is funded by the National Institute for Health Research. The authors are grateful to the support of Dr Matinee Mapping, assistant CEO of BMC. The authors acknowledge the thoughtful time and input of the urology surgeons, (Prof. Damrongpan Watanachote and Dr. Charuspong Dissaranan), who currently involved in similar research on urology. Special recognition of the effort and help is noted for the operating room manager, Ms. Rachanee and the OR nurses Ms. Suneerat and Ms. Jantima. Special recognition is extended to the Anaesthetists and Surgeons Committee (ASC) at BMC for allowing the principal author to present the work to them and for the useful comments and input of the ASC members.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

