@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Lower limb flexion posture relates to energy absorption during drop landings with soldier-relevant body borne loads

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           When landing with body borne load, greater hip and knee flexion may promote knee energy absorption.


                        
                        
                           
                           Landing with body borne load increased the demand placed on the lower extremity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Energy absorption by the lower limb did not increase when landing with body borne load.


                        
                        
                           
                           Participants relied upon extended hip and knee angle when landing with load.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Kinematics

Kinetics

Energy absorption

Impact force

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Fifteen military personnel performed 30-cm drop landings to quantify how body borne load (light, ∼6 kg, medium, ∼20 kg, and heavy, ∼40 kg) impacts lower limb kinematics and knee joint energy absorption during landing, and determine whether greater lower limb flexion increases energy absorption while landing with load. Participants decreased peak hip (P = 0.002), and knee flexion (P = 0.007) posture, but did not increase hip (P = 0.796), knee (P = 0.427) or ankle (P = 0.161) energy absorption, despite exhibiting greater peak hip (P = 0.003) and knee (P = 0.001) flexion, and ankle (P = 0.003) dorsiflexion angular impulse when landing with additional load. Yet, when landing with the light and medium loads, greater hip (R2 = 0.500, P = 0.003 and R2 = 0.314, P = 0.030) and knee (R2 = 0.431, P = 0.008 and R2 = 0.342, P = 0.022) flexion posture predicted larger knee joint energy absorption. Thus, military training that promotes hip and knee flexion, and subsequently greater energy absorption during landing, may potentially reduce risk of musculoskeletal injury and optimize soldier performance.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Musculoskeletal injury is a serious military issue (Kaufman et al., 2000) that often leaves soldiers medically unable to perform their duties (Jones et al., 2010). Besides the detrimental short-term impact on soldiers’ health, musculoskeletal injuries have a high prevalence of reoccurrence (Hauret et al., 2001), which increasingly result in long-term disability and discharge from the military (Gilchrist et al., 2000). Most musculoskeletal conditions, such as soft-tissue or bony disorders, are training-related overuse injuries (Jones et al., 2010) that result from the cumulative effects of repetitive sub-maximal loads that impact the body during physical activity (Hauret et al., 2010). The military is particularly interested in musculoskeletal injury because physical training with body borne loads – such as basic or advanced military training – has been suggested to further elevate the risk of sustaining these injuries (Knapik et al., 2011; Jones et al., 1994). In fact, during military training activities, 82% of musculoskeletal-based disabilities occur in the lower extremity (Almeida et al., 1999), with a majority at the knee joint (Kaufman et al., 2000; Hauret et al., 2010; Shaffer et al., 1999). Knee injuries, such as soft-tissue sprain, strain or rupture, reportedly occur during landing and pivoting maneuvers (Olsen et al., 2004), the same movements that are prevalent during a variety of military training activities (Johnson, 2003). Thus, military training may lead to musculoskeletal injury leaving soldiers unable to perform their duty.

During landing without body borne loads, the human body typically experiences ground reaction forces between two and five times body weight (Zhang et al., 2000), but can reach 14 times body weight (Panzer et al., 1987), and vary depending on landing height (Fathallah and Cotnam, 2000; McNitt-Gray, 1993) or demand (Dempsey et al., 2014). During drop landings with a light body borne load (10% and 18% of body weight, respectively), there is a significant increase in maximal vertical ground reaction force and demand placed on the musculoskeletal system (Sell et al., 2010; Kulas et al., 2008). However, to date, little is known about how the body borne loads, between 20 kg and 40 kg, that soldiers commonly carry during military activities increase the ground reaction force and demand place on the musculoskeletal system during drop landings (Task Force Devil Combined Arms Assessment Team, 2003).

To prevent musculoskeletal injury of the knee during these drop landings, the neuromuscular system must safely dissipate the loading of the passive tissues (Devita and Skelly, 1992) surrounding the joint by actively absorbing the kinetic energy of landing with eccentric contractions of the hip, knee and ankle musculature (Mizrahi and Susak, 1982). While the knee joint and associated musculature are the major contributors to energy absorption during landing (Zhang et al., 2000; Decker et al., 2003), their contributions can be influenced by a variety of factors. Energy absorption during landing is substantially impacted by gender (Schmitz et al., 2007), landing height (Zhang et al., 2000) and landing technique (Devita and Skelly, 1992). For instance, using greater knee flexion reportedly increases energy absorption and decreases ground reaction force during landing (Devita and Skelly, 1992; Kulas et al., 2008). Energy absorption also increases as demand of landing (Zhang et al., 2000; McNitt-Gray, 1993), such as the addition of a light body borne load (10% of body weight) (Kulas et al., 2008), increases. Yet, the energy absorption by the knee musculature purportedly increases at a relatively slower rate than the demand (Yeow et al., 2009), and it is currently unknown if energy absorption increases when landing with soldier-relevant body borne loads.

Landing with body borne load increases the demand placed on the musculoskeletal system (Sell et al., 2010; Kulas et al., 2008), but improving the biomechanical profile of lower extremity, such as using more knee flexion during landing, may increase the amount of energy the knee can safely absorb and decrease the risk of musculoskeletal injury – e.g., ligamentous sprain or rupture. Considering both recreationally active (Kulas et al., 2008) and military (Sell et al., 2010) participants exhibit greater knee flexion while landing with light body borne loads, increasing knee flexion when landing with soldier-relevant body borne loads should be an attainable goal to increase energy absorption and decrease the risk of musculoskeletal injury. But, to date, it remains unanswered how landing with body borne loads, especially soldier-relevant load configurations, increases the demand on the knee musculature, and whether greater knee flexion during such landings translates to greater energy absorption.

The primary purpose of the study was to examine how soldier relevant body borne loads impact lower limb biomechanics, particularly sagittal plane posture, angular impulse and energy absorption of the hip, knee and ankle, during the deceleration phase of a drop landing. We hypothesized that participants would exhibit significantly greater lower limb flexion posture and angular impulse, and energy absorption with the 20-kg and 40-kg as compared to the 6-kg body borne load during the deceleration phase of landing. Understanding whether greater flexion posture during drop landings with body borne load promotes energy absorption of the knee joint may provide an avenue to reduce both risk of musculoskeletal injury and the incidence rate of these debilitating injuries with future training methodologies. Therefore, a second purpose was to determine whether active (greater) lower limb flexion during the deceleration phase of loaded drop landings relates to increased energy absorption by the knee musculature. We hypothesized that greater flexion motion of the lower limb would relate to larger energy absorption at the knee.

@&#METHODS@&#

An a priori power analysis of knee joint biomechanics exhibited during similar dynamic landing task suggests 13 participants are needed to achieve 80% statistical power with alpha level of 0.05 (Herman et al., 2009). As such, fifteen male military personnel participated in this study. Only male participants were recruited as a sexual dimorphism in lower limb biomechanics exists during dynamic landings (Brown et al., 2009). All potential participants self-reported the ability to safely carry loads heavier than 40 kg. Potential participants who reported: current pain or recent injury to the back or lower extremity (previous six months), history of back or lower extremity injury or surgery, and/or any known neurological disorder were excluded from testing. Prior to testing, research approval was obtained from the local institutional review board and each participant gave their written consent. After signing the consent, all participants had their age, height and weight recorded (20.9 ± 3.1 yrs, 1.8 ± 0.1 m and 75.6 ± 11.6 kg).

Participants performed a drop landing task wearing three different, body borne load configurations (light, medium, and heavy) (Fig. 1
                        ). The testing order of the body borne loads were randomly ordered and assigned to each participant from a 3 × 3 Latin Square prior to beginning the study. For the light load (∼6 kg), participants carried a mock weapon and wore a helmet. For the medium load (∼20 kg), participants wore body armor with a fabric ammo panel attached on the anterior abdomen in addition to the items borne for the light load. For the heavy load (∼40 kg), participants wore a standard issue military backpack in addition to the items borne for the medium load.

For the drop landing task, participants stepped off a 30 cm box, landed on both feet, each on a separate force platform, and then quickly cut at 45° angle off their dominant limb and ran 3 m towards their non-dominant side. The dominant limb was defined as the leg each participant reported they could kick a ball the farthest. During each drop landing, three-dimensional (3D) joint (hip, knee and ankle) kinematic and kinetic data were recorded. Specifically, twelve motion capture (240 Hz) cameras (Oqus, Qualisys AB, Gothenburg, Sweden) captured motion data, while two force platforms (AMTI Optima, Advanced Mechanical Technology Inc., Watertown, MA) captured synchronous ground reaction force (GRF) data (1200 Hz). A drop landing was considered successful if each foot contacted only the assigned force platform, each foot landed synchronously, and the cut was within ± 5° of the target angle. Participants performed the drop landings until three successful trials were obtained.

During the drop landings, joint kinematics were quantified from the trajectories of thirty-six (14 mm diameter) reflective skin markers (Appendix A). Initially, the participant stood stationary in a neutral (stationary) position while a high-speed recording was taken. This stationary recording was used to define a seven segment (bilateral foot, shank and thigh, and pelvis) kinematic model using Visual 3D v4.00 (C-Motion, Rockville, MD). The knee and ankle joint centers were calculated with Visual 3D, as the midpoints between the medial and lateral femoral epicondyles and between the medial and lateral malleoli, respectively. While the functional hip joint center was calculated with Visual 3D from a method adapted from Schwartz and Rozumalski (Schwartz and Rozumalski, 2005). For each landing trial, synchronous GRF data and marker trajectories were low pass filtered with a fourth-order Butterworth filter at a cut-off frequency of 12 Hz. The filtered 3D marker trajectories were then processed by Visual 3D at each time frame, and the resultant hip, knee and ankle joint rotations expressed relative to each participant's stationary pose, using a joint coordinate systems approach (Grood and Suntay, 1983; Wu et al., 2002).

To quantify joint moments, the filtered kinematic and GRF data were processed using a conventional inverse dynamics approach (Winter, 2005), with segmental inertial properties defined in accordance with Dempster et al. (1959) in Visual 3D. The resultant hip and knee intersegmental moments were characterized as flexion-extension, while the ankle moments were expressed as plantar-dorsiflexion, respectively. Joint moments were expressed as external moments and normalized to the product of participant body mass (kg) and height (m), while the GRF data was normailzed to body weight (N). Angular impulses were calculated by integrating the respective joint moment–time curves. Lower limb sagittal plane joint power was calculated as the scalar product of angular velocity and net joint moment using Visual3D and normalized to body mass (kg). Total energy absorbed at the hip, knee and ankle were calculated by integrating the respective joint power–time curves and summing the discrete periods of negative mechanical work during the deceleration phase of landing. For analysis, all kinematic and kinetic data were time normalized to the deceleration phase of landing, which was defined as foot strike (instant GRF first exceeded 10 N) to peak knee flexion angle. The deceleration phase was examined because it represents the period of greatest knee load (Boden et al., 2000) and energy absorption during landing.

To determine the effect of body borne load during drop landings, dominant limb kinematic, kinetic and GRF variables were submitted to ANOVA analysis. Analysis was limited to the dominant limb to prevent confounding the statistical outcomes by including the non-dominant limb, which reportedly exhibits substantial differences in lower limb biomechanical compared to the dominant limb (Brown et al., 2009; Borotikar et al., 2008). The kinematic variables included peak hip and knee flexion, and ankle dorsi-flexion angles of the deceleration phase of landing. The kinetic variables included peak hip and knee flexion, and ankle dorsi-flexion angular impulse, and energy absorption at the hip, knee and ankle joints. Peak vertical GRF was also submitted to statistical analysis. Initial statistical analysis revealed no significant trial effect, therefore each dependent variable was averaged across the three successful drop landing trials for every participant. Then the subject-based mean values were submitted to one-way repeated measures ANOVA to test the effect of the body borne load (light, medium and heavy). In analyses where sphericity assumption was not meet, the Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment was applied to the degrees of freedom. Where statistically significant differences were observed, a modified Hommell Bonferroni procedure (Hommel, 1988) was used post-hoc to correct alpha for the probability of committing type I error due to multiple comparisons.

Regression analyses were performed to determine the relation between knee joint energy absorption and sagittal plane range of motion of the dominant limb during the drop landings. Specifically, hip and knee flexion and ankle dorsi-flexion range of motion were calculated as the difference between peak angle of the deceleration phase and the angle exhibited at initial contact of the drop landing and submitted to a simple linear regression analysis to assess their relation with energy absorption at the knee joint. A one-way ANOVA was performed on the regression coefficients for each body borne load (light, medium and heavy) to determine if the regression coefficients differed significantly between loads.

All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software (v18.0, IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) with alpha level of 0.05 set a priori.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Body borne load had a significant effect on peak hip (P = 0.002), and knee flexion (P = 0.007) posture during the drop landings (Table 1
                         and Appendix B). Specifically, post-hoc analysis revealed while donning the medium load, hip flexion (P < 0.001) decreased compared to the light configuration, but similar differences were not evident with the heavy load (P = 1.000), or between the light and heavy loads (P = 0.030, corrected α = 0.025). However, after correcting for Type I error, post-hoc analysis revealed no substantial difference in knee flexion posture between any of the body borne loads (P > 0.026, corrected α = 0.017). Body borne load had no effect on peak ankle dorsi-flexion (P = 0.988).

During the drop landings, body borne load had significant effect on peak sagittal plane hip (P = 0.003), knee (P = 0.001) and ankle (P = 0.003) angular impulse (Table 1). Post-hoc analysis revealed with the heavy load, hip (P = 0.007) and knee flexion (P = 0.012) and ankle dorsi-flexion (P = 0.018) angular impulse increased compared to the light load, while greater ankle dorsi-flexion angular impulse was also evident with the medium (P = 0.008) relative to the light load. Yet, substantial differences in energy absorption were not evident between any of the body borne loads at the hip (P = 0.796), knee (P = 0.427) or ankle (P = 0.161) (Table 1).

During the drop landings, the mean peak vertical GRF was 2.3 ± 0.4 N/kg, 2.5 ± 0.4 N/kg and 2.7 ± 0.4 N/kg for the light, medium and heavy loads, respectively (Fig. 2
                        ). Body borne load had a significant effect on peak vertical GRF (P < 0.001) during the drop landings. The post-hoc analysis revealed substantially greater GRF was evident with the heavy compared to the medium (P = 0.002) and light (P = 0.002) loads, and for the medium relative to the light (P < 0.001) load during landing.

Hip sagittal plane range of motion was found to be a significant predictor of knee energy absorption during the deceleration phase of the drop landings for the light (R2 = 0.500, b = −0.032, P = 0.003) and medium loads (R2 = 0.314, b = −0.031, P = 0.030), but not for the heavy load (R2 = 0.247, b = −0.030, P = 0.059) (Table 2
                         and Fig. 3
                        ). Specifically, with the light and medium loads, knee joint energy absorption increased 0.32 W/kg and 0.31 W/kg for every 10° increase of hip flexion used during landing. Knee sagittal plane range of motion was also a significant predictor of knee energy absorption for the light (R2 = 0.431, b = 0.031, P = 0.008) and medium loads (R2 = 0.342, b = 0.030, P = 0.022), but not for the heavy load (R2 = 0.185, b = 0.025, P = 0.109) (Table 2 and Fig. 4
                        ). For every 10° increase in knee flexion when landing with the light and medium loads, knee joint energy absorption increased 0.31 W/kg and 0.30 W/kg, respectively. However, further analysis found the regression coefficients between knee energy absorption and hip (P = 0.993) and knee (P = 0.930) sagittal plane range of motion were not significantly different between any of the body borne loads. Ankle dorsi-flexion range of motion was not a significant predictor of knee energy absorption for the light (R2 = 0.012, b = −0.003, P = 0.695), medium (R2 = 0.001, b = −0.001, P = 0.928) or heavy load (R2 = 0.011, b = −0.004, P = 0.709), respectively.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Musculoskeletal injuries are particularly concerning to the military, as activities, such as physical training, with body borne loads are thought to increase injury risk (Knapik et al., 2011; Jones et al., 1994). During drop landings, which commonly occur during military activities, the body experiences high ground reaction forces (Zhang et al., 2000). The current outcomes, in agreement with Sell et al. (2010), support the contention that a soldier transporting body borne load experiences significantly greater peak vertical ground reaction force during a drop landing. In the current study, load carriers increased peak vertical GRF 9% and 17% when landing with the soldier-relevant medium and heavy loads, as compared to the light load, respectively. To prevent musculoskeletal injury, the 0.2 N/kg increase in peak vertical GRF between each load configuration must be successfully attenuated by various bony and soft-tissue structures through muscular activity and joint mechanics (Lafortune et al., 1996; Nyland et al., 1994). During landing, for example, vertical GRF induces an external knee flexion moment that must be counterbalanced with eccentric quadriceps activation to prevent collapse of the lower limb. As demonstrated in the current study landing with a heavy or medium body borne load increased knee angular impulse approximately 18% and 37% compared to the light load, and thus, may necessitate larger quadriceps activation to control landing. Therefore, repeatedly landing with body borne load, as commonly experienced with military-style physical training, may potentially overwhelm the lower extremity and elevate musculoskeletal injury risk, especially with soldier-relevant loads (Dufek and Bates, 1990).

Greater energy absorption by the lower extremity during landing is thought to decrease injury risk by reducing the load placed on passive tissues (Mizrahi and Susak, 1982). Even though the addition of the heavy body borne load increased the angular impulse exhibited by the hip, knee and ankle joints during landing as compared to the light load, a similar increase in energy absorption by the lower extremity, i.e. eccentric contraction of the hip, knee and ankle musculature, was not evident. Kulas et al. (2008) previously reported that landing with a light body borne load, 10% of body weight, as compared to the approximately 8%, 26%, and 53% of body weight in the current study, subsequently increased the biomechanical demand, i.e. angular impulse, at the knee and ankle, but also resulted in a similar increase of energy absorption at those respective joints. Previous researchers concluded that the lower extremity musculature increased active attenuation as the demand of landing, such as height (Zhang et al., 2000; McNitt-Gray, 1993), increased to reduce the injury risk of those landings. Both Devita and Skelly (1992), and Zhang et al. (2000) attributed greater energy absorption during the loading phase of the landing to increased lower limb flexion, particularly at the knee. The fact the current participants relied upon greater extension of the lower limb when landing with soldier-relevant body borne loads may explain why greater energy absorption was not currently evident. However, additional study is warranted to determine if energy absorption is, indeed, a modifiable trait when landing with the soldier relevant body borne loads currently adopted.

The extended posture of landing with body borne load may prevent collapse of the lower limb. During landing, the lower extremity must control segment inertias as control is passed down the kinetic chain – from large, proximal to small distal segments (McNitt-Gray, 1991). With the addition of body borne load, the landing limb bears the responsibility of the elevated demand and must adopt an extended hip and knee posture to prevent overwhelming the limb musculature and ensuing collapse. The current participants decreased peak hip flexion approximately 9° and 8° with the medium and heavy loads, and peak knee flexion decreased 5° with the heavy load as compared to the light configuration; however, neither reduction in hip or knee flexion posture while landing with the heavy load were statistically significant after correcting for Type I error. Conversely, Sell et al. (2010) reported peak knee flexion angle increased 6° when landing with a similar, but lighter body borne load, as compared to an unloaded landing. But Sell et al. (2010) tested participants from the 101st Airborne Injury Prevention and Performance Optimization Program, who were approximately eight years older, had more military experience carrying loads and access to training to improve their landing technique. Whereas, the current study participants recently completed advanced infantry training and had previously received no specialized jump landing training. Considering trained athletes can modulate the impact force of landing by altering neuromechanical patterns, such as trunk (Shimokochi et al., 2013) or lower limb flexion posture (McNitt-Gray et al., 1991), additional study is warranted to determine the influence military training and experience has on the lower limb biomechanical profile, particularly knee flexion, exhibited while landing with body borne load in order to mitigate the injury risk of such tasks.

Greater lower limb flexion may increase energy dissipation while landing with body borne load. Larger hip and knee flexion range of motion during the deceleration phase of landing predicted greater energy absorption by the knee musculature with both the light and medium loads in the current study. These experimental outcomes are in agreement with Devita and Skelly (1992) and Zhang et al. (2000), as both reported energy absorption increases when utilizing greater knee flexion postures during landing. In the present study, however, landing with the heavy load did not exhibit a similar significant relation between lower limb flexion motion and knee joint energy absorption. Landing with the heavy body borne load may require an extended posture to maintain large moment arms of the associated musculature and prevent the collapse of the lower limb, which may occur when relying on greater flexion. The fact that the regression coefficients between hip and knee flexion motion and knee energy absorption did not statistically differ between any of the body borne loads (light, medium and heavy), suggests greater flexion posture while landing with the heavy body borne load may still be an important characteristic to reduce injury risk. Energy absorption of the knee purportedly increases when demand of landing increases (Zhang et al., 2000; McNitt-Gray, 1993), but the capacity of the knee to actively attenuate this elevated demand may increase at a relatively slower rate than the demand of the landing (Yeow et al., 2009). As such, increasing the energy absorption by the knee musculature while landing with heavy body borne loads, i.e. 40 kg or more, may require greater eccentric strength of the hip and knees to promote lower limb flexion and a safe landing. Future drop landing studies involving military participants ought to consider assessing hip and knee strength, in order to determine a relationship between increased strength and lower limb flexion, i.e. active energy dissipation during landing. Further study is also warranted to determine if greater lower limb flexion and knee joint energy absorption are attainable biomechanical adaptations with heavy, i.e. 40 kg or greater, body borne loads.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

A potential limitation of the current study was that the drop landings were not done as a stand-alone event, but also required a 45° degree cut immediately following the bilateral drop landing. The coupling of the two events, may have introduced biomechanical variations into the landing responses, as compared to previous literature that only examined drop landings in isolation (Ambegaonkar et al., 2011). Potentially obfuscating a direct comparison to previous literature is the chosen medium and heavy body borne loads, which were approximately 15 kg and 7.8 kg heavier, and drop height which was 20 cm and 15 cm shorter, on average than the loads and landing heights used by Sell et al. (2010) and Kulas et al. (2008), respectively. During landing, both a taller drop height (Fathallah and Cotnam, 2000), such as greater than 30 cm, and heavier body borne load (Sell et al., 2010), such as 20 kg or greater, may increase demand on the lower extremity, resulting in an altered biomechanical response and warrant further study. The altered biomechanical response currently evident, however, may stem from the fact that the center of mass differed between each load configuration, potentially influencing the landing strategy in conjunction with the larger loads. Regardless, additional study is warranted to determine the precise biomechanical differences, such as changes in knee joint kinematics, that result from incremental addition of body borne loads heavier than 20 kg. Additional study is also warranted to determine the precise biomechanical response exhibited by females during landing, particularly when impaired by body borne load, as this study was limited to only male military personnel.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In conclusion, landing with body borne load increased the demand place on the lower extremity, as the participants exhibited greater peak vertical GRF and angular impulse at the hip, knee and ankle joints during landing. Greater peak vertical GRF may increase the risk of musculoskeletal injury during landing. To prevent these musculoskeletal injuries, the demand of landing with body borne load must be actively attenuated by the lower extremity. The current participants, however, did not increase lower limb energy absorption – i.e. active attenuation – while landing with body borne loads, possibly because they extended their hip and knee when landing with load. Yet, participants that exhibited greater hip and knee flexion during landing increased energy absorption of the knee musculature when landing with the light and medium loads. Future research, therefore, ought to examine the influence military training and load carriage experience have on resultant lower limb biomechanical profiles exhibited when landing with body borne loads. It is likely training programs that promote flexion postures and subsequent energy absorption can mitigate injury risk and optimize performance when soldiers land with body borne load.

None of the authors demonstrate any conflict of interest regarding this submission.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by an FY 12 Competitive In-house Laboratory Independent Research (ILIR) Award program from the Department of the Army, Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army – Acquisition Logistics and Technology. The authors thank Ms. Marina Carboni and Mr. Albert Adams for their assistance with this study.


                     
                        
                           Appendix A
                           
                              Retro-reflective marker (∼14 mm) placement.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Segment
                                    Markers
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Trunk:
                                    7th cervical vertebrae, acromion processes (bilateral), sternoclavicular notch, xiphoid process (virtual marker), 10th thoracic vertebrae (virtual marker)
                                 
                                 
                                    Pelvis:
                                    posterior superior iliac spine, anterior superior iliac spine, superior iliac crest
                                 
                                 
                                    Thigh:
                                    greater trochanter, medial and lateral femoral epicondyles, anterior thigh
                                 
                                 
                                    Shank:
                                    tibial tuberosity, lateral fibia, distal tibia
                                 
                                 
                                    Foot:
                                    medial and lateral malleoli, calcaneus, middle cuneiform, second and fifth metatarsal heads
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Appendix B
                           
                              Stance phase (0%–100%) plots for hip, knee and ankle angle (°) and moment (N.m/kg.m) during the 30 cm drop landing for the light, medium and heavy loads. The shaded area represents the portion of the stance that occurs after peak knee flexion during landing.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

