@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Relationship between meanings, emotions, product preferences and personal values. Application to ceramic tile floorings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Relationships between elements of affective design on floor tiles are analyzed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The meanings given to the product can cause the generation of emotions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Both meanings and emotions give rise to product preferences.


                        
                        
                           
                           Functional meanings are less influential on emotions and preferences.


                        
                        
                           
                           Personal values can modify the relationship between meanings and preferences.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Affective design

Product preferences

Personal values

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This work aims to validate a conceptual framework which establishes the main relationships between subjective elements in human–product interaction, such as meanings, emotions, product preferences, and personal values. The study analyzes the relationships between meanings and emotions, and between these and preferences, as well as the influence of personal values on such relationships. The study was applied to ceramic tile floorings.
                  A questionnaire with images of a neutral room with different ceramic tile floorings was designed and distributed via the web. Results from the study suggest that both meanings and emotions must be taken into account in the generation of product preferences. The meanings given to the product can cause the generation of emotions, and both types of subjective impressions give rise to product preferences. Personal reference values influence these relationships between subjective impressions and product preferences. As a consequence, not only target customers' demographic data but specifically their values and criteria must be taken into account from the beginning of the development process. The specific results of this paper can be used directly by ceramic tile designers, who can better adjust product design (and the subjective impressions elicited) to the target market. Consequently, the chance of product success is reinforced.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A review of the concepts, models, and tools related to human–product interaction and affective design allows different types of subjective impressions to be identified. Although the techniques of affective design are largely based on the principles of the Semantic Differential (Osgood et al., 1957), which analyzes the meanings given to the product, other proposals (Desmet, 2002) focus on the study of emotions (triggered within the individual and referring to her/him). Only a few proposals (such as Desmet and Hekkert, 2007; Crilly et al., 2004) consider and distinguish both concepts. Although they refer to different elements (product and individual, respectively), the meanings and emotions generated by a product probably maintain some kind of relationship between them. Some authors (Desmet and Hekkert, 2007; Crilly et al., 2004) assume that the elicitation of emotions is subsequent to the generation of product meanings (and a consequence of it).

Several types of meanings can be distinguished in a product, including aesthetics, functionality, symbolic values, etc., which have been given different denominations in the literature, such as product messages (Monö, 1997), communicative functions (Bürdek, 1994) or roles of product appearance (Creusen and Schoormans, 2005). The aesthetic function is often considered as a separate aspect (Desmet and Hekkert, 2007) and not as a part of the semantic dimension (Bürdek, 1994). Other authors (Crilly et al., 2004) apply the denomination “semantic interpretation” only for what the product says about functionality performance, efficiency, and ergonomics. On the other hand, the semantic components are sometimes included in the aesthetic value of the product (Quarante, 1992).

Regarding emotions, some authors (Norman, 2004; Jordan, 1998, 2000) relate affects (emotions are considered to be a type of affect) with the communicative functions mentioned above. There is no consensus on which emotions can be considered product emotions. Some sources distinguish between primary and secondary emotions, or use terms such as emotional features (Chakrabarti and Gupta, 2007), while others do not take into account these distinctions when it comes to selecting product emotions. The classification proposed by Desmet (2003), based on the type of assessment that generates the emotion, is one of the most complete.

The elicitation of meanings and emotions (from now on, subjective impressions) is part of the process of communication between the individual and the product, and the senses are the starting point (Fenech and Borg, 2007) of this physical interaction. Moreover, this interaction may depend on the type of communication between the product and the individual. In this regard, some works have studied the influence of the intensity of the interaction, depending on the senses involved (Artacho-Ramírez et al., 2008; Vergara et al., 2011) or on the type of interface (image, prototype…) used (Hwang et al., 2013; Sauer and Sonderegger, 2009). Then, after the objective sensorial part of the process has occurred, the subjective sphere comes into play. The information captured by the senses is analyzed, organized, and interpreted, thus enabling the association of meanings to the product, and the elicitation of emotions.

These meanings and emotions will give rise to an assessment of the product, product preferences or, as some authors call it, behavioral responses. Thus, for an interested consumer, the behavioral response is called approach (purchase, use of the product, etc.), while for a disinterested one, the response is an avoidance or withdrawal of the product. But the preferences generated can also depend on the personal reference values. In the process of generating an assessment, a set of factors such as memory, previous experiences, culture, training, internal and learned rules, and also own emotional traits, can all play a part. In the literature all these personal values and criteria are denominated concerns (Desmet, 2002; Fenech and Borg, 2007), sociological values (Mantelet, 2006), or variables (Janhager, 2005). These personal reference criteria are part of the human diversity that should be understood in order to add value in product design and use (Khalid, 2006). Accordingly, this human diversity should be taken into account in frameworks for affective design, since it affects individual design needs (Khalid and Helander, 2004; Helander and Khalid, 2006; Khalid, 2006). Moreover, reference values should be considered as a possible influence on the relationship between meanings and emotions and product preferences: people's emotional responses to products seem to vary between different generations, social groups, nationalities and cultures (Demirbilek and Sener, 2003). Cultural differences can even influence on the product attributes that trigger strong emotional responses (Seva and Helander, 2009).

These elements of human–product interaction (meanings, emotions, preferences, and reference values) and their relationships explained in previous paragraphs can be considered together in a model to understand the Subjective Impressions in Human–Product Interaction (SIHPI). The SIHPI model (Fig. 1
                     ) attempts to fill the gaps identified in previous partial models, taking from each one interesting aspects for the intended objectives. This model is widely explained elsewhere (Agost and Vergara, 2010). The SIHPI model can be used as a theoretical basis for the application of design tools that take into account subjective impressions elicited by the product in the different stages of the product lifecycle, specially design and development.

Some methods are focused on the study of product design elements and their relationship with affective aspects (like feelings, moods or emotions). The Kansei Engineering technique looks for translating customers' feelings into design elements (Nagamachi, 2002; Yang, 2011). These studies are very useful for designers to create products adapted to users' preferences in a specific moment. However, the relationship between specific design elements and product preferences can quickly change with trends, and also depending on the type of product, while the relationship between the subjective impressions elicited and product preferences may be more stable over time. Moreover, personal values have influence over this relationship. For instance: A trendy person will wear fashionable clothes, throughout her/his life. But the design elements of these fashionable clothes, like colors in style, will vary according to trends. So, she/he will always prefer “modern” clothes, but modern style will be associated to different design elements throughout her/his life: red color, fit style, and so on.

In this work a study to analyze these relationships is described. Particularly, the analysis focuses on the relationship between product meanings and emotions, the relationship between both types of subjective impressions and product preferences, and the possible influence of personal reference values on the previous relationship. The products selected for the study were ceramic tile floorings, whose designs are highly influenced by fashion, and consequently by subjective impressions. They are, as defined by Seva et al. (2007), high-involvement products, that is, products that involve people in the purchasing process, are likely to elicit reactions, are usually expensive, and express the purchaser's personality.

To analyze the relationships between the main elements of the SIHPI framework, an experiment with ceramic tile floorings, based on questionnaires, was designed. A detailed description follows.

283 adults participated in the study (158 male, 125 female). A website was implemented for the questionnaires, which were distributed to different types of customers or decision agents of ceramic design: actual or potential users of the product, architects, distributors, ceramic tile designers, etc. The link to the questionnaire was distributed by e-mail to workers of the university, friends and acquaintances of the members of the research group, and to professional associations and enterprises of the ceramic sector. Several gifts were raffled among the participants who filled out the whole questionnaire to encourage participation.

A total of 19 ceramic tile floorings were selected from recent catalogs. They were chosen to elicit very different subjective impressions and product preferences. 3D rendered images of a neutral room were used to show the different floorings. As pointed out by previous authors (Alcántara and Zamora, 2006), the floorings used in the main parts of the house (living rooms, dining rooms or bedrooms) contain a greater emotional component than the floorings for kitchens and bathrooms. Therefore, the elements of the room were chosen to be reminiscent of a neutral living room or bedroom. The images lacked any other decorative elements – except windows and doors – that could influence the subjective response. The format of the floorings was superimposed onto the rendered image and shown in the lower left corner of each image (Fig. 2
                        ).

To obtain the initial semantic and emotional universes, a comprehensive set of adjectives, nouns, and other words related to ceramic tile floorings was compiled from ceramics companies' websites, catalogs, articles, and advertising in specialized journals, as well as words used in previous semantic studies and emotional tools (Lindberg, 2004; Alcántara and Zamora, 2006, Desmet, 2002; Mantelet, 2006). The initial semantic universe obtained consisted of 179 words and the initial emotional universe consisted of 32 words/phrases. To achieve reduced semantic and emotional universes, the affinity diagrams technique (Dahan and Hauser, 2002) was applied by the authors. Some terms with very similar meaning were grouped. Some synonyms and antonyms were clustered using judgments like “It is cozy and comfortable, not at all cold”. This was done to avoid different interpretations of each question and to reduce the number of questions. Antonyms were especially used in judgments related to product emotions, since these are characterized by a bipolar affective nature (Russell, 1979; Fernández-Abascal, 1995). Adjectives related to sensory organs other than vision (the only sense used in the study) were also discarded (e.g. Light or It seems soft and silky).

Professionals of the tile ceramic companies (marketing, commercial, design and development, management departments) reviewed the reduced universes obtained (both for semantics and emotions and also for personal reference values). The 24 semantic descriptors and the 7 pairs of emotional descriptors that were finally used are shown in Tables 1 and 2
                        
                        , respectively. The descriptors used in the study were in Spanish.

For the personal reference values, sources related to sociological values and personality factors were consulted (Rokeach, 1973; Eysenck and Eysenck, 1975; Digman, 1990; Goldberg, 1993), as well as catalogs and advertisements produced by the sector. The group of instrumental values (related to modes of behavior) was selected from the Rokearch approach, although some values have been discarded, and others have been grouped together into a single concept. In addition, a descriptor related to the “search for new sensations” was added, since some articles pointed out the existence of differences between architects and non-architects when it comes to assessing buildings based specifically on that factor (Llinares, 2003). The initial universe of reference values consisted of 37 descriptors. As in the previous cases, the universe was finally achieved through descriptive judgments.

Finally, the sentence “I am interested in ceramic tile floorings. I am very fond of them” was added to the collection, following the recommendation of the ceramic experts who acted as reviewers (Table 3
                        ).

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The chosen (web) interface facilitated distribution and allowed us to gather the data in a centralized way. Texts in Spanish limited the scope of the study. The questionnaires were based on rating scales.

First of all, some demographic characteristics and the personal reference values were gathered from participants. Then, they were shown the 19 floorings. Each subject had to select two floorings: the first one that they would choose for home (or in their work, if they maintained a professional relationship with the product), and the first one that they would reject. These two images were shown afterwards together with a third flooring (Fig. 3
                        ). The third one was the one with the lowest number of responses at that moment. It was chosen automatically with the aim of homogenizing the number of responses about the floorings. The participants were asked to provide answers about the impressions elicited by each of the three floorings using a rating scale with values from +2 (completely agree) to −2 (quite the opposite) in a randomized sequence for each impression.

With the selection of the favorite/worst floorings, we tried to ensure that the floorings caused them strong subjective impressions. With the third flooring we tried to balance the number of answers of each flooring.

Finally, they were asked to give their product assessment rating (with a score of 0–10) of the three floorings (0 least valued, 10 most valued).

All the statistical analyses were performed with the software application SPSS (PASW Statistics 18©). Four analyses were performed.

In order to reduce the data to a structure that was easy to handle and understandable, three Factor Analyses (FA) were conducted. Principal Component Analysis with Varimax Rotation was used for the extraction of components. The ratings of the 24 semantic descriptors, 14 emotional descriptors (grouped in 7 pairs of antonyms), and 23 judgments about reference values were taken as independent variables. For the first two analyses, 849 (283 × 3 images) cases were used, while for the last one 283 were used (1 per participant).

The factors that were selected were the ones with eigenvalues above 1, either for the rotated components or for the original components prior to rotation; that is to say, the factors chosen were the ones considered to provide the best and most comprehensive structure in each case.

The semantic and emotional structures were interpreted by taking into account the variables with significant loads, according to the sample size (Hair et al., 2000).

As only one factor was extracted for emotions, this relationship was performed by applying forward-step linear regression analysis. The emotional factor (EF) was considered as the dependent variable, and the semantic factors (SFs) were taken as the independent ones.

Analysis of correlations was applied to check the relationship of the SFs and EF (subjective impressions) with the product preferences. Product Assessment (PA, the flooring rating from 0 to 10) was adopted as a representation of the product preferences.

Both Spearman's and Pearson's correlation coefficients of the subjective impressions with the PA were initially used. Not all the variables used in this case followed a normal distribution, so the non-parametric correlation had to be used. However, as similar results were obtained, only Pearson's coefficients will be shown afterwards, as they are considered more powerful. Partial correlations coefficients were also computed.

The next step was to analyze whether the relationship of meanings and emotions with product assessment could differ depending on the reference values of subjects.

First of all, the reference value factors were transformed into binary coded variables to allow classifying participants in groups. For each factor, a cut-off value (corresponding to zero in the score of the original variables) was found, so as to be able to distinguish between the participants that are defined as positive or negative in terms of the factor. Thus, from each factor, a new qualitative variable was created: VFgroup = 0 (if the subject has been assessed below the cut-off value), and VFgroup = 1 (if he/she has been assessed above that value). This cut-off point was calculated as the value of the factor for a neutral (0) value of all the original variables. In this way, groups of people can be distinguished according to their personal reference values.

An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to verify that there were no significant differences between the groups created by the new binary variables for the SFs, EF, and the PA, so that the groups were homogenous in terms of meanings, emotions, and global assessment. If this were not true, i.e., if there were significant differences between groups for any of the variables, the differences observed in the relationship could be due to these differences and it would be a false result.

Then, in order to analyze the influence of the reference values on the relationship of meanings and emotions with product assessment, correlations of semantic and emotional factors with the overall product assessment were repeated, but this time distinguishing between population groups according to their personal reference values (VFgroup).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

For meanings, nine semantic factors were extracted. As indicators of the goodness-of-fit of the analysis (Hair et al., 2000), the Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO) measure was used to indicate the sampling adequacy (0.9 > 0.6), Bartlett's test of sphericity was significant (p < 0.001), and the total variance explained by the model was over 80%. The results of the rotated components of each factor can be seen in Table 4
                        , although only components with a value above 0.3 are shown, according to the sample size (Hair et al., 2000).

The nine SFs could be interpreted and named as follows:
                           
                              
                                 SF1 Simple, versatile. This explains more than 24% of the variance and consists of adjectives like simple, timeless and balanced, which could be seen as symbolic values. It is also associated to functional values, with adjectives like versatile and functional. Simplicity of the flooring is associated with versatility and timelessness. So the most important semantic factor shows that simple floorings will last for more time (people will not get tired of them). Moreover, simple floorings will be more versatile (changes in decoration will not come into conflict with the flooring).


                                 SF2 Innovative, designer flooring. This also explains a high percentage of the variance (>20%). It encompasses meanings again related to mainly symbolic names (in this case with innovation and avant-garde), and to aesthetic values, through adjectives such as decorative or designer flooring.


                                 SF3 Light. This is related to an aesthetic value: brightness and spaciousness, which is grouped with a perception of cheerfulness. Hence, bright floorings (those with nice, light colors) provide a greater feeling of spaciousness.


                                 SF4 Resistant; SF5 Slippery; SF6 Easy to clean. The percentages of variance explained are small (slightly more than 4% each one). These factors are related primarily to a single original variable, but these three factors are also clearly related to functionality and use.


                                 SF7 Homely; SF8 Expensive-looking; SF9 Natural. Similar to the three factors above, these are related primarily to a single original variable with a similar percentage of variance explained, although in this case the factors relate to symbolic values.

Only the first three factors account for variance of several original variables while the other six factors (SF4, SF5, SF6, SF7, SF8, SF9) are related to only one original variable. This means that the six variables to which they relate are perceived almost independently, regardless of the rest of the questions in the questionnaire.

In the Factorial Analysis of emotions, a single emotional factor was identified (rotated eigenvalue = 5.294) which can explain 75.63% of the variance (Table 5
                        ). The KMO value (0.934 > 0.6) and the significance level of the Bartlett's test (p < 0.001) confirm the adequacy of implementing factorial analysis.

Eleven factors for personal reference values were identified (Table 6
                        ). The solution explains 76.16% of the variance. KMO (0.771 > 0.6) and Bartlett's test of sphericity (p < 0.001) show the goodness-of-fit of the analysis.

These eleven factors can be interpreted and named as follows:
                           
                              
                                 VF1 Sophistication and fashion. The factor with the highest percentage of explained variance (11%) is related to elegance and trends criteria.


                                 VF2.Compliance and integrity. The next factor in proportion of variance explained (almost 8.68%) refers to personal skills such as responsibility, discipline, or honesty.


                                 VF3 Reflexive. The third factor brings together descriptors relating primarily to decision-making.


                                 VF4 Reserved. This refers to a reserved and restrained character.


                                 VF5 Tolerant, optimistic. This represents a tolerant and optimistic mentality.


                                 VF6 Neat, demanding. The biggest burdens correspond to the adjectives “Neat, clean” and “Demanding, perfectionist, used to quality”. The burden of this second descriptor is divided with the factor FC3, although with lower weight.


                                 VF7 Safety. This refers to the preference for safety, by grouping the descriptors “I like safety”, “I prefer to follow rules than to improvise or to search for new sensations” and, with a negative coefficient, “Imaginative, creative”.


                                 VF8 Ceramic interest. This is related with people with a special interest in ceramic paving, although it also considers their taste for careful decoration.


                                 VF9 Practice, VF10 Affectionate, VF11 Ecological. These three factors are related primarily to a single original variable.

Since the SFs are independent of each other and just one factor has been extracted for emotions in the previous analysis, linear regression was applied to analyze this relationship. The SFs are considered as the independent variables and the EF as the dependent one. The intention is to check to what extent the EF can be explained by the SFs.

The results show that the nine SFs are included in the analysis, all of them contributing positively except for SF5 Slippery, which contributes negatively. The total variance explained by the model is 81.3%. Table 7
                         summarizes the information about the coefficients of the regression analysis for the final model obtained in the forward-step process.

Three different groups of factors can be identified. The values of the coefficients show that SF1 Simple, versatile and SF2 Innovative, designer flooring have the greatest influence on the EF. Their meanings are mainly symbolic. The following four factors in terms of influence are SF3 Light, SF8 Expensive-looking, SF9 Natural, and SF7 Homely, whose functions of meaning are essentially aesthetic and symbolic. Finally, the factors with mainly functional meanings (SF4 Resistant, SF5 Slippery, and SF6 Easy to clean) barely influence the EF. In fact only one of them is significant with p < 0.01.

The results obtained show that there is a close relationship between the meanings given to the product and the emotions caused in the subject. However, emotions cannot be completely explained in terms of meanings: the nine factors included in the semantic analysis explain more than 80% of the variance of the EF. On the other hand, not all the meanings given to the product are related with the emotion in the same manner. In this experience, certain meanings, such as SF1 Simple, versatile or SF2 Innovative, designer flooring, present a greater relationship with the emotion generated by the product, while other meanings, such as SF6 Easy to clean or SF5 Slippery, do not show a relevant weight in the generation of emotions (see Standardized coefficients in Table 7). That is to say, the EF maintains a higher correlation with the SFs whose meanings are mainly symbolic or aesthetic, and is not (or is only very weakly – very low coefficients-) related with the factors whose functions of meaning are associated with more functional issues.

Pearson's correlation coefficients are shown in Table 8
                        (left column). All the significant correlations are positive. Only the correlation of SF5 Slippery is negative, but it is not significant. The emotional factor presents the highest coefficient. With regard to the SFs, the most important influence on global assessment of the product is for the perception of simple and versatile (SF1), also with a high correlation. The factors SF2 Innovative, designer flooring and SF3 Light are on a second level of correlation, and SF9 Natural, SF7 Homely and SF8 Expensive-looking are on a third, still significant, level of correlation. Finally, the factors with functions of meaning that are essentially functional: SF4 Resistant, SF6 Easy to clean, and SF5 Slippery, are not significant (Sig = 0.01). In addition, the values of the coefficients are very small (<0.1).

Due to the relationship that exists between the SFs and the EF, an analysis of partial correlations of each factor with the PA was performed, excluding the effect of the rest of the factors in the relationship (Table 8, second column). The only factor that has changed its position relative to the result obtained with total correlations is the EF, as expected. The rest of the factors (SFs) maintained the relative order established in the previous correlation. However, in this case, the values of the coefficients are higher for the last groups of semantic factors, i.e., the ones with a functional meaning.

It has been seen that both product meanings and emotions can directly influence preferences. Even after removing the effect of the meanings in the relationship between emotion and assessment, this relationship does not disappear completely, but continues to maintain a very relevant position (the EF continues to be located in the first group identified in relation to the PA, together with SF1–SF3). This means that the relationship between emotion and product assessment cannot be explained only on the basis of meanings. Emotion, regardless of them, has an influence on product assessment.

In any case, not all meanings and emotions influence product assessment to the same extent. For the sample used in the study, the most influential semantic factors are linked primarily to symbolic and aesthetic meanings, while those related to functional meanings maintain low coefficients, as was already seen in their relationship with the emotional factor.

It should be noted that, in general, the relative importance of meanings on the product assessment does not vary, regardless of whether total or partial correlations are applied. This corroborates the assumption that the generation of meaning is prior to emotions (Desmet and Hekkert, 2007; Crilly et al., 2004), and that meanings are to a large extent responsible for the generation of emotions. Therefore, in the analysis of the relationship between meanings and product assessment, we could have used the simpler option: total correlations. In contrast, the relationship of emotion with product assessment should be analyzed with partial correlation or regression analysis because the relative influence of emotion with regard to the rest of the factors changes with the type of analysis.

The groups of total cases created with the reference values for the binary variable VFgroup2 Compliance and integrity were 843 for positive and 6 for negative. This number was considered very small, so that this variable was discarded in the analysis. For the rest of the variables, the distribution of cases ranged from 465 to 384 in the most homogeneous split to 771-78 in the least homogeneous. In these cases, the sizes of the groups provided enough power to detect small and medium-sized differences for mean values with an ANOVA, in line with Cohen (1992) (with a power of 80% and significance level of 0.05). The exact power was calculated in accordance with Faul et al. (2007).

In all, 110 ANOVAs were performed (10 independent variables VFgroup × 11 dependent variables) to verify significant differences between the groups created by the new binary variables for the SFs, the EF, and the PA. Only in nine of them the differences were statistically significant, in spite of the high level of power to find them. Thus, it may be concluded that the groups for these 10 reference values can be considered homogenous in terms of meanings, emotions, and global assessment and, if any change is observed in their relationship, it will be a real effect of the reference values of the subjects. Moreover, these nine differences could be due to the way the floorings were chosen. It should be remembered that each participant selected two of the products to assess, and the third was assigned at random. So each group could have answered about different floorings. For instance, floorings number 1 and 5 (very bright ones) have been often chosen as “the favorite flooring” (36.4% of the times) by participants who define themselves as neat and demanding (VFgroup6 = 1). Nevertheless, they have been chosen only 13.4% of the times for the rest of the subjects (Fig. 4
                        ).

Perhaps some differences would not have been detected if all participants had answered about the same floorings. However, as stated before, the 10 pairs of groups can be considered homogenous in terms of meanings, emotions, and global assessment, in spite of the possible differences in the chosen floorings.

Once confirmed that the groups were homogeneous, the correlation coefficients of SFs and EF with the global PA (previous results) have been compared to the ones obtained when distinguishing groups of personal reference values (for VFgroup = 1 and VFgroup = 0). Fig. 5
                        , below, shows the values of the correlation coefficients of SFs and EF with the global PA, and also with the PA when distinguishing groups of personal reference values. For non- significant correlations, the shading is omitted.

The correlations obtained showed that the relationship between the semantic factor SF1 Simple, versatile and the PA is not altered by the distinction of groups based on the reference values. And the relationship between the EF and the PA also remains without changes. It should be noted that SF1 and EF are the factors that are most strongly related to the PA. On the other hand, the relationship between SF6 Easy to clean and the PA changes when distinguishing the groups VFgroup 5, VFgroup 6, VFgroup 7, VFgroup 8, VFgroup 9, VFgroup 10, and VFgroup 11. Although general results show that SF6 do not maintain a significant relation with the PA, those who consider themselves neat and demanding, practical, or those who look for safety, do relate easy to clean with the PA.

Furthermore, the relationship between SF9 Natural and the PA changes when distinguishing the groups VFgroup 1, VFgroup 3, VFgroup 4, VFgroup 5, VFgroup 9, and VFgroup 11. For instance, individuals who consider themselves thoughtful, practical or ecological people do not relate naturalness with the PA significantly.

From the groups created from the new variables, other interesting results can also be observed. As an example, in relation to VFgroup1 – Sophistication and fashion, the individuals that are defined as interested in sophistication and fashion (VFgroup1 = 1) show a higher correlation coefficient between SF2 – Innovative, designer flooring and the PA (0.539) than the other group (0.292), although both are statistically significant. Moreover, those who define themselves as sophisticated do not relate SF7 Homely and SF9 Natural with the PA, while the ones not defined as sophisticated (VFgroup1 = 0) do maintain a significant correlation (Fig. 5).

Other significant changes are: those who do not consider themselves tolerant and optimistic people (VFgroup5 = 0) relate easy to clean (SF6) with the PA, whereas the rest of the individuals do not. Individuals who define themselves as neat and demanding (VFgroup6 = 1), and the ones who define themselves as practical (VFgroup9 = 1) relate SF6 Easy to clean positively with the PA. This relationship is not significant without distinguishing groups. On the other hand, those who do not consider themselves as affectionate or familiar (VFgroup10 = 0) do not correlate SF7 with the PA, while in the general case this relationship is significant, with a significance level of 0.01.

Therefore, it seems that some distinctions about the meanings that have the most influence on product preferences can sometimes be identified, depending on the predominant reference values in each individual.

The SIHPI model considers product meanings and emotions elicited (design for impressions). The analyses have shown that meanings given to the product and emotions elicited are very close concepts; emotion can be explained on the basis of meanings to a large extent. In addition, they can both directly influence the product preferences.

In this study, nine semantic factors belonging to the functional, aesthetic and symbolic fields were extracted, which corresponds to the types of meanings, product messages (Monö, 1997), roles (Creusen and Schoormans, 2005) or communicative functions (Bürdek, 1994) mentioned in the introduction. On the other hand, emotions have been identified as only one factor, which means that all emotions are almost the same, at least for this product and the emotions considered here. This fits the view of considering emotions as affects, with a (high or low) intensity and a (positive or negative) valence (Fernández-Abascal, 1995). Our results show that the emotional factor is only characterized by the scores (intensity) and their sign (valence).

Not all the meanings are related to emotion with the same intensity. In our experience, functional SFs are not, or are only very weakly, related with EF. As we could expect, aesthetics and symbolic meanings are more related to the generation of product emotions. The emotional factor is strongly related to product assessment, although in the analysis of partial correlations this relationship is weaker, because emotion can largely be explained from the meanings.

It has also been noted that both meanings and emotions are related to the product assessment, taken as a representation of the product preferences. In particular, it has been found that preferences are related to a greater extent with semantic factors with symbolic or aesthetic functions. The emotional factor is strongly related to product assessment, although in the analysis of partial correlations this relationship is weaker, because emotion can largely be explained from the meanings.

Furthermore, the SIHPI framework also considers personal values. Some distinctions in the meanings that most influence the product preferences are identified in some cases, depending on the predominant reference values in each individual. This could be an important result to better characterize target customers and markets (or even other factors, like economic fluctuations), not only with demographic and sociological data, but also with personal and cultural values. For instance, some people who are more influenced by sophistication and fashion will be willing to pay higher prices for certain products that consider ‘high-level’. In any case, the specific conditions of the study should be considered. The sample of product focuses on floorings intended to the living room, with varied design features (colors, sizes, etc.). The floorings have been represented through 3D images published in a web page. In addition, other factors relevant to the decision (like the price) have not been taken into account. Future work could confirm whether (for instance), for kitchen or bathroom floorings, functional meanings are more related to preferences or not.

The study allows establishing the conditions to incorporate the customer as a collaboration agent in the ceramic tile product design and development (and also in other types of products, with similar characteristics: mature technology for production and designs that change continuously with fashion trends). A similar analysis should be performed for other types of floorings, depending on the initial requirements established in the conceptual design phase (for instance: we are looking for a design for practical people; the product should seem functional, useful, natural, easy to clean, long-lasting…). First, subjective impressions that are closely related to the preferences of the target customers should be identified. Then, throughout the development process, designs should be checked, in order to confirm that they really elicit these intended subjective impressions on the target customers. The incorporation in the design process of early revisions of affective requirements can increase the chance of success for products under development.

Next step could consist on studying the relationship of specific design attributes of ceramic tile floorings with subjective impressions and preferences. Nevertheless, as it was pointed before, this relationship is expected to be less stable over time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The theoretical models and tools for affective design proposed in the literature usually focus on the measurement of meanings given to the product or on the emotions generated. Both aspects have been considered jointly in this study. In addition, the reference values of the participants (personal criteria, rules, concerns, etc.) have been taken into account in the relationship of meanings and emotions with product preferences.

A questionnaire was designed and distributed to different types of customers of ceramic tile floorings via the web. Several factorial analyses applied to the responses showed that nine semantic factors (Simple, versatile; Innovative, designer flooring; Light; Resistant; Slippery; Easy to clean; Homely; Expensive-looking; Natural), only one emotional factor, and eleven factors of reference values (Sophistication and fashion; Compliance and integrity; Thoughtful; Reserved; Tolerant, optimistic; Neat, demanding; Safety; Ceramic interest; Practice; Affectionate; Ecological) were perceived.

Results from the study suggest that both meanings and emotions elicited by a product must be taken into account in the generation of the product preferences. The meanings given to the product can cause the generation of emotions, and both types of subjective impressions give rise to product preferences. Besides, customers' personal values influence the relationship between subjective impressions and preferences. Thus, in the particular case of our experience, functional meanings become influential only for some customers' groups, based on their personal reference values. Knowledge about personal values of target customers, and about the meanings and emotions that really influence product preferences, will make easier for designers to better adjust product design, reinforcing the chance of product success.

These considerations can be helpful to ceramic tile design and development process, since they allow incorporating the customer as a key affective design agent from conceptual stage. Customers' subjective impressions and product preferences can be taken into account from the beginning, when only conceptual images or prototypes are developed.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We thank the Fundació Caixa Castelló-Bancaixa and the Universitat Jaume I for the economic support of the project Ref P1-1B2008-21.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

