@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Prevalence and predictors for musculoskeletal discomfort in Malaysian office workers: Investigating explanatory factors for a developing country

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           High prevalence of MSD discomfort was reported in a population of Malaysian office workers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Predictive models for MSD discomfort in Malaysia were similar to those in developed countries.


                        
                        
                           
                           Cultural influences may explain differences in relative importance of MSD discomfort predictors.


                        
                        
                           
                           MSD risk management should address cultural differences to be maximally effective.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Musculoskeletal disorders

Risk

Discomfort

Office workers

Prevalence rate

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) are a major occupational health issue for workers in developed and developing countries, including Malaysia. Most research related to MSDs has been undertaken in developed countries; given the different regulatory and cultural practices it is plausible that contributions of hazard and risk factors may be different. A population of Malaysian public service office workers were surveyed (N = 417, 65.5% response rate) to determine prevalence and associated predictors of MSD discomfort. The 6-month period prevalence of MSD discomfort was 92.8% (95%CI = 90.2–95.2%). Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) analyses was used to compare a range of models and determine a model of best fit. Contributions associated with MSD discomfort in the final model consisted of physical demands (61%), workload (14%), gender (13%), work-home balance (9%) and psychosocial factors (3%). Factors associated with MSD discomfort were similar in developed and developing countries but the relative contribution of factors was different, providing insight into future development of risk management strategies.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) are a major work-related problem, comprising a third of all compensable diseases in North America, the Nordic countries and Japan (Punnett et al., 2005), similar figures are reported in other countries (Australian Safe and Compensation Council (ASCC), 2006; Linaker et al., 2011). High financial and social costs have been reported despite a significant focus on reducing the incidence of MSDs (Linaker et al., 2011). Occupational influences on MSD development are significant, up to 37% of all back pain has been linked to workplace exposures; however, large variations between countries have been identified (Punnett et al., 2005). Analysis undertaken as part of the global burden of disease study (Driscoll et al., 2014), estimated that disability adjusted life years (DALYs) for low back pain were 331 in Australia compared to 482 in South East Asia, where a large reliance on highly intensive argicultural practices contributes significantly to these differences; further insights are required to understand why these differences occur and the role of work organisation in the development of MSDs. These figures also do not include informal workers nor cumulative exposures and so are considered indicative of risk rather than absolute figures. This study aims to address the knowledge gap regarding MSD discomfort in the context of a developing country.

A number of frameworks describe the multifactorial nature of MSD development with contributions from physical and psychosocial workplace factors (e.g. National Research Council, 2001; Bongers et al., 2006; Karsh, 2006). However, most of these frameworks have been constructed in developed countries where formalised compensation and insurance schemes operate and significant attempts have been made to reduce the large numbers of MSDs over the past two decades. Developing countries typically have less formal systems and risk management aimed at reducing MSD hazard and risk factors is relatively recent and in its early stage of development.

The contribution of physical and psychosocial factors to the development of MSDs is well accepted with a strong evidence base to support contributions from a range of workplace hazards (NRC, 2001; Oakman and Chan, 2015; Widanarko et al., 2015). In particular, interactions between physcial and psychosocial factors have been linked with increased development of musculoskeletal symptoms (Widanarko et al., 2012, 2015). Although the relative contribution of factors may vary between workplaces, evidence suggests that even in physically demanding work, psychosocial factors are an important predictor of MSD development (Gerr et al., 2014).

Office work has been linked with high rates of MSD prevalence (van den Heuvel et al., 2006; Janwantanakul et al., 2008), through exposure to physical and psychosocial stressors in the workplace. Prevalence rates of MSD in office workers have been reported from 19% to 84% (Blatter and Bongers, 2002; Harcombe et al., 2009), this large variation is expected given the vastly different working environments and measures used across the different studies (Marras et al., 2009). In Malaysia, three studies were identified which had investigated MSDs in office workers (Premalatha and Noor Hassim, 1999; Abdul Rahman and Atiya, 2009; Mahmud et al., 2014). Work-related upper limb disorder (WRULDs) prevalence rates for office workers were reported as 33% in public (Abdul Rahman and Atiya, 2009) and 31% in private sector employees (Premalatha and Noor Hassim, 1999). Another study by Mahmud et al. (2014) analysed MSD complaints and whether a training program had reduced the number of complaints by body area but did not report an overall prevalence rate.

The importance of work organisation and culture on MSD development (Carayon et al., 1999; Janwantanakul et al., 2009) suggests a need for studies to be culturally specific, particularly in cases where different organisational or religious practices operate. An important factor in developing effective risk management strategies is the identification of relevant hazard and risk factors. We argue that as Malaysia is a developing country, identifying relevant predictor models are needed to explore the most relevant factors in predicting MSD discomfort. To date little exploration of MSDs in office workers based in developing countries has been undertaken. The aim of the current study is to estimate the prevalence of MSD discomfort in Malaysian public service office workers. Secondly, a model describing relevent predictors—psychosocial and physcial—of MSD discomfort will be developed. These findings will contribute towards a body of knowledge needed to inform development of intervention strategies to reduce MSD discomfort in developing countries such as Malaysia.

@&#METHODS@&#

This cross-sectional study was conducted with public sector employees based in the city of Putrajaya, Malaysia. Twenty-two public sector organisations were contacted and invited to participate, with four organisations agreeing to participate on the condition of anonymity for organisations and individuals that participated. Eligible employees were over 18 years of age and currently employed by the organisation, 636 potential office based workers were identified as potential participants in the study. Participation in the study was voluntary. The first author (IM) administered the questionnaire which took 20–30 min to complete. Respondents were provided with time and a separate room to complete the questionnaire during normal working hours.

The questionnaire was modified from one previously administered in a number of Australian workplaces (Oakman et al., 2014). The tool was translated into Malay using a back translation procedure to ensure consistency across different languages and maximum accuracy in the translated version (Brislin, 1970). Pilot testing was undertaken on 12 participants before distribution to all respondents. Participants commented on various aspects of the questionnaire, such as the use of appropriate terminologies for the type of office work undertaken in each organisation, and on the distribution procedure for participants. Comments were assessed and used to make minor adjustments to improve clarity of the questionnaire distributed to the organisations. Each participating organisation approved the conduct of the survey. Ethics approval was obtained through the La Trobe University Human Ethics Committee (No. FHEC12/092).

The questionnaire included questions relating to demographics, job satisfaction, work-home balance, physical and psychosocial hazards, and MSD discomfort, full details are reported elsewhere (Oakman et al., 2014).

Demographic information was collected on: age, gender, length of service, and work location.

A single item on both job satisfaction and work-home balance was measured on a 5-point scale (1 = very dissatisfied, 2 = dissatisfied, 3 = neutral, 4 = satisfied, and 5 = highly satisfied) (Oakman et al., 2014).

A 12-item measure of physical hazards and 4-items on workload were used with a 5-point response scale (1 = never or hardly ever, 2 = seldom, 3 = sometimes, 4 = often, 5 = almost all the time) (Oakman et al., 2014). Reliability of the physical hazards and workload scale was 0.80 and 0.89, respectively.

Twenty-six items from the Work Organisation Assessment Questionnaire (WOAQ) (Griffiths et al., 2006) were used to assess workplace psychosocial hazards using a 5-point scale (1 = major problem, 5 = very good). Cronbach's alpha for WOAQ was 0.93.

Participants were asked to indicate if they had experienced discomfort toward the end of the work day in the past six months (yes/no). Those who responded yes were asked to record frequency and severity of their symptoms across five body regions: 1) neck & shoulder, 2) hands & fingers, 3) arms, 4) middle to lower back, and 5) hips, bottom, legs and feet (Macdonald et al., 2007). Frequency was recorded on a scale of 0–4 (no discomfort to almost always), and severity from 1 to 3 (mild, moderate to severe discomfort). Scores were calculated for each region by multiplying frequency and severity. These scores were then added together to form an overall score out of a possible 60. Cronbach's alpha for this scale was 0.92. This question formed the outcome measure of self-reported MSD discomfort.

Descriptive statistics were used to describe the study population (see Table 1
                        ) and bivariate correlations used to examine the relationship between dependent and independent variables.

Data cleaning was conducted to identify missing data, two variables – physical demands and psychosocial factors (WOAQ) were found to have 8% of cases missing. Mean replacement method (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2005) was used to replace missing values and analyses were conducted with and without missing variables. No significant differences were found in the results of the respective analyses. Final model analysis was undertaken using data with mean replacement values.

The study utilised Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC), based on information theory (Akaike, 1974; Burnham and Anderson, 2002) to determine a best-fit model of predictors for explaining MSD discomfort in the Malaysian context. AIC modelling offers a way to draw inferences from a set of multiple competing hypotheses (Johnson and Omland, 2004; Symonds and Moussalli, 2011). As distinct from evaluating a single model, competing models are compared to each other, and the relative support in the observed data for each model is then assessed (Johnson and Omland, 2004).

Prior to conducting AIC analysis, a global model was constructed with potential predictors of MSD discomfort taken from the questionnaire. AIC theory assumes that if the global model fits, that is statistically significant, then simpler versions of the model will also fit. Hierarchical multiple regression was used to test model fit (Table 3
                        
                        ) (Symonds and Moussalli, 2011).

Six models were created utilising factors from the global model, aiming to evaluate the combination of predictors best suited to explain MSD discomfort amongst office workers and then compared using Akaike's Information Criteria (AIC) (See Table 4
                        ). The best–suited model in relation to MSD discomfort is explained by the lowest AIC score (Burnham et al., 2011). Delta AIC (Δi) and AIC weights provide information on the strength of the model (Burnham and Anderson, 2004). The focus on AIC is the model strength not level of significance as in other regression modelling. Evidence ratios (ER) were also calculated which provides a measure of how likely the best model is to predict the outcome in comparison to the other models (Burnham and Anderson, 2002; Symonds and Moussalli, 2011).

Data analysis was undertaken with females only to assess the impact of the high proportion of female participants. No significant differences were found in the global model (data not shown). All models presented were undertaken using data from males and females. All statistical analysis was conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics 21.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The final sample of 417 participants had a mean age of 34.2 (SD = 8.9), representing a response rate of 65.5%. The majority of the participants were females (333) with 84 males. According to records from the Malaysian Public Service Department, this is indicative of the underlying population of workers. Most workers were between 20 and 39 years (82%), and working between 40 and 54 h per week (82%). In addition, most participants in this study were permanently employed workers (99%) and responsible for dependents either children and/or parents (89%) (See Table 1).

In response to the question asking participants if they had experienced discomfort toward the end of the work day; a 6 month point prevalence of MSD discomfort was 92.8% (95%CI = 90.2–95.2%), with 93.4% of female and 90.5% of male office workers reporting discomfort in the preceding six months.

The bivariate relationship between the discomfort score and all variables is shown in Table 2. MSD discomfort scores were significantly related to all predictors (p < 0.01). MSD discomfort positively correlated with physical demands (r = 0.41) and workload (r = 0.33) indicating workers with higher levels of physical demands and workload also reported higher levels of MSD discomfort. Psychosocial factors were significantly associated with job satisfaction (r = 0.40) and work-home balance (r = 0.36) suggesting that higher psychosocial factors were related to higher job satisfaction and good balance between work and home. In addition, job satisfaction was also related significantly to work-home balance (r = 0.51).


                        Table 3 shows results for the global model where R² = 24, and adjusted R² = 0.23; with 23% of the total variance explained.


                        Table 4 shows six models tested using AIC to determine the model of best fit for MSD discomfort.


                        Table 5
                         shows the results of AIC analysis and relevant models weights. Model 1 had the highest weighting, and thus was considered the model with the best fit for prediction of MSD discomfort. Model 1 had a relative model weight of 0.55 with predictor variables including physical demands, workload, gender, work-home balance and psychosocial factors. The model has a 55% chance of being the best amongst the set of candidate models shown in Table 4. Model 2 and 3 had relative weight of 0.22 and 0.21, respectively.

The evidence ratio for model 1 indicates it is 2.5 times more likely than model 2 to be the model of best fit in predicting MSD discomfort of Malaysian office workers.

The relative importance of predictors in the final model is shown in Table 6
                        . Physical demands were the strongest predictors with psychosocial factors making only a small (3%) contribution to the model. Overall work related factors contributed 78% compared to gender (13%) and work-home balance (9%).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The prevalence rate for self-reported MSD discomfort of 92.8% in this study of public sector office workers in Malaysia is high. Limited numbers of studies undertaken in Malaysia and different reporting measures make comparisons to previous studies difficult. One Malaysian study by Mahmud et al. (2014) examined office workers and associated risk factors but did not report an overall prevalence rate. One study of New Zealand office workers (Widanarko et al., 2011) used a comparable outcome measure and reported overall MSD prevalence rates of 92%. Similarly, Harcombe et al. (2009) also examined New Zealand office workers and reported an 84% prevalence rate of any MSD in the past 12 months.

One plausible contribution to the high prevalence rate in the current study may be explained by cultural factors; employees may feel more comfortable disclosing MSD discomfort or pain symptoms via an anonymous survey rather than directly to their supervisor. Therefore, many hazards and risk employees are exposed to are not being addressed as they have not been reported in the workplace. This is explored in greater depth in a later section. Investigation and risk management of MSDs in Malaysia is relatively new, and so many previously identified risk factors for MSD development may not have been addressed as comprehensively as in other countries. Although Widanarko et al. (2011) and Harcombe et al. (2009) reported high rates, other studies in developed countries examining prevalence of MSDs in office workers have found lower rates (Blatter and Bongers, 2002; Karlqvist et al., 2002).

Differences in organisational practices and work culture may also influence the reporting and experience of pain (Sharan et al., 2011). The nature of the work undertaken may differ between studies and contribute to the variation in self-reported prevalence rates of MSDs across studies. Furthermore, the term ‘office workers’ and/or ‘office work’ may have different meanings between workplaces and one country to another.

An additional aim of the current study was to determine relevant predictors associated with MSD discomfort in a developing country. Six models were reviewed to investigate the most suitable model, relevant predictors were identified (from largest to smallest contribution) as: physical demands, workload, gender, work-home balance and psychosocial factors. This finding supports previous research which has reported a complex multifactorial pathway for the development of MSDs (National Research Council, 2001; Bongers et al., 2006; Karsh, 2006). In relation to office workers, this finding is also consistent (Janwantanakul et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2012).

Workplace factors (physical, psychosocial and workload hazards) made a significant contribution to MSD discomfort amongst this group of Malaysian office workers. However, a key difference in these results is the low contribution of psychosocial factors to the model. This may be explained by the work organisation, practices and culture in Malaysia. These results are inconsistent with earlier work relating to MSDs where psychosocial factors were found to make a strong contribution to the development of MSD discomfort (Oakman and Chan, 2015; Widanarko et al., 2015). In Malaysia, others have reported a low level of awareness in relation to psychosocial factors and adverse health outcomes, which perhaps contributes to the current findings where their role in the model describing MSD discomfort levels was small (Sadhra et al., 2001; Kortum et al., 2011).

A further factor relevant to the limited contribution of psychosocial factors in the development of MSD discomfort may be related to the different organisational practices and cultural values operating between countries. Malaysia has a hierarchical structured work environment with large power differences (Abdullah, 1992); loyalty to leaders is valued, whilst questioning one's superiors is not. In general, workers do not demonstrate negative emotions and dialogue between workers and employers is not encouraged. Idris and Dollard (2011) suggest this contributes to long term ‘health erosion’. These factors are important differences between workplaces in developed countries where communication between supervisors and employees is generally encouraged rather than repressed.

The significant contribution of gender and work-life balance to the development of MSD discomfort is also of interest and relevant to the broader culture of Malaysian society. Others have reported gender to be an important factor associated with MSDs, with women typically reporting higher levels of symptoms than males, often in the upper limbs and neck (Treaster and Burr, 2004; Paksaichol et al., 2012; Widanarko et al., 2014). It is acknowledged that the current study did not undertake analysis by body region and so further comment is not possible. Of relevance to the current study are the prevalent traditional gender roles in Malaysia (Noor, 1999; Subramaniam and Selvaratnam, 2010). Malaysian women are primarily responsible for non-paid work activities, such as household duties and caring responsibilities, even when they are undertaking paid employment outside the home. A recent study (Subramaniam et al., 2015) found whilst women articulated a preference for flexible work arrangements in terms of hours and greater levels of autonomy, in a highly patriarchal country such as Malaysia, access to non-standard work arrangements is limited. As such, Malaysian women face significant challenges in meeting the demands of work and home, and explain the significant contribution of work-life balance to the development of MSD discomfort found in the current study.

These findings suggest that differences in the relevance of predictors for MSD discomfort exist between countries, thus supporting the need for culturally specific identification and management of relevant hazard and risk factors for the prevention of MSDs.

By investigating the risk factors associated with MSD discomfort amongst office workers in a developing country, our study addresses an important research gap; however, some limitations exist. The study employed a cross-sectional design, so causation cannot be inferred. MSD prevalence was self-reported and as such is subject to issues related to this method of data collection, such as recall and selection bias, particularly given the high prevalence rate. A ‘healthy worker’ effect is possible (Arrighi and Hertz-Picciotto, 1994) as workers with MSDs related to workplace exposures may have moved to other organisations and thus not represented in the current study; however, the extremely high MSDs discomfort prevalence rate would suggest this an unlikely finding. Systematic differences in the characteristics of those who did and did not participate is possible but analysis was not possible and therefore represents a potential source of bias. Participation rates differed across the four organisations between males and females; however, restriction of the analyses to females only did not reveal any differences in the final models, and as such is unlikely to influence final results. The study sample was of Malaysian office workers in the public sector, so generalisability of the findings to private sector employees may not be appropriate. Nevertheless, we encourage future researchers especially in other developing countries to replicate our findings, and validate our model with a larger sample of office workers. In particular, longitudinal designs are needed to develop more definitive conclusions about the relationship between causal factors and MSD discomfort.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In conclusion, this study found that prevalence rates of MSD discomfort in Malaysian office workers are high. A range of factors were identified as predictive of MSD discomfort: physical demands, workload, gender, work-home balance and psychosocial factors. A key aspect of the current study was to consider differences between developed and developing countries in relation to MSDs. A key difference was the low contribution of psychosocial factors to the development of MSD discomfort, which is in contrast to findings of previous studies in developed countries. The significant role of work-home balance was an interesting finding. Little research has been undertaken in Malaysia with regards to the relationship between work-home balance and MSDs. These findings suggests differences between models of causation exist, but require further exploration using longitudinal study designs to fully explore the role of the work environment in Malaysia and other developing countries in the development of work-related MSD discomfort.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank the employees and supervisors of four public sector organisations in Putrajaya, Malaysia for their collaboration and participation in this project. The project was primarily funded by Universiti Malaysia Sabah.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

