@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Sex-based differences in lifting technique under increasing load conditions: A principal component analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Differences in lifting conditions between sexes were analyzed under increasing load conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Principal component analysis was used to analyze lifting waveforms.


                        
                        
                           
                           Single component reconstruction was used to interpret principal components.


                        
                        
                           
                           Lifting style was similar between sexes when load standardized to the individual.


                        
                        
                           
                           Lifting technique changed with increasing load.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Lifting kinematics

Sex differences

Principal component analysis

Single component reconstruction

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The objective of the present study was to determine if there is a sex-based difference in lifting technique across increasing-load conditions. Eleven male and 14 female participants (n = 25) with no previous history of low back disorder participated in the study. Participants completed freestyle, symmetric lifts of a box with handles from the floor to a table positioned at 50% of their height for five trials under three load conditions (10%, 20%, and 30% of their individual maximum isometric back strength). Joint kinematic data for the ankle, knee, hip, and lumbar and thoracic spine were collected using a two-camera Optotrak motion capture system. Joint angles were calculated using a three-dimensional Euler rotation sequence. Principal component analysis (PCA) and single component reconstruction were applied to assess differences in lifting technique across the entire waveforms. Thirty-two PCs were retained from the five joints and three axes in accordance with the 90% trace criterion. Repeated-measures ANOVA with a mixed design revealed no significant effect of sex for any of the PCs. This is contrary to previous research that used discrete points on the lifting curve to analyze sex-based differences, but agrees with more recent research using more complex analysis techniques. There was a significant effect of load on lifting technique for five PCs of the lower limb (PC1 of ankle flexion, knee flexion, and knee adduction, as well as PC2 and PC3 of hip flexion) (p < 0.005). However, there was no significant effect of load on the thoracic and lumbar spine. It was concluded that when load is standardized to individual back strength characteristics, males and females adopted a similar lifting technique. In addition, as load increased male and female participants changed their lifting technique in a similar manner.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Low back disorder (LBD) is the most prevalent and costly musculoskeletal disorder in the world (Brooks, 2006; Kumar, 2001, LeBlanc and LeBlanc, 2010; Punnett and Wegman, 2004). It is such a widespread problem that it has been identified by the Pan American Health Organization as one of the top three occupational health problems to be targeted for surveillance by the World Health Organization (WHO) (Choi et al., 2001). LBD is estimated to affect 4–33% of the population at any given time (Papageorgiou et al., 1996; van Tulder et al., 2002; Woolf and Pfleger, 2003), and up to 85% of individuals over their lifetime (Freburger et al., 2009; Papageorgiou et al., 1996; van Tulder et al., 2002; Walker, 2000; Woolf and Pfleger, 2003) with the majority of people being affected between the ages of 25 and 64 years (Nelson et al., 2005). The specific age group affected can be explained by the fact that 37% of LBD has been attributed to occupational factors such as lifting (Nelson et al., 2005; Punnett et al., 2005). The cost of medical care contributes to the large financial burden of LBD. However, indirect costs, such as: days off work, decreased productivity, and insurance claims are also major contributors. The annual cost of LBD in Canada is estimated to be $16.4 billion (Badley et al., 1994; Coyte et al., 1998). In the United States, the estimated annual cost of LBD is between $100 and $200 billion (Katz, 2006).

In terms of sex, earlier studies found that males have higher prevalence of LBD than females (Punnett et al., 2005). Recently; however, studies are reporting that females have a higher prevalence of LBD than males (Freburger et al., 2009). The rising prevalence of LBD in females may be partially attributed to the fact that more females are obtaining employment in physically demanding occupations than in the past. However, there remains to be more males than females in jobs that are physically demanding (Statistics Canada, 2011). Therefore, other factors likely contribute to the rising prevalence of LBD in females. Few studies have investigated the sex-based differences in lifting technique. Lifting technique is important to consider because it gives valuable insight into typical movement patterns. However, previous research has shown that training lifting technique (i.e. squat vs. stoop) is not effective in reducing spinal load (van Dieen et al., 1999), and that training lifting technique is not effective in preventing LBD (Martimo et al., 2008). Thus, new research assessing lifting technique and technique differences between sexes should be innovative, in order to ensure that any workplace strategies for decreasing LBD are effective and transferrable between males and females.

Sex differences in lifting technique were examined directly by Lindbeck and Kjellberg (2001). In their study, participants were required to lift a handled box from the floor to a table located at the level of the umbilicus. Each participant performed two constrained lifting methods at two speeds. The load in the box was 12.8 kg for males, and 8.7 kg for females. The difference in load was assumed to correspond approximately to differences in physical capacity between males and females. Kinematic differences in lifting technique were found between sexes. More specifically, trunk angles were significantly greater for males for all lift conditions. However, a number of limitations were discussed by Lindbeck and Kjellberg (2001). Primarily, the biomechanical model that was used represented the trunk with one segment and, as a result, it may not have accurately represented the spinal curvature of the participants. A second limitation they outlined was that, although the load was different for males and females, it did not account for individual capabilities.

In 2013, Sadler, Graham, and Stevenson completed a study that addressed the limitations outlined by Lindbeck and Kjellberg (2001). Participants were instructed to continuously lift a handled box from the floor to a table positioned at 50% of their height at a lifting rate of ten times a minute for 3 minutes using a freestyle (self-selected) lifting technique. They completed this twice; with a load of ∼0% and 10% of each individual's maximum isometric back strength. Using principal component analysis (PCA), no significant differences were found between males and females. The main limitation in the study was that participants were required to lift light loads, which may be why no differences in lifting technique were found. A second limitation is that participants were required to perform 30 continuous lifts, which may have led to a change in technique or fatigue.

The objective of the present study was to determine if there is a sex-based difference in lifting technique across increasing load conditions using PCA. Based on the study by Sadler et al. (2013) it was hypothesized that: 1) there would be no effect of sex on lifting technique, 2) there would be an effect of load on both sexes, and 3) both sexes would respond the same to the increase in load (i.e. there would be no significant interaction between sex and load). The findings of this research will help determine preferred self-selected lifting technique for males and females. This will help ergonomists and rehabilitation professionals understand whether the same strategies to help decrease LBD in males can also apply to females.

@&#METHODS@&#

Twenty-five participants (11 males and 14 females) participated in the study. Male participants' mean age, weight, and height were 24.1(±4.5) years, 80.2 (±13.1) kg, and 177.5 (±4.7) cm, respectively. Mean age, weight, and height for females were 23.3 (±1.9) years, 65.2 (±15.4) kg, and 163.5 (±6.6) cm, respectively. Height, weight, and maximum back strength were all statistically different between sexes (p < 0.05) as determined by one-way ANOVAs. All participants were healthy with no previous occupational experience in lifting or history of LBD. Prior to testing, each participant read and signed an information and consent form, which was approved by the Queen's University Research Ethics Board.

Each participant completed two testing sessions within one week of each other. During the first session the participants' maximum isometric back strength was obtained by having them complete a maximum isometric back strength test using a modified functional capacity evaluation system and published methods (Arcon Vernova Inc., Saline, MI, USA) (Lotz et al., 2009; Sadler et al., 2013). Briefly, participants were secured to a horizontally-oriented load cell and were instructed to maximally extend their back while keeping their lower body as relaxed as possible. Each participant completed 3 maximal exertions with 3 minutes of rest between trials. The maximum values for the three trials were averaged and used as the participants' maximum isometric back strength. Using the maximum isometric back strength, the lifting conditions were standardized to 10%, 20%, and 30% of each participant's isometric back strength. The mean maximum back strength was 72.0(±25.9) kg for males and 53.0(±10.4) kg for females (p = 0.02). For the 10% load condition the mean load lifted was 7.18(±2.7) kg for males and 5.21(±1.1) kg for females (p = 0.02). The mean load lifted for males during the 20% condition was 14.36 (±5.1), and 10.71 (±2.1) kg for females (p = 0.02). For the 30% load condition, males and females lifted 21.64(±7.8) kg and 15.86(±2.1) kg, respectively (p = 0.02). There was a significant difference between males and females for all load conditions, as determined by independent samples t-tests. Following the back strength test, participants practiced the lifting protocol to become familiar with the testing procedures.

During the second testing session, participants performed a lifting protocol consisting of 5 freestyle symmetric lifts of a wooden-handled box (36.7 cm × 29.2 cm × 25.5 cm with 3.0 cm diameter handles; total mass = box + load) for each load condition (10%, 20%, and 30% of their individual maximum isometric back strength). The order of load presentation was randomized for each participant. Each lift involved the participants lifting the box from a target on the floor to a target on a table (positioned at 50% of the participant's height) (Fig. 1
                        ). One minute of rest was given between lifts and a minimum of 3 minutes of rest was given between load conditions to prevent the effects of fatigue. Participants were free to choose their own lifting style with no step. Foot position was also self-selected and remained constant for all trials. Several practice lifts were provided prior to data collection to ensure participants were familiar with the protocol and verify that the instrumentation was working properly.

Instrumentation followed the protocol used by Sadler et al. (2013). Participants were instrumented with six Infrared Emitting Diode (IRED) triads consisting of three non-collinear markers. Three of the triads were placed on the lateral side of the right foot, shank and thigh. The remaining 3 triads were placed on custom-made fins attached at the levels of S1, T12, and C7. Single IRED markers were placed on the right lateral malleolus and lateral femoral epicondyle. Prior to data collection, virtual markers were obtained using a probe of known dimensions at the 1st and 5th metatarsal of the right foot, right medial malleolus, right medial femoral epicondyle, symphysis pubis, right and left anterior superior iliac spine, and right posterior superior iliac spine. Virtual markers were necessary to calculate the ankle, knee, and hip joint centers using regression equations and were used to compute transformation matrices between marker triads and the corresponding anatomical coordinate systems (Allard et al., 1997; Kirkwood et al., 1999).

A two-camera Optotrak 3020 system (NDI, Waterloo, ON) was used to collect kinematic data at a frequency of 100 Hz. In order to capture the beginning and end of the lift, the bottom of the box and the handles were instrumented with analog switches. The collection for each trial was started with the participant in upright standing with their feet in their preferred starting position.

All data processing calculations and analyses were completed using custom Matlab software (The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). Marker data were lowpass filtered using a second order dualpass butterworth filter with a cutoff frequency of 10 Hz and clipped from the point where the participant placed their hands on the handles to when they let go of the box. The participant completed the lift in a smooth motion with no pauses. Thus the moment of grasping the load is essentially the moment of lift-off. Therefore, the data consisted of the portion of the lift from the floor to the table. Joint angles of the ankle, knee, hip, lumbar spine, and thoracic spine were calculated using three-dimensional Euler rotations (Z-Y-X) (Zatsiorsky, 1998). The lower limb joint angles followed an anatomically based coordinate system where the three principal axes were lateral-medial (Z), posterior-anterior (Y), and distal-proximal (X) (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007; Graham et al., 2011; Sadler et al., 2013). In order to calculate spine kinematics, the triad coordinate systems on the custom made fins (S1, T12, and C7) were used. The custom made fins were necessary in order to get an accurate three-dimensional representation of spinal movement during the symmetrical lift. The directions of these coordinate systems were: positive x-axis upward (twisting), positive y-axis forward (lateral flexion), and positive z-axis to the left (flexion-extension) (Zatsiorsky, 1998).

The angular positions were then normalized to 0–100% of the lift cycle and the five lifts were ensemble averaged to give a single representative waveform for each participant, for each load condition. The ensemble curves were placed in a matrix for analysis using PCA. Trials were eliminated if there was insufficient marker data to calculate joint angles or if the switch was not triggered properly. At minimum, 3 of the 5 lifts were retained for each condition.

PCA is a quantitative method for achieving both data reduction and separating useful parameters from redundant ones (Nguyen and Reynolds, 2009). This is accomplished by representing the observations and the variables simultaneously using a limited number of optimal principal components or features (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007). The features are optimal in that they explain a maximal amount of variance in the original data set (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007). The process involves creating matrices of waveforms, such that every participant's waveform of data were entered as a row vector 
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          X
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             n x p
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                            representing n-observations (waveform) and p-variables (normalized time points) (Wrigley et al., 2006). For the present analysis, the 11 males and 14 females' average waveforms corresponding to each of the three load conditions (10%, 20%, and 30% of individual maximum isometric back strength) were entered as row vectors, yielding 
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          X
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             75
                                             x
                                             101
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                            data matrices for each dimension of the five (5) joints analyzed, resulting in 15 principal component models displayed as:
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          [
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            x
                                                            
                                                               1,1
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            x
                                                            
                                                               1,2
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      …
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            x
                                                            
                                                               1,101
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            x
                                                            
                                                               2,1
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            x
                                                            
                                                               2,2
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      …
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            x
                                                            
                                                               2,101
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      ⋮
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      ⋮
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      ⋱
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      ⋮
                                                   
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            x
                                                            
                                                               75,1
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            x
                                                            
                                                               75,2
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      …
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            x
                                                            
                                                               75,101
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          ]
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        

PCA consists of an orthogonal transformation that converts p variables X = x
                           
                              1
                           , x
                           
                              2
                           , … x
                           
                              p
                            into z new uncorrelated principal components Z = z
                           
                              1
                           , z
                           
                              2
                           , … z
                           
                              p
                            (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007). The principal components are mutually uncorrelated in the sample and are arranged in decreasing order in their sample (Deluzio et al., 1997; Deluzio and Astephen, 2007). That is, the first principal component explains the largest amount of variance, and subsequent PCs describe less variance in the original data set (Khalaf et al., 1999). The principal component model is Z = U
                           
                              t
                           
                           X where the columns of U = u
                           
                              1
                           , u
                           
                              2
                           , … u
                           
                              p
                            are called principal component loading vectors, and are the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of X (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007). Since the eigenvector matrix is orthonormal, the original dataset can be reconstructed by inverting the principal component model X = UZ (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007).

The principal component loading vectors, u
                           
                              i
                           , are an orthogonal basis set for the waveform that represent specific features of the data (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007). The principal component score, z
                           
                              i
                           , correspond to the contribution of the principal components to each individual waveform (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007). Therefore, each individual participant's original waveform is transformed into a set of PC scores that measure the degree to which the shape of their waveform corresponds to each feature.

The advantage of PCA is that if the majority of the variation is explained by the first few principal components, resulting in k < p, where the remaining PCs can be dropped and data reduction is accomplished (Deluzio et al., 1997). From previous research it has been deemed that a 90% trace criteria is adequate to describe the majority of the variation in the data, and capture the primary modes of variation (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007).

Interpretation of PCA is achieved through visual inspection of the PC loading vector, as well as waveforms of participants that scored low and high on each PC (Astephen et al., 2008; Deluzio and Astephen, 2007; Jones and Rice, 1992; Reid et al., 2010; Sadler et al., 2013). According to Brandon et al. (2013), the pattern of variation can often be described by one of three common operators. The first is a magnitude operator, which describes variation in the waveform amplitudes over the entire lift time or within a specific region. The second is a difference operator that describes a change from either having a relatively low to high waveform amplitude. Finally, the third is a phase shift operator, which captures a change in the relative timing of waveform events.

Single component reconstruction was used to interpret the PCs. In this method, the mean waveform is bound by those who score one standard deviation above and below the mean for the specified PC (Brandon et al., 2013). Interpretation is then achieved by visual comparison of upper and lower bands with respect to the mean waveform and the loading vector. Single component reconstruction has been shown to be advantageous to other methods in analyzing PCs, as the reconstructed waveforms for a single PC of interest are not contaminated by variance from other PCs (Brandon et al., 2013).

Statistical analysis of PC scores was completed using SPSS 18.0 (SPSS Corporation, Chicago, IL, USA). From previous research it has been argued that retaining the PCs that explain 90% of the variance in the data set is sufficient to capture the primary modes of variation in the waveform (Deluzio and Astephen, 2007). Therefore, PC scores that met the 90% trace criteria were analyzed for significance using a repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). A mixed design was used, with a between-subjects factor of sex (male, female) and a within-subject factor of load (10%, 20%, and 30% of individual maximal isometric back strength). The dependent variables were the PC scores and the independent variables were load condition and sex. A critical p value of p = 0.005 was considered significant in order to reduce the number of variables while retaining the important aspects of the data. This value reproduced the same significance findings as if we used the False-Discovery Rate correction by Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) (critical p = 0.009).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Thirty-two PCs were retained from the five joints and three axes in accordance with the 90% trace criterion (Table 1
                     ). There was no significant main effect of sex, or interaction effect between sex and load for any of the 32 PCs retained (Table 1). Due to the lack of interaction effects, these data were left out of the table to improve readability. There was; however, a significant effect of load on PC1 of ankle flexion, knee flexion, and knee adduction, as well as for PC2, and PC3 of hip flexion (p < 0.005).


                     Fig. 2
                     a–c represents the PC1 model for ankle flexion. Participants began the lift with 22.0° ± 7.6°, 21.1° ± 8.2°, and 20.5° ± 6.8° of ankle dorsiflexion from neutral standing for the 10%, 20%, and 30% load conditions, respectively. From the start position, individuals began plantar flexing until midway through the lift, followed shortly by a small amount of dorsiflexion, and plantar flexion to the end of the lift where the box was placed on the table (Fig. 2a).

The PC1 loading vector is displayed in Fig. 2b. The loading vector began as a negative value and continued to explain more variance in the data until a quarter of the way through the lift, then gradually increased towards zero (less loading value). The most significant value for the PC1 loading vector for ankle flexion occurred at 26% of the lifting cycle (Fig. 2b). Through visual inspection of Fig. 2b, it is evident that the loading vector for PC1 of ankle flexion was most important for load differentiation from approximately 10%–35% of the lifting cycle.

Returning to the mean waveforms for all load conditions (Fig. 2a), it is evident that at 26% of the lifting cycle (most negative loading value of PC1), the curves for the 10% and 20% load conditions are similar, whereas the waveform corresponding to the mean of the 30% load condition is visually different. This agrees with the repeated-measures ANOVA in that the 30% load condition was significantly different than the 10% (p < 0.005) and 20% (p < 0.005) load conditions (Table 1).

The mean flexion angle bounded by the upper and lower bands produced from single component reconstruction are displayed in Fig. 2c. From this, we can clearly see that participants who scored low on this PC began with less ankle dorsiflexion and ended with more plantarflexion than those who scored high. The 30% load condition resulted in significantly lower PC scores (−11.75 ± 53.9) than both the 10% (9.01 ± 42.6) (p < 0.005) and 20% (2.73 ± 58.9) (p < 0.005) load conditions (Table 1). Therefore, individuals used less ankle dorsiflexion at the beginning of the lift, and ended with a greater amount of plantarflexion when lifting a heavy load, as compared to a light and medium load (Fig. 2a).

There was no significant effect of sex for any of the 3 PCs retained for knee flexion. In terms of load, there was a significant main effect for PC1 of knee flexion (p < 0.005), as well as when comparing the 10% and 30% load conditions (p < 0.005) (Table 1). When lifting a box from the floor to a table, individuals began the lift with a large knee flexion angle and rapidly extended their knees to place the box on the table (Fig. 3
                     a). The mean starting knee flexion angle for the 10%, 20%, and 30% load conditions were 93.6° ± 23.3°, 94.5° ± 24.4°, and 98.1° ± 21.6°, respectively.

The knee flexion PC1 is a magnitude operator that captured variations in range of knee flexion (Fig. 3a–c). The loading vector for this PC began with a negative value, and gradually became more meaningful up to its maximum loading vector at 22% of the lift (Fig. 3b). From this point on, the loading vector increased rapidly towards zero (to approximately 60% of the lift) where it remained until the end of the lift (Fig. 3b).

As demonstrated by Fig. 3c, individuals who scored high on this PC began with less knee flexion, than those who scored low. The PC1 scores for the 10% load condition were significantly higher than the scores for the 30% load (p < 0.005). Therefore, when lifting heavy loads, individuals begin with more knee flexion in comparison to lifting a light load (Fig. 3c).

The mean ensemble waveforms for knee adduction for each of the 3 load conditions are displayed in Fig. 4
                     a. Participants began with a greater amount of knee adduction for the 30% load condition (12.3° ± 8.4°) followed by the 20% (10.9° ± 10.0°) and 10% (9.7° ± 7.9°) load conditions. From the start position, participants abducted their knees to neutral halfway through the lift cycle where they remained until the box was placed on the table.

The loading vector for PC1 of knee adduction is shown in Fig. 4b. This loading vector followed a similar shape as the mean waveforms for the angle it described. It began with a large positive value, increased to explain the greatest amount of variance at 15% of the lift and gradually had less weight following that point (Fig. 4b). Examining the mean lifting profiles (Fig. 4a) at 15% of the lift, it is evident that the 10% and 30% load conditions have a magnitude difference.

Individuals who scored high began with their knees in adduction, and abducted their knees to neutral approximately midway through the lift (Fig. 4c). There was an overall effect of load for PC1 of knee adduction (p < 0.005), as well as a significant difference between the 10% and 30% load (p < 0.005). The mean PC1 for the 30% load condition (9.22 ± 43.8) was significantly higher than the 10% load condition (−9.44 ± 41.7). Therefore, when individuals lifted a heavy load they began with and maintained more knee adduction as compared to a light load, where participants start with a relatively small amount of knee adduction.

Hip flexion waveforms for the 10%, 20%, and 30% load conditions are displayed in Fig. 5
                     a. Participants began the lift with a large hip flexion angle (103.0°, 103.8°, and 105.2° for the 10%, 20%, and 30% load conditions, respectively) and rapidly extended their hips to approximately 60% of the lift. From this point forward, participants flexed their hips slightly to place the box on the table, with the amount of flexion observed decreasing with increasing load (Fig. 5a). Three PCs were required to explain 90% of the variance in the hip flexion waveform. Of these, PC2 and PC3 demonstrated a significant effect of load, but not sex. Each will be discussed in turn.

PC2 of hip flexion is a difference operator (range of motion) (Fig. 5b). The loading vector began as a negative value and reached its maximal negative value at 27% of the lifting cycle. The loading vector then increased, intersected zero at 44% of the lift, and increased rapidly to 60% of the lift. From 60% to the end of the lift, the loading vector gradually increased (Fig. 5b). For PC2 of hip flexion, there was an overall effect of load (p < 0.005) as well as a significant difference between the 10% and both the 20% and 30% load conditions (p < 0.005). Individuals who scored high on PC2 began with a greater amount of hip flexion, and ended with a smaller amount of hip flexion than those who scored low (Fig. 5c). The mean PC scores for the 10%, 20%, and 30% load conditions were −30.49 ± 52.5, 3.30 ± 58.0, and 27.18 ± 68.3, respectively. Thus, individuals tended to use less hip flexion range when lifting a light load as compared to a medium and heavy load.


                     Fig. 5d illustrates the loading vector for PC3 of hip flexion. The loading vector began as a significant descriptor, decreased in magnitude to 20% of the lift, and became a greater factor following this point to approximately 70% of the lift (Fig. 5d). The minimum and maximum loading vectors were seen at 0% and 41% of the lift, respectively. The lifting waveforms for the upper and lower bands are seen in Fig. 5e.

Individuals who scored low on PC3 of hip flexion began with more hip flexion, had less hip flexion midway through the lift, and ended with more hip flexion than those who scored high (Fig. 5e). All of these features demonstrate differences in magnitude/time shift. In terms of load condition, there was only a significant difference between the 10% and 30% conditions (p < 0.005) (Table 1). The mean PC score for the 10% load was 11.56 ± 30.7, and the mean PC score for the 30% load was −10.08 ± 40.1. Therefore, individuals tended to begin with more hip flexion and have less hip flexion part way through the lift when lifting a heavy load as compared to a light load.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Differences in lifting technique between males and females during freestyle symmetrical lifting were analyzed using PCA of three-dimensional joint angles and visual inspection of single component reconstruction methods. Ankle, knee, hip, lumbar spine, and thoracic spine joint angles were assessed yielding 15 PC models. Using the 90% trace criteria, a total of 32 PCs were retained to explain the lifting patterns.

Repeated-measures ANOVAs revealed that there was no effect of sex on lifting technique, for any of the PCs retained. Therefore, males and females exhibit similar lifting kinematics in the ankle, knee, hip, lumbar spine, and thoracic spine during a freestyle symmetric lift when weights were normalized to individual maximum isometric back strength. There was; however, a significant effect of load on lifting technique and each sex responded the same to an increase in load (no sex by load interaction). For each joint angle, the minimum number of PCs retained to describe load differences varied from one to three. The PCs retained mainly explained differences in magnitude, time shift, and range (Brandon et al., 2013).

The findings of the present study agree with the work by Sadler (2013) who examined sex-based differences in lifting technique under light load conditions using waveform based analysis. From their study, the researchers concluded that under light load conditions, when load was standardized to individual strength characteristics, there was no difference in lifting technique between males and females. The present study built upon this previous study by including heavier loads, using principal component reconstruction to ensure no PCs were contaminated by variance from other PCs, and allowing participants to use a freestyle lifting technique with no restraints on timing or rate. It is interesting to note that, although participants were free to choose their own lifting rate, there was no significant difference between males and females in the amount of time taken to complete the lift for any of the three load conditions. This finding demonstrates that when analyzing lifting technique, it may not be necessary to constrain the time of the lift.

When analyzing the specific effects of load on lifting technique, Sadler et al. (2013) found significant differences in lumbar spine flexion and hip rotation. In terms of lumbar spine flexion, they found that, while lifting a light load (10% of maximum isometric back strength), individuals use a smaller range of lumbar flexion throughout the lift compared to a no load condition (0% of maximum isometric back strength). The second significant difference between load conditions was peak differences in hip rotation (Sadler et al., 2013). When individuals lifted a loaded box, they had greater peak internal and external hip rotation compared to an unloaded box. The observation of greater hip rotation was interpreted as further evidence to support a semi-squat lifting technique while lifting light loads.

The current findings agree with those from Sadler et al. (2013) in that participants tend to change their lifting technique as a result of load. However, there is a discrepancy in the joint rotations that demonstrated a significant difference. Sadler et al. (2013) observed differences in lumbar spine flexion and hip rotation whereas the current study found differences between load conditions for ankle flexion, knee flexion, knee abduction, and hip flexion.

Beginning with ankle flexion, when lifting a heavy load, individuals began the lift with slightly less ankle dorsiflexion, and ended with a greater degree of plantar flexion compared to a light and medium load. At the knee, when lifting a heavy load, participants demonstrated more flexion as at the beginning of the lift as compared to a light load. In terms of knee adduction, while lifting the heavy load, participants began the lift with their knees in more adduction as compared to a light load. Since participants used more knee flexion during the heavy load conditions, it was necessary for them to adduct their knees in order to make room for the box. This is optimal because the load can then be kept close to the body (Anderson and Chaffin, 1986).

Two PCs were required to capture 90% of the variance in hip flexion. The results demonstrate that participants used more hip flexion and a greater range of motion when lifting a heavy load as compared to a light load. The magnitude and range differences observed agree with previous studies where researchers found that as load increases there is a significant increase in hip flexion (Burgess-Limerick and Abernethy, 1997a,b). The findings of the current study as well as previous studies demonstrated that individuals modify their lifting technique as load increases. Burgess-Limerick and Abernethy, 1997a,b 
                     Giat and Pike (1992), and Sadler et al. (2013) concluded that individuals use a stoop lifting technique when lifting light loads and adopt a semi-squat or squat lifting technique as load increased. However, when looking at the relative timing of joints during lifting tasks, Grieve (1974), Anderson (1986), Schipplein et al. (1990), and Scholtz (1993a & b) found that participants begin lifting tasks with a more stoop-like lifting technique as load increases. Future research will look at intersegment coordination of lifting tasks using similar techniques to Plamondon et al. (2014).

Lifting technique is important to consider as it allows a representation of participant's self-selected and natural movement patterns. However, previous research has shown that training lifting technique is not effective in reducing spinal load (van Dieen et al., 1999), and that training lifting technique is not effective in preventing LBD (Martimo et al., 2008). Therefore, new research assessing lifting technique and technique differences between sexes should be innovative, in order to ensure that any workplace strategies for decreasing LBD are effective and transferrable between males and females.

Although this study improved upon the methodology from past research, limitations were present. First, in order to increase external validity and to get an accurate representation of natural lifting technique, participants were allowed to perform a freestyle symmetric lift with no constraints on lift time or rate. This may have increased the variability in the waveforms and caused no differences to be observed between sexes. However, since single component reconstruction was used, this should not have affected the results. Also, since there was no significant difference between males and females in terms of the amount of time taken to complete the lift, it is unlikely that the self-selected rate had a major impact on the results.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The objective of this study was to determine if there is a sex-based difference in lifting technique across increasing load conditions using principal components analysis and single component reconstruction. The hypotheses were that: 1) there would be no effect of sex on lifting technique, 2) there would be an effect of load on both sexes, and 3) both sexes would respond the same to the increase in load. The first hypothesis was observed since male and female participants used a similar lifting technique. The second hypothesis was observed because, lifting technique of the ankles, knees, and hips did change as a result of load. The third hypothesis was observed in that males and females responded the same to the increase in load.

The current study demonstrates that when load was standardized to individual back strength characteristics, males and females adopted a similar lifting technique regardless of the load being lifted. This demonstrates that findings from studies examining one sex might be used as an accurate representation of lifting technique for the other sex once actual load factors are taken into account. Future research should focus on using the standardized load mass protocol on other situations that involve lifting technique, such as asymmetric lifting or lifting with and without a step. Future studies should also examine interjoint coordination during lifting tasks.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This project was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and Ontario Graduate Scholarship.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

