@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Developing brain-computer interfaces from a user-centered perspective: Assessing the needs of persons with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, caregivers, and professionals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We identified the needs of BCI end-users (persons with ALS and their contacts).


                        
                        
                           
                           BCI end-users need more information on BCIs and everyday applications.


                        
                        
                           
                           A BCI system should support different users through different stages of ALS.


                        
                        
                           
                           BCIs should monitor and account for affective states.


                        
                        
                           
                           Retaining the sense of agency is crucial for end-users with ALS.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Brain-computer interfaces

User-centered approach

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  By focus group methodology, we examined the opinions and requirements of persons with ALS, their caregivers, and health care assistants with regard to developing a brain-computer interface (BCI) system that fulfills the user's needs. Four overarching topics emerged from this analysis: 1) lack of information on BCI and its everyday applications; 2) importance of a customizable system that supports individuals throughout the various stages of the disease; 3) relationship between affectivity and technology use; and 4) importance of individuals retaining a sense of agency. These findings should be considered when developing new assistive technology. Moreover, the BCI community should acknowledge the need to bridge experimental results and its everyday application.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an inexorably progressive disease that leads to the neurodegeneration of the motor system, causing severe physical disabilities that involve all limbs, swallowing, breathing, and speech. The life expectancy of persons with ALS generally varies between two and four years following diagnosis. Nevertheless, there is high interindividual variability, which makes predictions of life expectancy very difficult (Chiò et al., 2002; Czaplinski et al., 2006).

A small proportion of ALS patients have been estimated to use mechanical invasive ventilation. Although such devices increase life expectancy, they lead to total dependence on electromedical equipment (O'Toole et al., 2008). ALS patients who forgo this apparatus die in a relatively short time due to respiratory complications.

During its progression, ALS causes the complete loss of oral communication and a significant reduction in nonverbal communication (Hecht et al., 2002; Kübler et al., 2005; Young and McNicoll, 1998). The ability to correspond with family members and caregivers is critical in maintaining a patient's quality of life. Persons with ALS often consider this ability to be more important than retaining strength and physical mobility (Simmons et al., 2000). In an assessment of quality of life using the Schedule for the Evaluation of the Individual Quality of Life (SEIQoL) in 120 patients with ALS, Felgoise et al. (2009) reported that relational and psychological factors were more critical than health and physical aspects. Thus, the loss of communication and relational factors with the environment severely impacts the quality of life of people with ALS and their caregivers.

The ALS Specific Quality of Life-Revised (Felgoise et al., 2007), a questionnaire that measures quality of life specifically in persons with ALS, includes a subscale to assess interaction with others and the environment, emphasizing the impact of such aspects on their life. As observed by Blain-Moraes et al. (2012), the ability to maintain autonomy and independence by controlling the environment (e.g., switching television channels, regulating the temperature of a room, turning lights on and off) helps persons with ALS to retain agency and subjectivity, defined in relation to technology by Moser (2006) as a position of consciousness, knowing, thinking, or feeling.

Assistive technology (AT) that meets the needs of persons with ALS could establish new communication and environmental control channels, significantly improving their quality of life. Conventional AT, however, requires a certain degree of muscular control, thus losing its effectiveness once the disease has evolved to the point at which all muscular function is lost. Noninvasive brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) can provide ALS patients a communication channel that is independent of muscular activity, exploiting electroencephalographic (EEG) signals and extracting specific features that are then classified and translated into external commands (Birbaumer and Cohen, 2007; Cincotti et al., 2008).

BCIs have been used for various purposes, of which two major clinical applications are movement restoration in patients who have been affected by spinal lesions or stroke (Cincotti et al., 2012; Daly et al., 2009; Kaiser et al., 2011; Pfurtscheller et al., 2003; Ramos-Murguialday et al., 2013) and a communication system for those with motor impairments (Birbaumer et al., 1999; Donchin et al., 2000; Furdea et al., 2009; Kübler et al., 2009, 2001; 2005; De Massari et al., 2012; Nijboer et al., 2008; Riccio et al., 2012). Other uses include the control of robots and wheelchairs (Tonin et al., 2011; Carlson and Millán, 2013; Millán et al., 2009; Galán et al., 2008; Tonin et al., 2010; Leeb et al., 2013), internet browsing (Bensch et al., 2007; Mugler et al., 2010; Muglerab et al., 2008; Riccio et al., 2011; Zickler et al., 2011), and gaming (Bos et al., 2010; Gürkök et al., 2013; Nijholt et al., 2009; van de Laar et al., 2013; Holz et al., 2013).

Although the application of BCIs is limited primarily to a laboratory setting, recent studies have examined the possibility of using BCI in everyday life for environmental control (Aloise et al., 2011; Babiloni et al., 2007; Cincotti et al., 2008; Kleih et al., 2011). The challenges in bringing BCI technology to daily activities include the design of user-machine adaptation algorithms and the incorporation of human–computer interaction (HCI) principles to improve usability (Millán et al., 2010). Most research in BCI has focused predominantly on improving the technology—e.g., enhancing signal speed and the accuracy of classification—but more attention should be paid to human factors and the needs of potential users (Blain-Moraes et al., 2012). In their systematic review of EEG-based BCIs, comprising 127 articles, Pasqualotto et al. (2012) found that most studies concentrated on the development of new algorithms to improve the accuracy of brain signal classification. A user-centered perspective, however, was rarely considered.

Few studies exist on the specific needs of BCI users, as observed by Blain-Moraes et al. (2012) and Zickler et al. (2009), who reported on how extensively research on BCIs has focused primarily on improving technological aspects, such as speed and accuracy, whereas psychological aspects and usability have largely been ignored.

Surveying a focus group on the barriers and mediators of BCI technology in the ALS population, Blain-Moraes et al. (2012) found that relational factors have a significant influence on its acceptance, examining BCI user experience, priorities, and opinions in a group of persons with ALS and their caregivers. In our study, we extended this analysis to a more heterogeneous group to address these issues from various perspectives, generating a complete description of users' needs from the home to the hospital.

To this end, we recruited individuals who had a personal or professional relationship with ALS patients. As the disease progresses, individuals with ALS become more dependent on those who are close to them (e.g. family members, caregivers, medical personnel), particularly regarding the use of technology. Thus, the experience of these groups must be considered. Specifically, we examined certain applications of BCIs in the communication and domotic domains, in addition to asking participants about their general concerns with communication issues and BCI systems.

In contrast to Blain-Moraes et al. (2012), the participants in our focus group did not have direct experience with BCIs, allowing us to better understand the expectations and needs of new potential end-users. Our chief goal was to determine the needs of persons with ALS and their relatives, and caregivers and professionals who work with ALS with respect to BCI technology.

@&#METHODS@&#

To gain insight into the needs of ALS patients in terms of AT for communication and control, we implemented the focus group method. This qualitative approach is designed to obtain opinions and feedback on specific topics (Morgan, 1996), permitting direct examination of individual perception and experience on a topic or problem. It also allows one to consider various opinions and accumulate a more detailed and greater body of data (Ward et al., 1991), complementing other standardized quantitative methods. As observed by Blain-Moraes et al. (2012), the focus group method enables researchers to describe the perspective of participants “in their own words,” rather than relying solely on numerical data from predetermined rating systems. This tool allows researchers to ask questions that are more relevant to the personal and environmental contexts of the individuals who are involved.

Focus group participants find the experience more stimulating compared with more structured approaches and thus might be more candid in their responses (Bristol and Fern, 1996). The focus group allows participants to think out loud, modify their opinion, and comment on each other's points of view, often challenging each other and revealing dynamics that are unlikely to emerge in more controlled settings (Kidd and Parshall, 2000).

The focus group was led by two experienced psychologists: a moderator and an assistant who took notes. The session was video-recorded.

We recruited nine participants through the ALS Center of “Policlinico Umberto I” General Hospital, Sapienza University, and the nonprofit association Viva la Vita Onlus, which comprises persons with ALS and their relatives. We included different people who had experience with ALS: a person with ALS, a person who lived with a relative with ALS, a non-cohabiting family member of someone with ALS, a certified assistant, an in–home nurse, a hospital nurse, an occupational therapist, a communication aids expert (e.g., a person who worked for an organization that provides communication aids to those with disabilities), and a medical doctor. The rationale of this diverse sample was to obtain various perspectives on the requirements of a BCI for communication and control and to encompass the spectrum of issues regarding ALS and BCI. This selection was consistent with Zickler et al. (2011) who argued for the importance of including caregivers, family members, and other assistants in evaluating BCI technology, because these individuals have specific ideas and requirements that should be considered.

Potential subjects were informed about the opportunity to take part in a focus group that was centered on BCI, facilitation of communication, and domotics for persons with ALS. As soon as a suitable participant agreed to participate, he/she was included in the group list and re-contacted for the focus group appointment. We excluded subjects aged under 18. One participant per category was recruited to keep the number of participants suitable for the focus group and avoid overrepresentation of certain categories.

Four of nine participants had knowledge of BCI technology prior to their recruitment, and none had used a BCI. The participants' personal data, their years of having a relationship with ALS, and their knowledge of BCI technology are shown in Table 1
                        . All participants gave written informed consent prior to participation and authorized audio and video recordings of the focus group session to be made. The participants were reassured that all information that was shared within the focus group would remain confidential and used exclusively for research purposes.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

One week before the scheduled date of the focus group, the participants received a document via email that provided a general overview of the BCI operations and examples of its functions (see Supplementary Material).

To promote comfort and openness within the group, participants were invited to arrive fifteen minutes before the session began to become acquainted with each other in an informal manner. We arranged comfortable seating in a room with sufficient space to allow participants to feel at ease and see each other.

Due to a transportation-related problem, the person with ALS joined the group via videoconference, with the image projected onto a large screen and a webcam pointed at the group. He was using invasive mechanical ventilation and communicated through an eye-tracker and an ETRAN system with support from his wife.

The focus group session was video-recorded using a digital video camera that was connected to a computer. The moderator opened with a question that required participants to introduce each other and describe their personal experience with ALS. Although the moderator had a list of questions to pose, the participants were free to discuss the issues that emerged spontaneously during the conversation for most of the session. After the introduction, the group discussed the needs for and problems regarding communication with individuals with ALS and the following open-ended questions:
                           
                              -
                              What do you think about BCI as a device for communication and domotic control?

What are the most important features of communication that should be included in a BCI system? Which features are less important and why?

What are the most important features of domotic control that should be incorporated into a BCI system? Which features are less important and why?

In addition to the functions that have been proposed as examples in the document that you received via e-mail, are there other functions for communication and domotic control that could be useful in a BCI system?

The focus group lasted for about one hour and a half, with the moderator leading the discussion per the questions above. This duration was sufficient for each subject to express his/her thoughts and discuss his/her ideas with the other participants.

The data analysis comprised three sequential steps. First, the focus group session was fully transcribed. Each participant was allocated a code to preserve anonymity that could be matched easily to his role or relationship with ALS.

Second, four evaluators (two evaluators who had frequent professional contact with ALS patients and AT and, were thus defined as “experts”; two evaluators with no relationship with the disease, defined as “naïve”) were asked to divide the text into conceptual categories, assigning keywords (Fig. 1
                           ). One of the “expert” evaluators was a psychotechnologist (i.e., an expert on the application of technology for psychological purposes) with frequent contact with persons with ALS and AT. The other “expert” was a member of the management board of Viva La Vita Onlus, an organization that supports those with ALS and their caregivers. The “expert” evaluators, respectively, identified 8 and 6 conceptual categories. The “naïve” evaluators, respectively, identified 23 and 33 conceptual categories. Thus, the total number of categories that were identified in the first evaluation phase was 70.

Subsequently, beginning from this pool of conceptual categories, three final evaluators (G.L., L.S., and A.P.) independently created macrocategories that included those found by the “expert” and “naïve” evaluators and named them. The final evaluators' task was to minimize the number of categories while including all of the main aspects that were identified by the evaluators. They referred to the original focus group transcripts when necessary. At the end of the evaluation, three sets of macrocategories were generated (containing, respectively six, four, and four categories).

Ultimately, the three final evaluators discussed how to merge the proposed macrocategories into a coherent set until a consensus was reached. This procedure allowed them to describe a final set of four macrocategories, including all topics that had been raised by the focus group and those that had been identified by the evaluators. Table 2
                            shows the categories that were identified by the final evaluators and how they were grouped into the final macrocategories.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The four macrocategories that emerged from the focus group evaluation were: 1) Need for information, 2) Modularity, 3) Taking emotions into account, and 4) Retaining sense of agency. These macrocategories are described below. For each topic, we also reported significant quotes from the focus group transcripts to link the participants' original words to the macrocategories.

Often in the focus group session, participants expressed doubts and criticisms, asking several questions about the general function of BCIs—particularly their capabilities and limitations. The media tend to present BCIs as devices that can ‘read the mind,’ fostering unrealistic expectations and rational skepticism.

Participants also wondered whether those with ALS and healthy subjects could use such complex systems in the same manner. For instance, several doubts were raised about whether it would be realistic for a person with ALS to wear an EEG cap for several hours to communicate and control his/her environment. The noncohabiting relative of a person with ALS asked, “How were these patients able to keep this cap on for so many hours?” (Researcher's note: the persons with ALS who are using BCIs.)

Some participants expressed concerns over the complexity of a system that allows users to communicate through the acquisition of brain signals, possibly requiring long-term and time-consuming training. Further, they reported difficulties in imagining the use of BCI devices, perceiving a gap between the current state of the technology and the need for it to be practical and user-friendly. As stated by the expert in communication aids, “ It is necessary to clarify how a BCI should really be used.” Shortly after this comment, the nurse opined that “there are some doubts—not about the product (i.e., the BCI system) but about its use.” Overall, it was evident from the statements by the focus group participants that there remains a lack of information about BCIs outside of the laboratory.

The participant with ALS ended the focus group session by saying, “You should consider that, as the pathology progresses, any system becomes useless. You should think about patients in the first stages of the disease (Researcher's note: when the person with ALS still has residual motor function—) not about me.” This assertion forces us to face the inexorability of the disease and underscores one of the most critical issues in managing AT in general and BCI specifically: with the progression of ALS, patients gradually lose their physical functions. What works at the beginning of the pathology might become useless in a relatively short time.

An emerging topic was the generalized need for a ‘modular’ system that should adapt to the individual throughout the pathology, supporting the user as he gradually loses functions. An ideal system should also accommodate the user's age and computer skills. “If it happened to me,” argued the son of a person with ALS, “I would for sure know how to use a computer-based device. But what about older people who never used a computer in their life?” The communication aids expert also described his experience with an illiterate user, emphasizing how such a condition made the use of a system, even as simple as the ETRAN, impossible.

Moreover, the nurse reported working with persons who spoke different languages, further complicating the communication. “It may become more and more difficult to find illiterate users, but you may find foreign persons; so, the problem is to find a way to relate.” In this sense, a nonverbal, pictographic menu as input for a BCI system is a better choice—for example, using simple icons instead of verbal commands.

Several focus group participants noted the importance of considering users as individuals, with disparate residual physical functions and, thus, needs in using a communication system.

For instance, a communication system can allow individuals with concentration problems to write complete sentences and simultaneously express themselves precisely and compose fixed sentences, based on common phrases for quick communication (e.g., “I'm cold”) or keywords (e.g., “aspiration”). The medical doctor observed, “I think there should be a minimal standard that has to be evaluated. People should create their scheme—for example, with standard sentences—so that giving input is not exhausting, and they can communicate with basic sentences to minimize effort, concentration, and reduce frustration. One should distinguish between levels of residual function so that the technology can adapt its complexity to people's level of function.”

The son of a person with ALS added, “For the patient with ALS, using the hand as long as possible is important, because otherwise one could say, ‘Why are you putting the cap on me, if I can use my hand?’” No assistive technology is used by the person with ALS alone, requiring caregivers who must understand its specific functions and adapt them to the user's situation. Participants noted the possibility of having multiple input channels to an AT for ALS patients to exploit the their best residual communication channel, which could be used at various stages of the pathology.

We can conclude that BCIs should be customized, taking into account the user's ability to interact with technology and residual motor function. Moreover, they should adapt to the person's changes in residual motor abilities throughout the neuropathology.

The emotional experience should not be underestimated in the interaction between an individual and an assistive device. When using an assistive device for the first time, a person must understand how it works and needs to cope with what it represents—namely, an evidence of his/her gradual loss of function. The daughter of a person with ALS described her mother's refusal to use a body lift device: “We had to argue a lot with her to convince her. She kept saying, ‘I feel like a monkey on the lift.’” The son of a person with ALS expressed his concerns over convincing end-users to wear EEG caps and, referring to ALS patients who had already used BCIs, asked, “How could these patients adjust to a new reality? They are already imprisoned in their body, so how could they accept this new thing—how did they react?”

The focus group participants also expressed their frustration with communication systems often failing to convey messages in an adequate time. The nurse observed, “With the speech synthesizer, some patients become very angry, because caregivers and operators interrupt them in the middle of the sentence, thinking they already understood the concept, often altering the original message. This means they have to put a huge effort to be concise”.

This slow response can also cause significant anxiety when the user must communicate something urgently. The person with ALS observed that the fear of not being able to convey a message quickly, even if due to a minor difficulty, can lead to a loss of concentration that disrupts communication. Moreover, emotions can interfere with communication—for example, simple reactions, such as fear and laughter, can disturb the electroencephalographic response, creating noise that deteriorates the performance of the BCI.

The communication aids expert reported, “I see it this way: if I am facing a problem, maybe I have difficulty counting (Researcher's note: counting icons/letters on a screen using a P300-Speller BCI), and maybe the fear of not being able to count already reduces my concentration. There can not be the immediacy of a glance.”. The various experiences that were reported by focus group participants indicate that the presence of affective states, such as frustration and anxiety, should not be neglected, because they can markedly attenuate the efficacy of the BCI.

All participants emphasized the need for ALS patients to retain their sense of agency during the pathology—e.g., being able to control their environment and activities autonomously without asking for help, turn the lights on and off, control the television, answer the doorbell, regulate the temperature in a room, and get somebody's attention. The occupational therapist pointed out, “Doing small things, being able to open… to turn on the heating or the fan because it is cold or warm, can give a sense of agency to a person.”

The need to control the environment was evident in a description by the daughter of a person with ALS: “Last week, my mother heard a beep and realized that the electricity had gone off, but nobody had noticed. She was terrified and immediately asked for the ETRAN. She was the only one who had heard the beep.” Being able to act in their environment is fundamental for patients with ALS, because they are often connected to medical devices such as mechanical invasive ventilation units. They can feel terrified when there are sudden environmental changes, such as a blackout, if they have no means to respond to these changes, especially at home.

Focus group participants highlighted the importance for persons with ALS of retaining their sense of agency in communicating with people in close proximity and remotely. The caretaker stressed the significance of “maximizing the contacts,” because persons with ALS are “completely alone with their pathology”, adding that “anything that reduces the hours of silence and loneliness, in my opinion, can be helpful”. In particular, the possibility of sending a text message (via SMS or email) or making a video call to a distant family member or friend could help the person with ALS to feel part of a community. The daughter of a person with ALS expressed how important it was for her mother “to see and to listen to her grandchildren living in a different city, so she could see them, and they could see her, and see that she was smiling”. The daughter added that the primary function of the aids should be “to allow the patient to engage in the same activities he/she engaged in before the illness”, commenting on the value of persons with ALS perceiving themselves as individuals who remained able to choose how to live their lives.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study we used the focus group method to record the opinions and needs of individuals with ALS, their family members and caregivers, and professionals with frequent contact with ALS patients. We stress that those with ALS are never alone when using technology and are assisted by family members, caregivers, physicians, and health care assistants, particularly when they begin invasive mechanical ventilation. Nevertheless, there are few studies that have tested BCIs for everyday life: Sellers and colleagues (2010) reported a case study of an ALS patient who used a BCI for communication at home over 2.5 years but did not involve caregivers and other stakeholders.

From the BCI designer's perspective, the modularity of the BCI system is a challenging need to satisfy. Especially for a neurodegenerative disease, such as ALS, in which changes in functions are progressive and rapid, a system that can be used throughout the various stages of the disease must be developed, without forcing users to continuously replace their AT with new devices. New technology is often intimidating and difficult to adjust to; thus, one of the criticisms that emerged from the focus group is the emotional struggle that is experienced in adopting a new AT.

One of the central aims in the development of new BCI systems, as suggested by the participants several times during the discussion, is to start using a device before mobility is completely lost. The device would use a person's residual motor function and allow him/her to become familiar with the technology. Progressively, the system would also permit EEG inputs that are not based on motor function, supporting the development of BCIs that are merged with existing AT software (Riccio et al., 2011; Zickler et al., 2011; Riccio et al., 2015), which can initially exploit residual motor function and subsequently, with progression of the neuropathology and the complete loss of motor function, use BCI input.

Based on our results, we developed an assistive interface that is controlled by standard input devices (such as a mouse and computer keyboard) and EEG signals, taking the disease progression and residual potential of each end-user into account (Caruso et al., 2013; Schettini et al., 2015). The idea of using a hybrid BCI (Millán et al., 2010) was also examined by Zickler et al. (2011), considering feedback from end-users who had tested a BCI for communication. The development of hybrid BCIs is an emerging area of research (Riccio et al., 2015), of which our results should encourage further study. Moreover, BCI researchers should determine the cognitive and neural predictors of BCI performance and the effects of long-term use and training (Riccio et al., 2013).

As reported by several participants, emotions might undermine the performance of a BCI. Several subjects wondered whether a BCI could continue to function in the presence of various affective states, such as irritability or panic (e.g., due to poor physical condition or a lack of control over the environment). Additional research is needed to evaluate the effects of ongoing emotional states on the control of a BCI system (Molina et al., 2009). Moreover, next-generation BCI devices should incorporate a health monitoring system that monitors vital signs to automatically warn the caregiver of ongoing problems.

The strong need to retain a sense of agency and domotic/environmental control (e.g., choosing what to watch on TV, deciding whether to open the door if somebody rings) emerged during the discussion. Thus, a person with ALS should not be seen merely as somebody who requires assistance but as an individual with wishes, decisions, and personality. To this end, future BCI systems should include functions that promote autonomy and independence, especially in the user's home.

Consistent with Blain-Moraes et al. (2012), participants gave positive responses overall to BCI technology, identifying it as a useful means of improving the quality of life of persons with ALS. In our study, however, concerns about the efficacy of BCIs were more evident, possibly because none of the participants had used BCIs. Several personal factors that Blain-Moraes et al. (2012) identified as having a strong influence on BCI acceptance, such as fatigue, anxiety, discomfort, and attitude toward technology, also emerged in our study. Yet, in our study the participants appeared to confer limited importance to more technical aspects of BCIs (e.g., EEG signal acquisition), which were identified less frequently by our transcript evaluators. This finding might be attributed to the lower familiarity of participants with BCI systems. Thus, we conclude that when providing users with a new technology, particular consideration should be given to personal and emotional aspects, in addition to technical factors.

Our study and Blain-Moraes et al. (2012) led to suggestions regarding the development of new communication systems, such as having shortcut options for frequently used sentences and a word prediction tool, demonstrating that the need for immediate communication is perceived as critical in both study groups. Blain-Moraes et al. (2012) also indicated that BCIs impact the relationship between a person with ALS and his/her primary caregiver. BCIs are a means of communication between a patient and caregiver but can become a burden for the latter (e.g., it is time-consuming to set up the EEG, and caregivers and ALS users must learn how to use the system). We noted how these relational aspects could be extended beyond the individual-caregiver relationship to other close contacts and medical personnel.

The topics that arose from the discussion between various people in contact with persons with ALS generated unique information, demonstrating how multiple perspectives can enrich the user-centered design, consistent with Zickler et al. (2011). All people who are linked to the end-user must cope with his needs and emotional reactions. Thus, their experience should be taken into account.

The need for information on BCIs, expressed by the participants, and their doubts on the real-life function of BCIs, stress the importance of testing BCIs in everyday settings—i.e., the user's home—with the support of caregivers. This uncertainty is significant, considering that all of them received a document that explained how BCI systems work and that some participants were accustomed to working with various technological aids. At the beginning of the focus group session, all participants confirmed having read the informative document and that they were interested in its content but found it to be complicated (“I am not sure whether I understood everything well.” “I thought this was about mind-reading, but then I realized that the system was more complex.”). Although the description of BCI systems in the document was simple, most participants had no familiarity with this type of technology, especially concerning EEG acquisition. Finding a method of explaining the operation of BCI systems and their applicability to everyday life easily is a crucial challenge.

These doubts indicated that information on BCIs and their application as an assistive technology remains poorly distributed, even among those with ALS and their relatives and caregivers. Such information can be found only in scientific journals, beyond the reach of the layperson. In addition to bringing BCIs to outside of a laboratory setting, end-users must be put into contact with BCI developers—for example, through specific programs in hospitals and other places that are attended by persons with ALS and their relatives and caregivers.

The significance of accurate information, modularity, emotional aspects, and sense of agency, which emerged from our study, is not necessarily BCI-specific and could be applied to various ATs and end-users. As stated in ISO 9241-210 (2009), the usability of an AT is represented by the extent to which specific users achieve predetermined goals in a certain context. Thus, ad hoc studies should be performed by need and technology.

Recently, the user-centered design was adopted for the development of various products, such as devices for stroke rehabilitation (Daemen et al., 2014; Lu et al., 2011), limb prostheses (Christ et al., 2012), wheelchairs (Herrera-Saray et al., 2013; Moody et al., 2012), and telecare and health monitoring systems (Jia et al., 2013; Sánchez-Morillo et al., 2013; Vermeulen et al., 2014). This growing area of research confirms that to allow AT use in everyday life, focusing solely on the technical aspects of ATs is insufficient, and the end-user's needs and satisfaction should be prioritized.

In this study we took a multifaceted perspective, considering persons with disparate relationships to ALS, each category of which should be examined further using qualitative and quantitative methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Our focus group-based study allowed us to identify the principal aspects that should be considered in developing user-centered BCIs for communication and environmental control. Potential end-users should be extensively and realistically informed about BCI everyday applications, and the systems should be modular and customizable to support a wide range of users, as well as the same user at various stages of ALS neuropathology (e.g., throughout the gradual loss of motor function). Further, the relationship between emotional states and technology should be taken into account, and effort should be directed toward developing systems that promote an individual's retention of a sense of agency.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Italian Agency for Research on Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ARiSLA), under the aegis of the BrindiSys project. We thank Fabrizio Corradi, Mauro Pechezzi, Alessandro Giannandrea, and Linda Pecoriello for their support in evaluating the focus group transcripts and Dr. Matteo Placidi for support in editing this manuscript.

The following is the supplementary data related to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2015.03.012.

All authors report having no financial, personal, or organizational conflict of interest with the work in this manuscript.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

