@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Association of individual and work-related risk factors with musculoskeletal symptoms among Iranian sewing machine operators

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Prevalence and severity of musculoskeletal symptoms (MSDs) was high among operators.


                        
                        
                           
                           The relatively high RULA scores highlighted a poor sewing workstation design.


                        
                        
                           
                           Both physical and psychosocial job factors were associated with MSDs.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Sewing operation

MSDs

RULA

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This cross-sectional study evaluated working conditions and the occurrence of self-reported musculoskeletal symptoms among 251 Iranian sewing machine operators. A questionnaire and direct observations of working postures using the rapid upper limb assessment (RULA) method were used. A high prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms, particularly in the neck/shoulders, back and hands/wrists were found. The mean RULA grand score of 5.7 highlighted a poor sewing workstation design and indicated that most operators (with posture assessed at action level 3) needed an investigation and changes in their working habits soon. Work-related factors (including number of years worked as an operator, prolonged working hours per shift, long duration of sitting work without a break, feeling pressure due to work and working postures) and individual factors (including age, gender, BMI and regular sport/physical activities) were associated with musculoskeletal symptoms in multiple logistic regression models. The findings add to the understanding of working conditions of those jobs involving sewing activities and emphasise the need for ergonomic interventions to reduce musculoskeletal symptoms in the future.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) are a major health problem in both industrialized and industrially developing countries (Buckle and Devereux, 2002; Colombini and Occhipinti, 2006; Öztürk and Esin, 2011; Nazari et al., 2012; Widanarko et al., 2014). MSDs have considerable impact on both individuals and countries worldwide (Coury et al., 2000) and, more specifically, work-related MSDs have been recognised as a significant problem within the European Union in terms of individual ill health and economic factors such as impact on production and revenues (Buckle and Devereux, 2002). This also seems to be the case in other parts of the world such as the United States and Asia (Lewis et al., 2002; Oh et al., 2011). A number of risk factors including physical, psychosocial, organizational and socio-demographic aspects have been identified as being associated with the development of MSDs among different occupational groups, particularly in those involved in sedentary and repetitive activities (McLean et al., 2001; Buckle and Devereux, 2002; Fogleman and Lewis, 2002; Johnston et al., 2008; Dianat and Salimi, 2014). Prevention of MSDs is, therefore, one of the most important factors that can have a major impact on productivity enhancement and on promotion of health and safety at work (Kogi et al., 2003).

With specific reference to sewing machine operators, this is an occupational group that may experience a high prevalence of MSDs (Wang et al., 2007; Öztürk and Esin, 2011; Sealetsa and Thatcher, 2011) that is often attributable to poor working postures that have to be maintained during the whole working period as well as to repetitive hand and arm movements that characterise this kind of work (Li et al., 1995). Typically, sewing machinists perform piece–work activities, assembling component parts of a final garment or product. The fragmentation of work in this way means that the task are often highly repetitive, potentially dangerous and complex task involving the coordination of both hands, usually performed in a seated working posture for a long period of time. The operation usually requires the operator to lean forward (with a forward inclined posture of both head and trunk) to focus their attention and have better visual control of the task. In many ways, given the fixed nature of the sewing machine, the machinists has to adapt their posture and viewing angle so that they can conduct this form of ‘precision work’ (Kroemer, 2009) and this can lead to the development of MSDs, particularly in the back, neck and upper limbs (Serratos-Perez and Mendiola-Anda, 1993; Öztürk and Esin, 2011; Sealetsa and Thatcher, 2011).

The textile industry in Iran is one of the oldest and largest industries, which employs more than 10% of all workers in Iran's manufacturing sector, and accounts for approximately 6% of the total industrial production of the country (Iranian Statistics Centre, 2002). The textile industry, which is dominated by small and medium enterprises (SMEs), is regarded as a very labour-intensive industry. While the occupational health and safety programmes in developing countries have mainly focused on large-scale industries, SMEs in these countries are a major and very much neglected sector in occupational health research (McCann, 1996). A better understanding of the occupational hazards and their control measures in this sector has the potential for a notable impact on national productivity and workers' quality of life. Currently, there is limited research on the occurrence of MSDs and the associated risk factors among the Iranian sewing machine operators. The findings from research in this area will help to better understand the working conditions of those jobs involving sewing operation and to assist in introducing preventative measures and developing guidelines in this regard. It also has the potential to inform work practises in other developing nations with similar industrial sectors (e.g. the Far East).

Having provided an overview of the textile industry in Iran and the potential of this work to lead to MSDs research was conducted to investigate the following factors:
                           
                              •
                              evaluate the MSD risk levels associated with typical sewing machinist operating postures,

evaluate the frequency and severity of musculoskeletal symptoms among sewing machine operators,

evaluate the association between musculoskeletal symptoms and contributing individual and work-related factors.

A cross-sectional, descriptive-analytical study was conducted over a five-month period between July and November, 2012. The study setting was in three provinces of western Iran (e.g. East Azerbaijan, Kermanshah and Kordestan). Data on the number of sewing machine operators in the study area was obtained from the Iranian Ministry of Industries and Mines. There were a total of approximately 5000 operators involved in sewing machine operating tasks in the study region who worked at approximately 470 different workshops. Sampling was done by a multi-stage random selection process. The first stage was to select workshops (n = 60) using probability proportion to size sampling method. The number of operators in each of these selected workshops ranged from 6 to 15, with a total of 525. Using the same procedure, 251 participants (151 males and 100 females) were then selected from these workshops. Each participant was familiarised with the study procedure and any questions were answered by the investigator. A written informed consent form was signed by each operator before participation in the study. The participation was strictly on a voluntary basis and the operators were under no obligation to complete the study. The data collection was performed using a questionnaire and direct observation of the operators during their work. The operators were not paid for their participation. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the ethical review committee of Tabriz University of Medical Sciences.

Data for demographic, work-related and musculoskeletal symptoms were recorded using a questionnaire. Demographic details included: age, gender, height, weight, body mass index (BMI as weight/height2), educational level (illiterate, primary school, secondary school and diploma), marital status (single or married) as well as individual habits such as being involved in regular sport and physical activities each week and smoking habits of the respondents. The questions regarding the work-related items were based on the relevant literature (Westgaard and Jansen, 1992; Li et al., 1995; Herbert et al., 2001; Öztürk and Esin, 2011; Dianat and Salimi, 2014) and included: number of years worked as an operator, number of hours worked per day and week, job satisfaction based on the survey question: “How much are you satisfied with your job? low, moderate and high”, perceived speed of work: “Does your work require you to work very fast? yes/no”, duration of continuous work without a break (>10 min): “How many hours do you usually work without breaks (breaks > 10 min)?”, and perceived pressure due to work: “Do you feel pressure due to work? yes/no”. There were also questions regarding the workstation design including the use of adjustable chairs (yes/no) and operators' satisfaction with the design of sewing machines and tables (with response alternatives: low, moderate and high).

The frequency of musculoskeletal symptoms in different body regions was measured using the standardised Nordic Musculoskeletal Disorders Questionnaire (Kuorinka et al., 1987). This questionnaire was translated and revised into Farsi and has an established validity and reliability (Dianat et al., 2013, 2014; Dianat and Karimi, 2014). The respondents were asked to indicate if they had experienced any ache, pain, discomfort or numbness in the last 12 months for different body regions using a body map. Those operators who reported musculoskeletal symptoms in any of the body regions were also asked to indicate the severity of these in each of the different body areas, using a scale of 0 – no pain to 5 – very high pain. The questionnaire was administered by one of the authors interviewing the operators and took approximately 15 min to complete.

The questionnaire was tested through a pilot study on a sample of 30 participants and minor word modifications were made on some items of the questionnaire. The test-retest reliability (stability) of the items of the questionnaire was evaluated with Kappa coefficients. The kappa coefficients ranged from 0.82 to 0.99, indicating a good reliability of the measure.

In addition to these data, Rapid Upper Limb Assessment (RULA) (McAtamney and Corlett, 1993) was used to evaluate the working postures of operators at their workstations. RULA, as a reliable and validated observational method, can be used for assessment of biomechanical and postural loading on the musculoskeletal system which is known to contribute to MSDs. This method was designed for assessing the severity of postural loading and is particularly applicable to sedentary jobs (Li and Buckle, 1999) similar to the sewing tasks in the present study. In this method, work postures are selected in relation to their perceived severity, frequency of occurrence or other such criteria and a score is calculated for different body regions that are then used to calculate an overall ‘Grand Score’ which relates to one of four action levels:
                           
                              •
                              Action Level 1 = a score of one or two indicates that the posture is acceptable if it is not maintained or repeated for long period.

Action Level 2 = a score of three or four indicates that further investigation is needed and changes may be required.

Action Level 3 = a score of five or six indicates that investigation is needed and changes are required soon.

Action Level 4 = a score of seven or more indicates that investigation and changes are required immediately.

The observations and recordings of postures in the present study were performed by two trained observers. Although the sewing machine operations required a fairly static posture, the investigators made sure to examine the longest adopted posture during the task cycle for each individual. A separate RULA assessment sheet was used for each operator for recording the RULA scores.

The original version of RULA checklist was translated and revised into Farsi by Dianat and Salimi (2014). This version was used in this study. The inter-rater reliability of the RULA scores using Kappa coefficients was found to be ‘good’ (with Kappa coefficients ranging from 0.78 to 0.92 for RULA scores). Moreover, the results of Chi-square tests which evaluated the association between individual body part scores and the reported pain or discomfort in the corresponding body region (Massaccesi et al., 2003; Öztürk and Esin, 2011), confirmed that the RULA scores provided a good indication of the musculoskeletal loading sustained by the operators.

The analysis of the data, including descriptive statistics was carried out using SPSS software version 14.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Demographic data and job characteristics of the study population were presented as mean (SD), range and percentages. Chi square and t-test analyses were used to evaluate any gender differences. The relationships between the prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms and study variables (demographic and job characteristics) was initially assessed using univariate logistic regression analyses. Multiple logistic regression analysis was also performed using backward stepwise procedure to estimate the association between independent variables and self-reported musculoskeletal symptoms for each body region (e.g. different regression models were developed for different body parts) in the multivariate context. The independent variables in the logistic regression models included demographic (age, gender, BMI, educational level, marital status, smoking and time spent on sport/physical activities each week) and job characteristics (number of years worked as an operator, daily working hours, job satisfaction, perceived speed of work, duration of continuous work without a break, perceived pressure due to work, use of adjustable chairs, and satisfaction with the design of sewing machines and tables) as well as three RULA scores including RULA score A (arm/wrist score), RULA score B (neck/trunk/leg score) and final RULA grand score. Since all of these variables were theoretically of equal importance, an equal role was assigned for all of them in the regression models, and therefore no adjusting factor was considered in each model. The odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated from the multiple logistic regression models. The fit of the models was confirmed by the Hosmer–Lemeshow goodness-of-fit test. For all statistical tests, p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Table 1
                         shows the demographic details of the study participants. The age of participants ranged from 18 to 64 years (mean = 33.2 years; SD = 9.9 years). Most of the participants were married (74.5%) and had a mean BMI of 24.1 kg/m2 (SD = 4.1 kg/m2, range = 13.1–36.0 kg/m2). Among them, 4.0% were illiterate, 47.0% had primary school education, 33.5% had secondary education and 15.5% had diploma. The majority of operators (74.5%) reported that they were not involved in regular sport and physical activities.

The job characteristics of sewing machine operators are presented in Table 2
                        . The operators had been working in their current job between 1 and 42 years (mean = 12.6 years; SD = 9.5 years). The mean daily and weekly working hours spent on sewing garments (shirts, pants, jackets, etc.) were 9.1 (SD = 1.5) and 54.5 (SD = 11.0) hours, respectively. The majority of participants (60.2%) reported more than 2 h of continued work without a break (>10 min) during a daily shift (range = 1−4 h). All of the participants were paid on a piece-rate salary system. A large proportion of the participants indicated that they feel pressure because of work (89.6%) and had to work very fast (84.5%). Only 10% of the operators had adjustable chairs and less than one-third of them were highly satisfied with the design of sewing machines and tables.


                        Table 3
                         shows the percentages of operators with each RULA score, including the RULA scoring for the two different regions of the body and for the grand score. The upper arms score of the operators was generally 3, a result that was characterized by the upper arms being slightly abducted and flexed between 20° and 45°. The lower arms score for the majority of operators was also 3, and reflected the need for machinists to extend their arms across the midline of the body with elbow flexion more than 100°. The wrist score was generally between 3 and 4, with the wrists in extension (sagittal plane) of 15° or more. The neck and trunk scores of 2 and 3 for the majority of the machinists also indicated a high proportion of neck and trunk flexation of more than 20° to the front. However, the most common postures of the legs were determined to be within normal limit which supported the use of RULA assessments in the first instance (with its focus on the upper body). A typical working posture of an operator at his workstation is illustrated in Fig. 1
                        .

The final RULA grand score ranged from a minimum of 4 to a maximum of 7 with an average score of 5.7 (SD = 0.62). For the majority of operators (90.9%), the final RULA grand scores were determined to be 5 (30.7%) or 6 (60.2%), which indicates an action level of 3. The percentage of machinists with a final RULA grand score at action level 4 was 6.4%. Additionally, none of the operators had a final RULA grand score of 1 or 2 (e.g. an acceptable working posture). The mean arm/wrist score (score A) was higher in men than in women (4.9 and 4.0, respectively; p < 0.001), although women's mean neck/trunk/leg score (score B) was higher than men (4.1 and 2.9, respectively; p < 0.001). Women also received higher RULA grand scores than men (mean 6.1 and 5.4, respectively, p < 0.001).


                        Tables 4 and 5
                        
                         show the prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms in different body regions reported by the sewing machine operators. A total of 79.6% of the machinists (80.1% males and 79% females) reported some form of musculoskeletal symptom at some time during the 12 months preceding the data collection. Ninety-one percent of those who reported symptoms indicated more than one location of pain or discomfort. The most commonly affected body regions were low back (58.9%), neck (54.1%), hands/wrists (40.2%), upper back (37.8%) and shoulders (27.8%). More males than females reported symptoms in their upper back, while the frequency of hand/wrist symptoms was higher in females than in males (p < 0.01). The prevalence of shoulder (p < 0.05), knee and ankle/foot (p < 0.01) symptoms increased with age.

Regarding the severity of complaints, moderate to severe symptoms (3 or 4 on the scale of 0–5) in the low back, neck and upper back areas seemed to be reported more frequently than other body regions (as shown in Tables 4 and 5). The mean rating of the severity of complaints in the low back, neck and upper back areas were 3.8, 3.3 and 3.1, respectively. The severity of ratings for the upper back, low back and hands/wrists (p < 0.01) were found to differ between males and females (Table 4). The severity of symptoms for the neck, low back and knees also increased by age group (p < 0.01) (Table 5).

The results of univariate and multiple logistic regression analyses of factors associated with MSDs in different body regions are shown in Table 6 and 7
                        
                        . The results of multiple logistic regression analyses indicated that the number of years worked as an operator, number of hours worked per day, duration of continuous work without a break, feeling pressure due to work, and working postures (assessed by the RULA method), as well as individual factors including age, gender, BMI and being involved in regular sport and physical activities were significantly associated with the presence of musculoskeletal symptoms of different body regions. However, no significant association was found between the fast working, job satisfaction, use of adjustable chairs, operators' satisfaction with the design of sewing machines and tables, marital status, educational level and smoking habits and the reported symptoms.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The findings of the present study add to the understanding of the working conditions of sewing machine operators with respect to the occurrence of musculoskeletal symptoms and their associated risk factors. The prevalence of self-reported musculoskeletal symptoms was found to be very high among the study population, where the most commonly affected body regions were the low back, neck, hands/wrists, upper back and shoulders, respectively. The mean rating of severity of complaints in the low back, neck and upper back areas was generally between moderate and high (3 or 4 on the scale of 0–5), which is relatively similar to the findings of previous studies conducted among sewing machine operators (Westgaard and Jansen, 1992; Sealetsa and Thatcher, 2011). The severity of symptoms reported for each body region differed between the genders so that males experienced more severe symptoms in their upper back and low back, whereas the mean severity of hand/wrist symptoms were higher in females than in males.

As shown in this study, musculoskeletal pain and discomfort is a major problem in sewing machine operators. This is consistent with previous epidemiological reports of MSDs among this working population (Öztürk and Esin, 2011; Sealetsa and Thatcher, 2011). The high prevalence of neck/shoulder and back complaints found in the present study is also in agreement with previous studies among relatively similar occupations involving sewing operations (Serratos-Perez and Mendiola-Anda, 1993; Roquelaure et al., 2002; Öztürk and Esin, 2011; Sealetsa and Thatcher, 2011; Nazari et al., 2012). These findings provide further evidence that MSDs are highly prevalent among the workers involved in sewing activities. This is possibly not surprising because the sewing operation, as a highly repetitive task, involves frequent head and trunk bending movements for a long period of time, and therefore imposes unacceptable postural loading on the body. This is confirmed by the results of multiple logistic regression models in this study, which indicated that working posture was a possible risk factor for musculoskeletal pain in the neck, shoulders, upper back and low back regions of sewing machine operators.

The most common posture adopted by the operators during the sewing task performance was the bending posture of the neck and trunk (more than 20° flexion) to the front. Such a working condition can impose excessive physical loads on the musculoskeletal system of operators, and may eventually lead to the development of musculoskeletal problems in different body regions if sustained over long periods of time. The mean RULA grand score of 5.7 in the present study emphasises that the operators' postures were constrained by both the visual and the manual aspects of the sewing task, and that the design of the sewing workstations had a considerable influence on the postures adopted. It was found that the majority (91%) of the study participants (with posture assessed at action level 3) needed an investigation and changes in their working habits soon to avoid serious harm and physical damage. These results are consistent with previous reports of poor working postures (assessed by RULA method) among sewing machine operators (Öztürk and Esin, 2011; Teodoroski et al., 2012).

The findings of this study confirm that the sewing machine operators had frequent periods of long duration of sewing work without breaks (e.g. sitting in one place in a static or non-moving position for more than 2 h). Several previous studies have shown that the long duration of sitting work without a break may influence the risk for neck and shoulder complaints among different occupational groups such as sewing machine operators (Wang et al., 2007), hand-sewn shoe workers (Dianat and Salimi, 2014) and office employees (Johnston et al., 2008). In a study conducted by McLean et al. (2001), it was also shown that regular rest breaks reduced the neck, shoulder and low back discomfort among computer workers. Our findings also indicated that the duration of continuous work without a break was associated with the occurrence of neck and shoulder complaints. Thus, to reduce MSDs, sewing machine workers should be advised to take regular rest breaks in order to alleviate exposure and also to aid recovery from unhealthy postures.

The prolonged working hours have also been recognised as another risk factor for development of MSDs among different occupational groups (Fogleman and Lewis, 2002; Johnston et al., 2008; Nazari et al., 2012; Dianat and Salimi, 2014). Nazari et al. (2012) found that the prolonged daily working hours contributed to a greater number of reports of upper back symptoms among hand-woven carpet weavers. Dianat and Salimi (2014) also found that the number of hours worked in a day was significantly positively associated with knee symptoms in hand-sewn shoe workers. The significant positive association between duration of sewing task and reported symptoms in the upper back and lower back areas in the present study is in agreement with these previous studies. The findings of the present study also indicated a significant association between the number of years worked as an operator and the presence of symptoms in the neck and shoulders. This result is also similar to the findings of Ferreira and Saldiva (2002) who reported a significant association between duration in the job and MSDs among the operators engaged in computer-telephone interactive tasks.

Several previous studies have shown that psychosocial factors of the working environment may have a role in the development or reporting of MSDs among workers involved in sewing activities (Wang et al., 2007; Öztürk and Esin, 2011; Dianat and Salimi, 2014). Öztürk and Esin (2011) reported that feeling pressure because of work was associated with musculoskeletal pain in different body regions of female sewing machine operators in Turkey. Our findings also indicated that feeling pressure due to work was significantly associated with the presence of upper back symptoms among sewing machine operators. This is perhaps not surprising, as the study participants were paid based on the number of items they completed and this provided an incentive to work at high speed without adequate rest breaks. The findings of the present study provide further evidence that both physical and psychosocial job factors are associated with increased risk of musculoskeletal problems among workers involved in sewing activities.

Regarding individual risk factors, the results of multiple logistic regression models indicated that gender was a significant factor for upper back symptoms with an odds ratio of 10.9 for males in comparison with females. This may be attributed to differences in working habits between genders (e.g. the number of hours worked in a day was higher for men than women). Two other studies have reported a significant association between age and upper back symptoms in workers involved in sewing activities (Öztürk and Esin, 2011; Dianat and Salimi, 2014). In our study, age was significantly positively associated with knee symptoms. A better understanding of the task characteristics may provide an insight into the job design to support the user needs of older workers in future (Stedmon et al., 2012). It was also shown that those operators involved in sport activities were less likely to report hand/wrist symptoms than other workers. Body mass index was also shown to be significantly positively associated with knee symptoms (OR = 1.10), which is similar to the observations of Viester et al. (2013) in a Dutch working population. These findings highlight the need for consideration of individual factors (such as age, gender and BMI as well as regular sport/physical activities) in future analysis of musculoskeletal complaints among this working population.

The findings of the present study have several implications. Considering the significant role of SMEs in economic development, improved working conditions in this sector has the potential for a significant impact on national economy and workers' quality of life. The findings also highlight the role of prevention in the workplace in order to reduce MSDs. These findings emphasise the importance of both individual and work-related aspects of sewing tasks in association with musculoskeletal symptoms. The implications for ergonomic practice may be to improve the workstation design for sewing tasks (e.g. to reduce poor working postures) based on workers' anthropometry. Other specific interventions aiming at improving work organisation (e.g. through limited working hours per shift or week and allowing adequate rest breaks) are also recommended with a view to helping prevent such symptoms in this working group.

It is important to consider the current findings in the context of the cross-sectional data collection, and whilst a large dataset was possible, causal inferences cannot be drawn. It is also necessary to highlight that the data rely on the reliability and accuracy of self-report, which may be subject to recall or interviewer bias (where participants either failed to correctly remember data, or provided expected answers to the interviewer). The RULA observational method applied to operators' working postures allowed to perform rapid and reliable evaluation of the loading on the musculoskeletal system during the sewing tasks, while direct exposure assessment methods (e.g. electrogoniometric and video-based motion measurements) may be required if data are to be used for characterisation of joint/limb movements and dynamic physical stress or for biomechanical modelling purposes (Li and Buckle, 1999; Dianat et al., 2012).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A high prevalence of musculoskeletal pain and discomfort (particularly in the neck, shoulders, upper back, low back and hands/wrists) among the sewing machine operators emphasises the need for ergonomic interventions for improving the working conditions of this working group. The relatively high RULA scores in the study highlight a poor sewing workstation design and suggests that in most cases the operators' postures at their work stations need to be investigated and some changes are required soon. Work organization factors including long duration of sitting work without a break and prolonged working hours per shift, as well as other work-related variables such as the number of years worked as an operator and feeling pressure due to work were also found to be associated with the occurrence of musculoskeletal symptoms in different body regions. Other recommendations are, therefore, to reduce the number of hours worked per shift or week, limit the number of uninterrupted hours of work and allowing adequate rest breaks, thereby lowering the frequency and severity of complaints.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

