@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of culture (China vs. US) and task on perceived hazard: Evidence from product ratings, label ratings, and product to label matching

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Chinese participants perceived less hazard in response to warning labels than did US participants.


                        
                        
                           
                           Perceived hazard in response to products did not differ as a function of culture.


                        
                        
                           
                           Likelihood of injury and control affected matching performance differently across culture.


                        
                        
                           
                           Warning design should take into account that risk perceptions vary with culture and context.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Warnings

Culture

Risk

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In the current study, 44 Chinese and 40 US college students rated their perceived hazard in response to warning labels and products and attempted to match products with warning labels communicating the same level of hazard. Chinese participants tended to provide lower ratings of hazard in response to labels, but hazard perceived in response to products did not significantly differ as a function of culture. When asked to match a product with a warning label, Chinese participants' hazard perceptions appeared to be better calibrated, than did US participants', across products and labels. The results are interpreted in terms of constructivist theory which suggests that risk perceptions vary depending on the “frame of mind” evoked by the environment/context. Designers of warnings must be sensitive to the fact that product users' cognitive representations develop within a culture and that risk perceptions will vary based on the context in which they are derived.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

“Economic globalization” refers to “the increasing economic interdependence of national economies across the world through a rapid increase in cross-border movement of goods, service, technology, and capital” (Karacan and Ergin, 2011, p. 53). As part of this process, trade between the US and China rose from $2 billion in 1979 to $562 billion in 2013. China is the United States' biggest source of imports and its third-largest export market (Morrison, 2014). In this case, the borders that are being crossed are not only physical, but cultural. One concern associated with the import and export of products is whether those products are appropriately labeled given the target population. Do product perceptions vary with culture? Do warning labels convey the same level of risk to members of different cultures? Do warning labels accurately reflect the level of risk that product users associate with a given product?

Perceptions of hazard in response to warning label components (colors, symbols, and signal words) have been shown to vary as a function of language spoken (e.g., English-only vs. Spanish (Wogalter et al., 1997); English vs. Chinese vs. bilingual (Luximon et al., 1998)). For English-speaking participants in the US, research indicates that the color red tends to communicate higher levels of hazard followed by orange and then yellow (e.g., Braun and Clayton-Silver, 1995; Bresnahan and Bryk, 1975; Chapanis, 1994; Dunlap et al., 1986; Leonard, 1999). However, some studies suggest that black communicates greater hazard than red (e.g., Lesch et al., 2009). For signal words, DEADLY communicates greater hazard than DANGER, and DANGER communicates greater hazard than WARNING (Wogalter et al., 1998). Regarding WARNING and CAUTION, the ANSI standards (ANSI Z535.4, 1998) suggest that WARNING indicates a situation which, if not avoided, could result in death or serious injury while CAUTION is to be used to indicate a situation which, if not avoided, may result in minor or moderate injury. However, research has not consistently supported the distinction (e.g., Kalsher et al., 1995; Wogalter et al., 1998, 1995).

In a study examining Chinese perceptions of hazard for signal words and sign shape, Yu et al. (2004) found that, while the relative strength of the signal words was similar for Chinese vs. western cultures (as observed by Wogalter and Silver, 1990), the Chinese tended to provide lower ratings of perceived hazard. We (Lesch et al., 2009) also found that Chinese participants consistently assigned lower levels of perceived hazard to warning components and configurations than did US participants, but the relative ordering of warning components and configurations was fairly consistent across culture.

Models within cultural psychology propose different mechanisms and modes of transmission for cultural influences. Differences between Western and East Asian nations have been conceptualized in terms of traits such as individualism vs. collectivism (Schwartz, 1992; Triandis, 2001), independent vs. interdependent self-concepts (Markus and Kitayama, 1991), or analytic vs. holistic cognitive styles (Nisbett, 2003). It has been suggested that a heuristic-based and holistic cognitive style (i.e., experience-based, emphasizing the embeddedness of form and content) is more readily accessible to members of Asian cultures while an analytical cognitive style (i.e., rule/logic-based) is more readily accessible to members of Western cultures (e.g., Morris and Peng, 1994). Participants of Chinese and Korean descent appear to rely on readily accessible exemplars and intuition rather than abstract rules for tasks that assess categorization, conceptual structure, and deductive reasoning (Lechuga and Weibe, 2011). In the attribution of causality, Morris and Peng (1994) found that American participants attributed more to an actor's internal properties, whereas Chinese perceivers attributed more to situational context.

According to the “psychometric” approach to risk perception (Slovic et al., 1986), different countries/cultures each have a unique hazard profile which can be described in terms of a set of qualitative characteristics including whether the hazards are voluntary, chronic, catastrophic, common, fatal, immediate, ascertainable, controllable, or novel. Factor analysis has been used to reduce this set of risk characteristics to two higher order dimensions (e.g., Slovic et al., 1980). The first, Unknown Risk, has been found to be primarily determined by the extent it is “unknown” (i.e., to those exposed as well as to “science”), but also by “unfamiliarity”, “involuntariness”, and the “delay of effects”. The second, Dread Risk, has been found to be most strongly determined by “severity of consequences”, “dread”, and “catastrophic potential”. Consistent with this approach, it has been found that participants' ratings of severity of injury, likelihood of injury, and familiarity are predictive of ratings of perceived hazard (Wogalter et al., 1999). As severity of injury and likelihood of injury increase, perceived hazard increases; whereas, as familiarity increases, perceived hazard decreases. Whether severity of injury or likelihood of injury is found to be the best predictor of perceived hazard appears to depend on the types of items examined. For example, Slovic et al. (1979) found that, for technologies (i.e., nuclear power) and activities (i.e., recreational activities), likelihood of injury is the strongest predictor.


                     Schmidt and Wei (2006) used a psychometric approach in their study of risk perceptions in Austria and China. They obtained evidence for three main risk factors (catastrophic risk, uncertainty, and relevance) that were broadly consistent with those identified in earlier risk perception studies. Additionally, risks such as nuclear energy, auto accidents, and smoking appeared in similar relative positions within the factor space as observed in earlier studies (e.g., Slovic, 1987; Slovic et al., 1986, 1980, 1987). However, Austrian and Chinese lay people differed in terms of their perceptions of controllability – Chinese lay people viewed the risks as being far more controllable than did Austrian lay people. The Chinese participants also believed people were better informed, that the risks are less voluntarily chosen, that there is a longer delay before the effects of the risks become observable, and that the risks have a higher catastrophic potential. Furthermore, Chinese lay people felt personally more affected by the risks than did Austrians, but judged future generations to be less affected.

According to cultural theories of risk (e.g., Douglas and Wildavsky, 1982), the meanings of risks are socially constructed through collective-level processes of selective attention. Cultures view specific activities as dangerous in order to protect their social structure and worldviews (see Boholm, 2003). Four basic sociological forms have been defined based on grid-group theory: egalitarianism, individualism, fatalism, and hierarchism (Douglas, 1978). Consistent with cultural theory, Xie et al. (2003) found that respondents from China, a country characterized by high power distance (inequality in power distribution in which more power translates into more privilege) and strong hierarchical cultural roots, were more concerned about risks that threaten established forms of social relations and less concerned about technology risks.

These approaches to risk suggest stable worldviews on the part of the perceiver. However, evidence in judgment and decision-making demonstrates that cultural differences vary with task and situational factors such as attentional load, time pressure, and choice format (e.g., Briley et al., 2000; Chiu et al., 2000; Knowles et al., 2001). These findings, as well as findings that bi-culturals can easily switch from one cultural style of judgment to another cultural style, have been used by Weber and Morris (2010) to argue that cultural styles are not fixed worldviews, but evoked frames of mind in which meaning is constructed based on internal cultural representations from memory as well as external structures in the environment. According to this approach, living in a culture instills a person with cognitive representations (schemas, categories, rules, procedures, goals, etc.) that guide judgments and decisions by constraining attention, search for evidence, as well as inference. These representations will be activated to the extent that they are applicable and accessible in a given context. According to this view of cultural influences, the important question is not “Does culture matter?” but “When does culture matter?” (see Weber and Morris, 2010).

The current study attempted to answer this question by comparing and contrasting performance on three different tasks as a function of culture: (1) perceived hazard in response to warning labels (additional analyses of these data were presented previously in Lesch et al., 2009), (2) perceived hazard in response to product names, and (3) a matching task in which participants viewed a product name and an array of twelve different labels and selected the warning label which they believed best represented the level of hazard associated with the given product. While considerable research has focused on isolated variables that affect hazard perception, comparatively little research has examined interactions among these variables or the relation between perceived hazard derived from different sources (i.e., products and warning labels). How do judgments of risk vary across these tasks and as a function of culture of the product-user? Are judgments of risk calibrated (i.e., closely aligned) across task and across culture? That is, are judgments of risk similar regardless of culture of the participant or the method used to obtain the risk judgment? As regards calibration across culture, prior evidence suggests that Chinese participants perceive lower levels of hazard associated with warning labels (e.g., Lesch et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2004) and are generally found to be less risk averse than western participants (Hsee and Weber, 1999; Weber et al., 1998; Weber and Hsee, 1998). As regards calibration across task, it was hypothesized that US participants' perceptions would be better calibrated than Chinese participants' perceptions due to more extensive regulation of product-labeling in the US as compared to China (and, consequently, greater exposure to co-occurrences between labels and products). It was also hypothesized that performance across tasks might reflect a greater reliance on a holistic cognitive style by Chinese participants and a greater reliance on an analytical cognitive style by US participants.

Alternatively, a constructivist view of risk (e.g., Weber and Morris, 2010) suggests that cultural differences will occur in some tasks, but not others, depending on the “frame of mind” evoked by the environment/context. While all the tasks require judgments of perceived hazard, the matching task is likely to evoke other considerations (or schemas or other cognitive representations) regarding which hazards should be warned against. If different frames of mind are evoked for each culture, as a function of task, then different patterns of performance would be expected.

To increase our understanding of how judgments of hazard are formed across tasks and culture, ratings of severity of injury, likelihood of injury, control, and familiarity were obtained and used to predict performance on the different tasks. Earlier research, with Western populations, indicates that perceptions of hazard tend to decrease with increased perceived control and familiarity and increase with increased likelihood of injury and severity of injury (e.g., Wogalter et al., 1999). However, other research suggests that Chinese perceptions of control may differ from those of more western populations (e.g., Schmidt and Wei, 2006).

Every year countless numbers of people are injured while using products. Increasing our understanding of cross-cultural conceptions of risk will not only improve product safety, but should also facilitate interactions among nations in terms of foreign affairs and policy, more generally. To do so, perceived hazard was examined as a function of task (label rating, product rating, matching) and culture (China vs. US).

@&#METHOD@&#

All participants were students from local colleges or universities and were paid for their participation. Forty students (20 female, 20 male) participated in the experiment in the United States (mean age = 20.5 years, SD = 2.00) and forty-four students (21 female, 23 male) participated in the experiment in China (mean age = 21.6 years, SD = 1.17). All study procedures were approved by the Liberty Mutual Research Institute Institutional Review Board for the Protection of Human Participants.

Personal computers (Pentium 3 processor) were used for stimulus presentation and data collection. The CRT monitors had 17-inch displays characterized by 1024 × 768 pixel resolution, 24-bit color, and a refresh rate of 85 Hz. The display settings (i.e., color, brightness, contrast) were set the same on each monitor. A computer program controlled stimulus presentation and recorded responses.

A set of 12 warning labels (from Lesch et al., 2009) consisting of colors, signal words, and symbols was used. These warning labels were constructed based on ANSI recommendations and suggestions from prior research (see Lesch et al., 2009). The symbols included the standard safety alert symbol (i.e., exclamation point inside a triangle), the skull and crossbones symbol, as well as a skull with crutches which was proposed by Barnett and Wambaja (2000) as a new international safety alert symbol. The Chinese translations of DANGER, WARNING, CAUTION, and BEWARE were obtained from Luximon et al. (1998). The translations of DANGER and WARNING corresponded to those provided by the Chinese National Standard (GB15258-1999, 1999) for chemical safety labels (Shenzhensafety, 2004) which also specifies the translation for NOTICE. The translation for DEADLY was obtained from the Oxford English-Chinese dictionary. See Table 1
                            for the Chinese translations. Signal words and symbols were superimposed onto 6.5 × 1.5 cm colored rectangles for presentation. See Fig. 1
                            for the warning labels examined.

Products, technologies, and activities were obtained from lists from Wogalter et al. (1991, 1999) and Slovic et al. (1979). However, pilot testing indicated that some of these items are uncommon or are different in China – for example, electric hedge trimmer, drain cleaner, football helmet, and semi-automatic rifle. Therefore, these lists were supplemented with items from the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (2014). Fifty items were randomly selected. See Appendix A.

Products were rated on 5 dimensions taken from Wogalter et al. (1991, 1999) and Slovic et al. (1979): perceived hazard, severity of injury, likelihood of injury, control, and familiarity. Questions were modified to accommodate products, technologies and activities. See Table 2
                            for the different rating types.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Prior to beginning the experimental tasks, all participants read and signed an informed consent form, were screened for normal color vision, and responded to a basic demographic survey which asked about gender, age, education, exposure to other cultures/languages, as well as family income and area where the participant grew up. For each participant group, stimuli were presented in their native language (English or Chinese). All participants completed three tasks in the following order: product rating, warning label rating (see Lesch et al., 2009), and the matching task.

For the product rating task, participants rated all 50 selected products (presentation order was randomized) on one rating type before proceeding to the next. Participants provided ratings on a scale from 1 (not at all _____) to 9 (extremely _____). They were instructed to make their responses as quickly as they could.

For the label rating task, participants rated the level of hazard conveyed by warning components and configurations on a scale from 1 (not at all hazardous) to 9 (extremely hazardous). Participants rated colors, signal words, symbols, and warning labels. However, for the current study, the focus will be on warning labels.

The matching task consisted of 50 trials. On each trial the participant viewed a product name (the same 50 products rated in the product rating task) with an array of 12 warning labels (See Fig. 1). The same 12 labels were presented on each trial, but the location of each label within the array varied randomly across trials. Selection of product names was also randomized across trials. The participant was instructed to select the label which best communicates the level of hazard associated with the given product and to press the corresponding response key.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                        China. Twenty-seven percent of the Chinese participants reported having grown up in a rural area, 34% in small towns, 25% in small cities, and 14% in large cities. Fifty percent of participants reported that their annual family income was less than 7500 RMB, 30% between 7500 and 15,000 RMB, 18% between 15,000 and 30,000 RMB, and 2% greater than 30,000 RMB.
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           At the time of testing, the GDP per capita was approximately 12,336 RMB (retrieved from: http:://www.indexmundi.com/facts/china/gdp-per-capita on June 27, 2014).
                         When asked what kinds of exposure they have had to American culture, 93% of participants reported exposure through movies, 80% through literature, 79% through television, 75% through the internet, 55% through consumer products, and 5% reported exposure through travel.


                        United States. Eight percent of the US participants reported having grown up in a rural area, 70% in small towns, 23% in small cities, and 5% in large cities. Three percent of participants reported that their annual family income was less than $15,000, 15% between $15,000 and $30,000, 30% between $30,000 and $45,000, and 53% greater than $45,000.

Mean ratings for each Rating Type (severity of injury, likelihood of injury, control, and familiarity) were subjected to an analysis of variance with Rating Type as a within subject variable and Culture and Gender as between subjects variables. There was a main effect of Culture such that Chinese participants provided significantly lower mean ratings (mean = 4.9, SE = .08) than US participants (mean = 5.8, SE = .09), F(1,80) = 57.15, p < .01, eta-squared = .42, and a main effect of Rating Type, F(3,240) = 20.73, p < .01, eta-squared = .21. There was also a significant Rating Type × Culture interaction, F(3,240) = 6.02, p < .01, eta-squared = .07. There were no other significant main effects or interactions. Pairwise comparisons, using the Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons, indicated that mean ratings of likelihood of injury (mean = 4.7, SE = .13) were significantly lower than the mean ratings for all other rating types, all p's < .01. The Rating Type × Culture interaction reflected significantly lower mean ratings for Chinese participants than for US participants for all rating types except likelihood of injury. See Table 3
                        .

An analysis of variance over the product means produced a similar pattern of results with two exceptions: there was a significant Rating Type × Gender interaction, F(3,117) = 8.83, p < .01, eta-squared = .19, and a marginally significant Rating Type × Culture × Gender interaction, F(3,117) = 2.50, p = .06, eta-squared = .06. Pairwise comparisons, using the Bonferroni adjustment, indicated that females rated themselves as somewhat less familiar with the products than did males and that there was a significant effect of Gender on the ratings of control for the US participants (mean = 6.2, SE = .22 for females and mean = 6.0, SE = .23 for males), p < .05, but not for the Chinese participants.

Participants rated their perceptions of hazard directly in response to labels and products in the warning label and product rating tasks, respectively. These will be referred to as “direct” hazard ratings since they were given directly in response to a label or product. However, since participants did not rate perceived hazard in the matching task, hazard ratings for the products were derived based on the perceived hazard ratings given to those “matching” labels in the label rating task. These will be referred to as “derived” hazard ratings since they are derived based on the hazard ratings provided to the matching label in the label rating task.

However, prior to deriving perceived hazard ratings for the matching task, it was necessary to determine whether the range of individual ratings given to labels fully captured the range of individual ratings given to products. That is, it is possible that some participants might have judged some products to be more/less risky than the highest/lowest level of risk they assigned to the labels. In these instances, participants would be unable to select a label that matches the given product in terms of perceived risk. Trials for which the product's rating was lower (or higher) than the lowest (or highest) rating given to labels in the rating task were identified. If the participant selected the label with the lowest (or highest) available rating, it was considered a truncation. As an example, if a product received a rating of “9”, but the highest rating assigned to a label by that participant was “8”, then the participant would not be able to select a label matching the product in terms of perceived hazard. The best they could do would be to select the label with the highest available rating (in this example, “8”). We reasoned that, in these instances, there was good evidence that the resulting mismatch was forced by the truncation of the range of perceived hazard for the labels. All truncation trials were removed from data analysis as were any products that were missing 20% or more of their data (for either Culture) due to truncation of the range of perceived hazard for the labels. Ten products (tables, rope or string, tableware, bubble baths, electric toy cars, screwdriver, hair clippers, oscillating fan, can openers, pins and needles) from the original set of 50 were removed. Of the remaining trials, 1.5% were eliminated due to truncation for the Chinese and 5.8% for the US participants.

Perceived hazard ratings given directly in response to the labels were subjected to a linear mixed model analysis with Culture, Gender, and Label as fixed effects. SAS/STAT® 9.2, (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) was used for estimating fixed and random coefficients and the models were fit by restricted maximum likelihood (REML). The results indicated that Gender was not significant and was, therefore, dropped from the model. There were significant main effects of Culture and Label, F(1,83.47) = 39.44, p < .01 and F(11, 111.54) = 192.50, p < .01, and a significant Culture × Label interaction, F(11,111.54) = 5.06, p < .01. The main effect of Culture reflected significantly higher mean perceived hazard ratings for US participants (Mean = 6.8, SE = .12) than for Chinese participants (Mean = 5.7, SE = .12). Planned comparisons indicated that only DANGER-skull did not significantly differ as a function of culture. The relative order of the labels on perceived hazard was the same for US and Chinese participants with the exception of the labels DANGER-skull and DEADLY! (see Fig. 2
                           ). For the US, DEADLY! received higher mean perceived hazard ratings than did DANGER-skull (8.9 vs. 8.4) while the pattern was reversed for China (7.7 vs. 8.5).

Perceived hazard ratings given directly in response to the products were subjected to a linear mixed model analysis with Culture, Gender, and Product as fixed effects. Ratings of product familiarity were included as a covariate in the linear mixed model in order to control for an effect of varying levels of participant familiarity with the products. If participants are not familiar with the specific products examined, then they will have no basis to judge the products on the other dimensions (likelihood of injury, severity of injury, control, perceived hazard). The results indicated that there was a main effect of Product, F(39,162.01) = 43.00, p < .05, as well as a significant Culture × Product interaction, F(39,162.05) = 4.33, p < .01, but no main effect of Culture (p > .05). Paired comparisons (using the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons) indicated that mean ratings of hazard in response to products significantly differed, as a function of Culture, for 11 out of 40 products. For eight (alcoholic beverage, bicycle, firefighting, hay processing equipment, hockey, laundry soap, paints/solvents, and snowboarding) of these 11 products, the mean rating provided by Chinese participants was significantly lower than the mean rating provided by US participants. For the other three products (chainsaw, swimming, and trash compactor), the mean rating provided by Chinese participants was significantly higher than the mean rating provided by US participants.

A linear mixed model with Culture, Gender, Product, and Familiarity as fixed effects was used to compare direct perceived hazard for products (from the product rating task) with perceived hazard as derived from the matching task. All main effects were significant (all p's < .01) except for Gender. There were also significant Culture × Product, Culture × Task, Product × Task, and Culture × Task × Product interactions (all p's < .05). US participants provided higher perceived hazard ratings (Mean = 6.0) than did Chinese participants (Mean = 5.0), F(1, 6239) = 20.87, p < .01. The main effect of Task reflected higher mean perceived hazard ratings (6.0) derived from the Matching Task than mean direct perceived hazard ratings (5.0) provided in response to products in the Product Rating Task, suggesting that labels with somewhat higher ratings of perceived hazard were being matched with products with somewhat lower ratings of perceived hazard. There was a significantly smaller task difference for Chinese participants (Means of 5.2 vs. 4.8, derived vs. direct) than for US participants (Means of 6.8 vs. 5.2, derived vs. direct). See Table 4
                           .

Paired comparisons (employing the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons) indicated that, for US participants, there were four products that were well-calibrated in terms of their direct and derived hazard ratings – that is, direct hazard ratings given directly in response to products and those derived from the matching task did not significantly differ for these “products” (which are actually activities): firefighting, snowboarding, hockey, and surgery. Thirty-six products were not well-calibrated. For each of these 36 products, the derived hazard rating was significantly higher than the direct hazard rating indicating that US participants tended to select labels with higher perceived hazard (relative to their product ratings).

For Chinese participants, the opposite pattern was observed: well-calibrated products (those with non-significantly different derived and direct hazard ratings) outnumbered non-calibrated products 33 to 7. Non-calibrated products included: fishing, hay processing equipment, lawn mower, log splitter, pesticide, prescription antibiotics, and workshop staples. For prescription antibiotics, the direct hazard rating was significantly higher than the derived hazard rating. For the remaining six non-calibrated products, the direct hazard rating was significantly lower than the derived hazard rating. Since product familiarity was included as a covariate, we can be confident that the observed patterns are not due to participants' differing levels of familiarity with the products.

The difference between the ratings derived from the matching task and those observed in the product rating task was significantly larger for US participants than for Chinese participants, suggesting that levels of perceived hazard associated with products and their “matching” labels may be better calibrated for Chinese participants than for US participants. When individual data points (direct minus derived difference scores) are considered, it can be seen that the distributions were similar across culture for difference scores of zero (perfect calibration) and for slightly negative difference scores (−1 to −3) (See Fig. 3
                           ). However, 21% of the difference scores were highly negative for US participants compared to only 10.6% for Chinese participants, while 29.9% and 7.8% of the difference scores for Chinese participants fell in the slightly positive and highly positive categories, respectively, compared to only 17.7% and 1.7%, respectively, for US participants. To summarize, the data were somewhat skewed towards large negative differences (larger derived hazard values than direct hazard values) for US participants. For Chinese participants, more data fell within the central region with less falling in the tails (large positive and negative difference scores). See Fig. 3.

Regression analyses were used to further explore cross-cultural differences in task performance. Multinomial regression was selected since it is appropriate for use with categorical data (i.e., label selection) and its use would facilitate comparison across tasks (since data from the other tasks could also be treated categorically). Culture, Gender, likelihood of injury, severity of injury, familiarity, and control ratings were explored as potential predictors of product hazard ratings (based on earlier literature review). To ensure sufficient numbers of observations in the subpopulations, ratings were first recoded into low (1–3), medium (4–6), and high (7–9) categories, with medium serving as the reference level; labels with the signal words NOTICE and BEWARE were recoded as “low”, CAUTION and WARNING were recoded as “medium”, and DANGER and DEADLY were recoded as “high”. Factors and covariates were entered using a forward stepwise method (p < .05 in; and p > .10 out). Main effects, two-way interactions, and three-way interactions were examined.

It was found that when Culture was included as a predictor, the best-fitting models for both product ratings and label selection predicted distributions that were significantly different from the observed distributions. Therefore, separate multinomial regressions for Chinese participants and for US participants were conducted. The goodness-of-fit statistics indicated that the resulting best-fitting models produced predicted distributions that did not significantly differ from the observed distributions. For the product rating task, Pearson χ2(32) = 27.42, p > .05 and Deviance χ2(32) = 29.93, p > .05 and Pearson χ2(128) = 122.40, p > .05 and Deviance χ2(128) = 132.23, p < .05, for the Chinese and US participants, respectively. For the matching task, Pearson χ2(132) = 146.54, p > .05 and Deviance χ2(132) = 155.58, p > .05 and Pearson χ2(128) = 129.69, p > .05 and Deviance χ2(128) = 150.35, p > .05, for the Chinese and US participants, respectively. The significant predictors for each Culture and Task (p < .05) are presented in Table 4. For the product rating task, the Nagelkerke pseudo-r2s suggest that the models provide a moderately good fit for both the Chinese participants, Nagelkerke pseudo-r2 = .44, and the US participants, Nagelkerke pseudo-r2 = .47. However, for the matching task, the Nagelkerke pseudo-r2s suggest that the models provide a low to moderately good fit (Nagelkerke pseudo-r2 = .14, for Chinese participants, and .28 for US participants).

For product hazard ratings, it can be seen that both the Chinese and US models share severity × control and familiarity as significant predictors. For both cultures, high severity increased the likelihood of selecting a high hazard rating (relative to a medium hazard rating), but control moderated the effect of severity differently across culture. For the US, when a high severity item was also low control, the likelihood of a high product rating increased to the greatest extent, Exp(B) = 8.1, followed by high severity – medium control items, Exp(B) = 4.1. When the item was of high severity and high control, the likelihood of a high product rating was increased to the smallest extent, Exp(B) = 2.5. Therefore, as control increased, the effect of severity decreased. For Chinese participants, on the other hand, it was the high severity – high control items that increased the likelihood of a high hazard rating to the greatest extent, Exp(B) = 14.2, followed closely by high severity – low control items, Exp(B) = 11.9, and then high severity – medium control items, Exp(B) = 4.7.

For both cultures, low severity increased the likelihood of low hazard ratings relative to medium hazard ratings, but control also moderated the effect of low severity, particularly for the Chinese participants. See Table 5
                           . For Chinese participants, low severity items that were also high control were about 20.2 times more likely to result in a low hazard rating relative to a medium hazard rating, while low severity – low control items were 10 times more likely, and low severity – medium control items were 4.1 times more likely.

Familiarity was also a significant predictor for both cultures. The pattern, however, is difficult to interpret: low familiarity increased the likelihood of high hazard ratings (relative to medium hazard ratings) for US participants, but also increased the likelihood of low hazard ratings (relative to medium hazard ratings) for both US and Chinese participants, as did high familiarity.

Finally, likelihood of injury was a significant predictor for US participants, but not for Chinese participants. High likelihood of injury increased the likelihood of a high hazard rating relative to a medium hazard rating, Exp(B) = 3.7, while low likelihood of injury increased the likelihood of a low hazard rating relative to a medium hazard rating, Exp(B) = 2.7.

For the matching task, severity and control interacted in a similar fashion, in predicting high hazard ratings, as they had in the product rating task except that the magnitude of the predicted changes were much smaller. This suggests that ratings of perceived control may be less important in assigning a warning label to a product than in assigning a hazard rating to a product. See Table 4. The pattern was somewhat different in predicting low hazard ratings: high severity served to reduce the likelihood of low hazard ratings to about the same extent for US and Chinese participants, but control did not appear to moderate the effect. Familiarity, again, appeared to have similar effects across cultures, but likelihood of injury, again, was only significant for US participants. For US participants, high likelihood of injury increased the likelihood of a high hazard label by 1.5 times while low likelihood of injury increased the likelihood of a low hazard label by about 1.8 times.

To summarize, the pattern of significant predictors was somewhat similar both across cultures as well as tasks, with the exception of likelihood of injury, which was a significant predictor for US participants for both the product rating task and the matching task but not for the Chinese participants (for either task). Also, while the significant predictors were much the same, their predicted effects were not. Consistent with prior research, high severity of injury increased the likelihood of high hazard ratings and high hazard labels (and decreased the likelihood of low hazard ratings) while low severity of injury increased the likelihood of low hazard ratings. Control behaved as expected for US participants – for high severity of injury items, decreases in control produced greater increases in the likelihood of selecting a high hazard rating/label. For Chinese participants, high severity – high control items produced the greatest increases in the likelihood of selecting a high hazard rating/label. The models for US and Chinese participants also differed in the magnitude of the predicted changes in hazard rating – the changes were much greater for Chinese participants than for US participants. For high hazard ratings, the Exp(B)s for high severity ranged from 4.7 to 14.2, for Chinese participants, but only from 2.5 to 8.1 for US participants. Finally, the models also differed, across culture, in terms of likelihood of injury. Likelihood of injury failed to significantly predict variance in product ratings or label selection by Chinese participants. For US participants, high likelihood of injury ratings predicted increased likelihood of selecting high product ratings (and high hazard labels) while low likelihood of injury ratings predicted increased likelihood of selecting low product ratings (and low hazard labels).

As regards cross-task (but within culture) comparisons, it appeared that the effects of control were greater (i.e., changes in control predicted greater changes) in the product hazard rating task than in the matching task (see Table 4). However, the scales used across task (the numeric scale for product ratings vs. “label” scale for the matching task) cannot be assumed to be equivalent, even though they both reflect a range from low to high hazard.

In this era of economic globalization, it is important to determine how different cultures perceive product hazards and warning labels to ensure that the eventual user of a product is adequately warned of potential hazards. In this study, Chinese and US college students participated in three tasks designed to assess the extent to which these two populations differ in their perceptions of hazards associated with products and labels and in terms of the calibration of their product perceptions with level of hazard communicated by a “matching” warning label.

When rating perceived hazard directly in response to products and warning labels, pattern of performance was somewhat similar across culture. For the label rating task, the relative ordering of labels in terms of perceived hazard was the same with the exception of DANGER-skull and DEADLY!. However, a main effect of Culture indicated that Chinese participants' mean ratings of perceived hazard associated with warning labels was significantly lower than US participants' mean ratings of perceived hazard. This finding suggests that, in order to communicate a similar level of hazard, “stronger” warning labels need to be used for Chinese relative to US product users. For the product rating task, there was no main effect of culture, but there was a significant Culture × Product interaction.

The multinomial regression analyses suggested some possible bases for the significant Culture × Product interaction: as expected, US participants' performance demonstrated the greatest increase in likelihood of selecting high hazard ratings for high severity – low control products. However, Chinese participants' performance demonstrated that high severity – high control products produced the greatest increases in likelihood of selecting high product hazard ratings. In a study of environmental hazards, Lai and Tao (2003) also found that Chinese participants judged controllable risks to be more threatening, rather than less threatening. Lai and Tao explain this result in terms of Confucian teachings that “demand the exertion of human effort, responsibility, and positive engagement” in dealing with things “that are of immediate concern, knowable, and controllable” (Lai and Tao, 2003, p. 682).

Confucian teachings also encourage a reliance on intuition (Chou, 1981) which is consistent with the finding that Chinese participants, unlike US participants, did not appear to rely on likelihood of injury information in forming their hazard perceptions. Similarly, Wright et al. (1978) observed differences in probabilistic thinking between British participants and three groups of Southeast Asians (including Hong Kong Chinese). They found that British participants were more likely to adopt a probabilistic view of uncertainty and that they were more accurate in their assessment of the likelihood of occurrence of uncertain events. Anecdotally, Pollock and Chen (1986) noted the experience of a team of American decision analysts from the University of Michigan who worked with a Chinese team to control the water pollution of the Huangpu River in mainland China: their Chinese counterparts did not appear concerned about uncertainty. They appeared to assume complete certainty for all important information pertaining to a decision task, and they found the necessity of assigning probabilities to events “strange” and “unnatural.”

A separate issue concerns the calibration of perceived hazard across products and associated warning labels. If perceived hazard in response to products is well-calibrated to perceived hazard in response to their associated warning labels, then it could be argued that the warning system is valid (i.e., it communicates the intended level of hazard) for the given user population. That is, the warning is successfully serving its function as a reminder of already-known hazards (see Lehto and Miller, 1988; Lesch, 2005). However, another function of warnings is to educate about unknown hazards. If perceived product hazard is not in alignment with actual hazard, warnings could serve to shift the perceptions of hazard that target users associate with the product.

The Chinese participants appeared to be better calibrated, than their US counterparts, in their perceptions of hazard across products and their “matching” labels. Thirty-three out of 40 products did not significantly differ in terms of their mean direct and derived perceived hazard ratings. However, for US participants, only 4 products were well-calibrated. The data indicated that US participants were assigning labels with hazard levels that exceeded the hazard levels that they had assigned to the matching products – a finding that is in contradiction to our hypothesis that US participants would demonstrate better calibration due to more extensive regulation of product labeling in the US than in China. One plausible explanation is related to the fact that product liability law is much more advanced in the US than in China and that product liability lawsuits are much more common in the US. As a result, in the US, there may be a perception that “over-warning” is required in order for a label to be considered legally sufficient; thus, the assignment of higher hazard level labels to products.

An alternative interpretation is that the two tasks activated different cognitive frames for the hazard judgments for US participants, but not for Chinese participants. We suggest that, for both groups, the product hazard rating task likely elicited the most obvious or “available” hazards (or hazards resulting from typical/expected use) for the products. However, the matching task would be more likely to call attention to possible, though not likely, hazards and/or hazards resulting from non-typical/unexpected use of products. For example, in the product rating task, products such as a hairdryer or windshield wiper fluid may receive relatively low hazard scores since their normal everyday use infrequently causes injury. However, being asked to assign a label to a product in the matching task would be more likely to call to mind those less likely situations that should also be warned against (e.g., ingesting windshield wiper fluid or using a hair dryer while in the bath tub). The litigiousness of the US society, and a more readily accessible analytical cognitive style, would likely trigger activation of this “frame” in the matching task for US participants. However, the Chinese have a more readily accessible experienced-based, or holistic cognitive style (as reviewed earlier), which should decrease the likelihood that the matching task would trigger/activate an alternative judgment frame. An experience-based cognitive style will rely on the most readily available experiences (personal experiences). Essentially, this argument suggests that the Chinese participants answered the same question for the two tasks (How hazardous is this product?) while the US participants answered what could be considered two very different questions: “how hazardous do you think this product is?” (product rating task) and “what warning should this product have?” (matching task).

Our results appear most consistent with constructivist theories of risk perception in which cultural differences arise when environmental stimuli activate culturally-specific cognitive representations. We suggested that, in consideration of the matching task, the litigiousness of the US society resulted in US participants assigning relatively higher hazard warning labels to products that they had assigned relatively lower hazard ratings. Such a tendency to “over-warn” would threaten the validity of risk communications. It was also suggested that the two cultures differed in terms of the cognitive styles used to approach each of the tasks, with Chinese participants potentially being guided by a Confucian heritage that emphasizes intuition and holistic processing. The US pattern of results on the matching task was consistent with a more analytical, or rule-based, style. However, it should be emphasized that these cognitive styles are not considered fixed traits, but frames of mind evoked in response to triggers in the environment and based on culturally-derived cognitive representations. Thus, we argue that US participants tended to take a more holistic approach to the product rating task and a more analytical approach to the matching task. Designers of warnings must be sensitive to the fact that an individual's cognitive representations develop within a culture and that risk perceptions will vary based on the context in which they are derived. Therefore, it appears unlikely that one warning system, or simple translations of existing warning systems, will be sufficient for different cultures and contexts.

There are several limitations to the current study. First, the design would have benefitted from using a more extensive set of products and a larger participant pool. However, even so, we were able to observe significant effects of product characteristics on performance. Another limitation is that each participant only provided a single rating for each warning label configuration even though it is likely that a given warning label configuration captures a range of perceived hazard, rather than a single point on a continuum. On this basis alone, one would not expect perfect calibration between perceived hazard in response to products and their “matching” labels. However, this cannot explain that Chinese participants' perceptions appeared relatively well-calibrated, while the US participants' perceptions did not. Finally, the generalizability of the results can be called into question since only college students served as participants. However, one might expect cross-cultural differences would be attenuated for this group, relative to older segments of the population, due to their likely greater exposure to technologies that have served to “shrink” the world. Thomas Larsson (2001, p. 9) refers to globalization as “the process of world shrinkage, of distances getting shorter, things moving closer. It pertains to the increasing ease with which somebody on one side of the world can interact, to mutual benefit, with somebody on the other side of the world.” Despite this process of “world shrinkage,” we have observed important differences in the risk perceptions of two cultures that point to the importance of ensuring that warnings are able to serve their intended functions (warning of unknown hazards and reminding of known hazards) when products cross cultural borders. While our focus has been on the implications of economic globalization for warning effectiveness, the increased blending of ethnic and racial groups in The United States (i.e., what has been referred to as “The Great Melting Pot”) suggests that care must also be taken when communicating across cultures within a given nation. The US Census bureau predicts that, by 2043, there will be no single majority group in the US (Cooper, 2012).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In conclusion, our results indicate that Chinese and US participants' perceptions of hazards were differentially constructed based on culturally-specific cognitive representations. More specifically, while Chinese and US participants responded similarly to severity of injury associated with a product, they responded quite differently to the likelihood of injury and the perceived controllability of hazards associated with products. For controllability, the responses were opposite across culture: Chinese participants were more likely to select high product hazard ratings in response to high control products and US participants were more likely to select high product hazard ratings in response to low control products. It was also the case that US perceptions of hazard were related to the likelihood of injury associated with the product while Chinese perceptions were not. Caution should be exercised when attempting to translate existing warning systems across cultures since the same information can convey very different messages. Therefore, warning messages/safety communications intended to be used across cultures should focus on those dimensions that are responded to similarly across those cultures involved (i.e., in this case, severity of injury). However, safety communications restricted to use within the US would also benefit by including information regarding likelihood of injury as well as framing messages to emphasize a lack of controllability. For Chinese participants, in order to elicit greater perceptions of hazard, warning messages/safety communications should be framed in such a way as to emphasize the product user's controllability over the hazard.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank Zhengxuan Zhao for his assistance at various stages; Lucinda Simmons for her assistance in data collection and analysis; Angela Garabet for her assistance in data collection; Marvin Dainoff, Yulan Liang, and William Shaw for their comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript, and Peg Rothwell for assistance in manuscript preparation. This research was supported by the Liberty Mutual Research Institute for Safety.


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Alcoholic beverage
                                    Baseball/softball
                                    Battery chargers
                                 
                                 
                                    Bicycle
                                    Bubble baths
                                    Can openers
                                 
                                 
                                    Chain saw
                                    Commercial aviation
                                    Electric power
                                 
                                 
                                    Electric saw
                                    Electric toy cars
                                    Fire fighting
                                 
                                 
                                    Fishing
                                    Hair clippers
                                    Hair dryers
                                 
                                 
                                    Hammer
                                    Hay processing equipment
                                    Hockey
                                 
                                 
                                    Horseback riding
                                    Household bleach
                                    Hunting
                                 
                                 
                                    Laundry soaps/detergents
                                    Log splitters
                                    Manual lawn trimmers
                                 
                                 
                                    Motor vehicles
                                    Nuclear power
                                    Oscillating fan
                                 
                                 
                                    Paints, solvents
                                    Pesticide
                                    Pins and needles
                                 
                                 
                                    Power pruning equipment
                                    Power sanders
                                    Prescription antibiotics
                                 
                                 
                                    Pull down/folding stairs
                                    Rope or string
                                    Scissors
                                 
                                 
                                    Screwdriver
                                    Skateboard, scooter
                                    Skewers, picks
                                 
                                 
                                    Slow cookers
                                    Snowboarding
                                    Steam iron
                                 
                                 
                                    Surgery
                                    Swimming
                                    Tables
                                 
                                 
                                    Tableware
                                    Trash compactor
                                    Vaccinations
                                 
                                 
                                    Windshield wiper fluid
                                    Workshop staples
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

