@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Maintaining knife sharpness in industrial meat cutting: A matter of knife or meat cutter ability

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The ability to maintain the cutting edge sharp is notably individual.


                        
                        
                           
                           The knife quality influence on sharpness is inferior to meat cutters' influence.


                        
                        
                           
                           Knife usage time is a relevant predictor for discomfort and ultimately MSD.


                        
                        
                           
                           Beef cutting may require up to at least six freshly sharpened knives per day.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Steel quality

MSD

Individual skill

Sharpness analyser

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Knife sharpness is imperative in meat cutting. The aim of this study was to compare the impact of knife blade steel quality with meat cutters’ individual ability to maintain the cutting edge sharp in an industrial production setting. Twelve meat cutters in two different companies using three different knives during normal production were studied in this quasi-experimental study. Methods included were measuring knife cutting force before and after knife use, time knives were used, ratings of sharpness and discomfort and interviews. Results showed that the meat cutters' skill of maintaining sharpness during work had a much larger effect on knife sharpness during work than the knife steel differences. The ability was also related to feelings of discomfort and to physical exertion. It was found that meat cutters using more knives were more likely to suffer from discomfort in the upper limbs, which is a risk for developing MSD.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Accidents and musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) are since long frequent among meat cutters, both in Sweden (Arbetsmiljöverket, 2012; Magnusson et al., 1987) and elsewhere (Conroy, 1989; Coutarel et al., 2004; Tappin et al., 2006). The risk/1000 employees for serious occupational injury were 15.8 for employees in slaughterhouses and meat processing compared to 2.3 for all blue collar workers in Sweden.
                        1
                     
                     
                        1
                        Official statistics from the Swedish Work Environment Authority, 2014/12/31. Available on request.
                      The most common accidents among meat cutters are related to the knife (Cai et al., 2005) where the fingers are at greatest risk.

Moreover, several studies have shown how knife sharpness affects the meat cutters' work load and thereby risk for MSDs (Bishu et al., 1996; Claudon and Marsot, 2006; Dempsey and McGorry, 2004). Carpal tunnel syndrome and trigger finger are more prevalent among meat cutters than other industrial workers and are suspected to be caused by hand held tools as knives (Gorsche et al., 1998, 1999). Among meat cutters, MSDs regarding other upper-limb joints such as e.g. epicondylitis and tenosynovitis (Kurppa et al., 1991; Viikari-Juntura et al., 1991), tendonitis (Yassi et al., 1996), neck and low back pain (Magnusson et al., 1987) are problematic. For a more comprehensive review, see Tappin et al. (2006).

A sharp knife thus means lower grip force, cutting moment and cutting time (McGorry et al., 2003). When the knife is dull, the forces involved are higher which increase the risk for MSDs. In the study of McGorry et al. (2003) the mean cutting moment increased with 25% when the knife was dull. Moreover, the wrist will be pressed to deviate which may lead to epicondylitis (Claudon and Marsot, 2006). Consequently, according to literature a sharp knife is of high importance to avoid accidents and MSDs. It is the sharpness of the knife in use that determines the workload, cutting forces and usability of the knife. So what are then the factors that may influence the sharpness of the knife during cutting?

The sharpening itself at a grinding machine determines the initial sharpness of the knife when beginning to cut. Sharpening is however not included in this study as this is not performed during cutting work but as a separate activity that is organized differently depending on size of company and organizational choice.

The quality of the steel in the knife blade has an impact: in a test of three different steel qualities the blade material did not have any initial effect on cutting capacity, but the harder the steel the better the knife retained its sharpness during repeated wear by striking the edge to a brass cylinder (Marsot et al., 2007). However, no tests of steel quality impact during real meat cutting have been published and it is thus unclear whether the repeated wear towards a brass cylinder corresponds to the situation in real work.

The other possible impact on knife sharpness during cutting is the individual working technique, which in turn can be separated into avoiding dulling the knife and maintaining the sharpness. Regarding the latter, when using a knife, the hair thin cutting edge gets wavy and bent and a technique called steeling is used for retaining a sharp edge. Steeling restores the edge by straightening and re-centring it and this is made by swiping the knife edge along a steel rod or through a steeling device with crossed bars (Dick, 2014; McGorry et al., 2005b; PRIMEdge, 2015; Szabo et al., 2001). Steeling is made during work as a separate activity in between cutting the meat and meat cutters spend up to 10% of their work time steeling their knife (CINBIOSE UQAM, 2008). Being skilful in steeling is considered to be difficult but essential for keeping a knife sharp.

The other aspect of the individual meat cutter's impact on knife sharpness is less described in literature. Experienced meat cutters and supervisors claim that cutting in the bones, touching the protective metal mesh gloves or apron with the edge or cutting into the cutting board are typical situations when knives become dull. However, more detailed knowledge about the individually related mechanisms does not exist, nor does knowledge regarding the magnitude of the impact of individual skill in relation to knife steel impact exist. There are however indications from knife manufacturers and people working in the business that the differences between individuals in ability to keep their knives sharp are large. Such indicators are for example how often a meat cutter has to sharpen the knife or how many knives are used during a day.

In their study of work training in meat cutting, Ouellet and Vézina (2014) found that cutting quality of the knife was perceived most important by the experienced workers regarding numbers of cuts required to perform a task and the apprentices in the study identified the knife as being the most important factor of 12 regarding pain at work.

It is therefore of vital importance to shed more light into the factors that affect the sharpness of the knives used when cutting, not the least in order to find opportunities for reducing the work load of meat cutters. The aim of this study was thus to compare the impact of the quality of the knife blade steel in relation to the impact of the meat cutters' individual ability in maintaining the sharpness of the knife. A further aim was to investigate to what extent the individual ability to maintain knife sharpness can be related to the individual meat cutter's experiences of discomfort, exertion and knife sharpness.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

The study was performed as a quasi-experimental case study in two separate meat cutting companies. Both companies cut beef, were privately owned and each plant had some 50 employees of whom 10 were employed as meat cutters doing deboning, starting with quarter carcasses. Six participants (Table 1
                     ) in each plant volunteered and gave their informed consent. All were men with more than 2 years' experience as meat cutter.

Work consisted of cutting beef from quarters of carcasses brought to the meat cutters hanging on a roof conveyor. One working cycle consisted of cutting a quarter carcass and took approximately 10 min. Additional work was knife steeling (maintenance) and sliding of quarter carcasses to their work stations. The weekdays Tuesday to Thursday in one week per plant were chosen in order to certify that conditions would be as uniform as possible.

Work periods and breaks are shown in Fig. 1
                        . Breaks lasted 15–45 min and were spent sitting in rest or canteen rooms, close to the work stations. Total working time at A was 7 h, and 8 h at B.

A standard model of knife was used but with three different steel qualities in the blades (Fig. 2
                        ).

One was a prototype (P) with a nitride hardened steel blade; one was from a Swedish manufacturer (S) and one from a French manufacturer (F), both using traditional but slightly different carbide hardened steel. All being 150 mm long and semi-flexible and hardened to HRC 57–59. The knives were chosen for being the most common standard design used for this type of deboning according to the Swedish manufacturer. They were as similar as possible in appearance but using different steel manufacturers. The participating meat cutters normally used similar knives. The study also provided an opportunity to test a steel quality not previously used for hand-held knives. All knives in the test were new and sharpened with an angle of 35° in a standardised way by an independent company only performing sharpening of tools and using Cozzini PRIMEdge centralized knife sharpening system (PRIMEdge, 2015). All participating meat cutters used X-steels for maintaining the edge during experiment.

Data were collected through interviews, ratings and measurements of knife sharpness and time each knife was used. The procedure for each data collection and the analysis performed is described below.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Short interviews were initially held with all meat cutters included in the study. Apart from collecting the individual data displayed in Table 1 the interviews covered knife related experiences as their opinions of knives, sharpness and steeling. They were also asked how they would describe the feeling of cutting with a sharp or dull knife respectively, and questions related to knife sharpness training experiences. The interview data was grouped into categories and representative answers and opinions are provided in the results section to show how meat cutters express the experiences related to the quantitative results.

The rest of the data was collected following a defined procedure related to the meat cutting work performed. In each company, Tuesday-Thursday was used to make sure that the carcasses only had been chilled for one night which affects the hardness of the meat and to avoid “Friday rules”, being common and deviating work procedures in order to prolong the weekend.
                              
                                 1.
                                 The procedure was planned so that each meat cutter was assigned three knives of the same type for each day of participation. Knives and meat cutters were paired randomly. Each day, two participating meat cutters used knife type F, two used type P and two used type S. The order in which the knives were assigned was balanced.

Before each meat cutter started working in the morning he was given a numbered freshly sharpened knife by the researchers. This knife had already been tested for its individual sharpness. Each meat cutter also rated their morning discomfort before starting to work according to the rating procedure described below. Directly after doing this the meat cutter went to work and the time was noted.

When the meat cutter experienced the knife to be too dull to be maintained only by steeling, he went back to the researchers and picked up a new freshly sharpened knife. The time was recorded and the meat cutter rated his discomfort, exertion and experience of sharpness. Thereafter he directly returned to work. The used knife was then tested for its sharpness.

After using three knives or performing a full day's work, if not all three knives were used, each meat cutter rated his discomfort, exertion and experience of knife sharpness. Time was also recorded. If the day's work was not finished, he then continued with his everyday knives. Only used knives were recorded in the study. There were no possibilities to extend the study for more days if not all three knives were used during one work day.

This procedure was repeated three days in a row and each meat cutter had a new set of three knives every day and for each day a new knife type F, S or P respectively.

Ratings performed were: discomfort before/after use of knife, exertion and knife sharpness, the latter being a measure of the feeling of knife usability. The purpose of the ratings was to catch early signs of risks for MSD as well as to compare the ability of the meat cutters to judge the condition of the knives after use.

For discomfort and exertion, ratings were done using a body map (Kuorinka et al., 1987) to relate the ratings to different body parts. For exertion, data was collected regarding knife hand, other hand, knife arm and other arm. In the protocol 0 was used for “no discomfort; no effort; worst sharpness imaginable” and 10 for “worst discomfort; maximum effort; best sharpness imaginable”.

The ratings were done using the visual analogue scale (VAS), a ruler with a scale numbered from 0 to 10 and a sliding cursor (Grant et al., 1999).

The sharpness of each knife was tested in an Anago KST sharpness analyzer (Fig. 3
                           ) validated and previously used in studies regarding knife sharpness (McGorry et al., 2003, 2005b).

The sharpness of each knife's edge was measured from the tip to about 100 mm from the tip by cutting a test strip attached to a force sensor. The analyser software then provided an average cutting force for each knife based on about 250 force samples during these 100 mm.

The knife cutting force was used for comparison between the knives and for determining the “speed” of force increase s. This was calculated using the formula:
                              
                                 (1)
                                 
                                    
                                       s
                                       =
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                (
                                                
                                                   
                                                      F
                                                      U
                                                   
                                                   −
                                                   
                                                      F
                                                      N
                                                   
                                                
                                                )
                                             
                                          
                                          t
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          [
                                          
                                             
                                                N
                                                /
                                                h
                                             
                                          
                                          ]
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where F
                           
                              N
                            is the average new knife cutting force when starting working and F
                           
                              U
                            is the average cutting knife force when changing the used knife or finishing work.

The time t each knife was used was measured from the moment the meat cutter left the test room with a newly sharpened knife until he came back with the used knife considering it impossible to work with anymore. The time was corrected for breaks (Fig. 1). The time used thus included time for changing carcasses, steeling the knife and other complementary activities performed. However, it was controlled that all meat cutters only did their normal production work.

To compare the knife types' median values of F
                           
                              N
                            and F
                           
                              U
                            Mann–Whitney tests were used as the distributions were found not to be normal. The same tests were used to compare knives' usage time t and force increase s.

The ratings of exertion in the hands and arms were compared for the different knife types. The sums of the ratings of exertions were calculated for each knife type within each individual, and the knives were thereafter ranked according to the results. The knife type related to the least exertions was ranked 1 and the knife type with the highest feeling of exertion was ranked 3. The sums of the rankings for each knife type were then calculated. This ranking procedure was used to reduce the influence of variation in the ratings and only the order the different knife types' perceived influence on exertion was considered.

In a similar way, the sum of the ratings of knife sharpness was calculated for each knife type. Highest ranking of knife sharpness was ranked 1 and lowest ranked 3. Both these rankings were then compared using the Mann–Whitney test suitable for ordinal scale parameters.

The ratings of discomfort were tested for correlation with new knife force, used knife force, force increase, knife usage time, time as meat cutter (experience) and age. Discomfort being hypothesized as an indicator of risk for musculoskeletal disabilities (Macdonald, 2012; National Research Council and The Institute of Medicine (2001)).

Regarding the influence of individual meat cutter and knife types on force increase s and time each knife was used t, Kruskal–Wallis test was used. By this, the influence of each of these two independent variables could be determined.

IBM SPSS Statistics 21 software was used to make the statistical evaluations of the results. The tests used are also displayed with the results.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The important expected features of a knife were described as for example “Being sharp, staying sharp. Relatively flexible and following the bones smoothly and easily”. This was a typical comment and mentioned by many. To this can be added comments on the handle that should fit their own hand well. A soft and flexible blade was considered to save strain on the wrist when cutting.

The experiences of dull knives were expressed as e.g. “It's hard work, fatiguing. The knife takes its own way”, “Heavy, you get bad results” and “You work harder with the other hand as well because you have to tear the meat apart”. A dull knife thus meant a heavy workload with poor result, pain and poor quality of the meat. The meat cutters, however, all answered that they don't work with a dull knife.

The experiences of sharp knives were expressed as e.g. “The day moves on easy, in the evening I feel fine” or “It's as cutting in butter, no resistance” or “Easier, you don't have to work that much”. To work with a sharp knife thus meant to have flow in work, to be able to be productive without getting exhausted.

All meat cutters were autodidacts on steeling with only some hints from fellow workmates in some cases. Steeling was considered more or less an automatic movement that was constantly repeated.

An overview of the quantitative data received is provided in Table 2
                        . Rated discomfort before work might indicate problems related to MSD.

The data were tested for normality using Shapiro–Wilk tests which is supposed to produce the most powerful test (Razali and Wah, 2011; Ghasemi and Zahediasl, 2012). Very few of the samples were found to be normally distributed and all statistical tests used were thus adapted to this condition. Data are therefore presented with median values and distribution with interquartile range (IQR) values (see Tables 2 and 3
                           ).

The data on cutting forces (before and after use) from the Anago sharpness analyser together with knife usage time and the ratings (VAS) of the participating meat cutters were used to evaluate the differences regarding the knives.

As can be seen in Table 3, knife P was significantly sharper before the meat cutters started working as the new knife force was lower. Knife P was also used the shortest time, significantly shorter than knife S. Regarding the rankings developed from meat cutters' ratings of the knives' sharpness, knife P was perceived as the least sharp knife and the F knife was experienced to give the least exertion of the tested knives.

The individual meat cutters' influences on force increase were analysed. Two measures were used, (1) how fast the cutting force of the knife increased s and (2) knife usage time t until the meat cutters did not want to use the knife anymore. Fig. 4
                         shows the box plot of the different individuals' influence on the force increase per time unit (sharpness deterioration). As can be noted the variations between the different individuals are large.

The significance of the differences was tested using Kruskal–Wallis test with both individuals and knife types used as independent variables. The difference between individuals was significant with p < 0.001. The difference between knives was non-significant.


                        Fig. 5
                         shows the difference between meat cutters, means and standard deviations, regarding time they used the knives before exchanging them to a new one.

The differences between the results were tested similarly with Kruskal–Wallis test. The results were significant regarding differences between individuals (p = 0.018) but non-significant between knives.


                        Fig. 5 shows that the median value of knife usage time for the 12 individuals varied from about 1h 20 min to almost 3h. For a working day of 8h the meat cutters in this study thus needed 3–6 freshly sharpened knives/day to be able to perform their work and being content with the sharpness of their knives during the whole day.

The discomfort ratings before and after work (VAS) were tested for correlation regarding the different aspects measured. When two ratings of discomfort for different body parts were present the one being most relevant was chosen i.e. knife hand or knife arm. The results are shown in Table 4
                        .

As can be seen the initial knife sharpness, the knife usage time, the experience as meat cutter and the age all were related to discomfort after work for the group studied and age was also related to discomfort before starting to work.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The problems of MSD's in meat cutting well illustrate the multi-factorial character of many real life problems in workplaces. How work is organized, what tools are used, the means of influence and what education and training the workers have – all and more are needed in order to understand the environment and thus be able to make the right moves towards a better meat cutting business in Sweden (Neumann et al., 2010). In this study, some of the issues and problems related to meat cutting were addressed by using a quasi-experimental approach studying the issues at hand during full production.

There were some differences between the knife types that could be identified. Knife P was initially sharper than the other two. All knives were sharpened by a professional knife sharpening company using advanced dedicated machinery which provided a standardized sharpening as good as possible. The only likely reason for knives P to be sharper according to the authors is that due to the specific character of the material these knives received another sharpness in the process before the study. There were however no significant differences in sharpness of the used knives, when the meat cutters preferred to change their knife. Knife P was used less time before exchange than the others, the difference to knife S being significant. The force increase was as well largest for knife P but there were no significant differences between the knives.

The difference was however perceived by the meat cutters who ranked knife P as being the least sharp knife in spite of that this knife was initially sharper than the other knifes. A possible explanation regarding knife type P is that this specific new material was easy to get sharp but that the edge of this material was more sensitive to wear, i.e. its abrasion resistance was slightly less than the other knives'. The reason for this may well be found at the micro level of the material as both the composition (nitride vs carbide, higher chromium content) as well as the production procedure (powder metallurgy vs traditional) differs. A slightly different material or a more obtuse edge angle may have solved this problem since larger edge angles resist wear better (Marsot et al., 2007).

As far as the authors know, no other study tested different knife types and their ability to stay sharp in real meat cutting work. In a laboratory study with simulated wear cycles however, Marsot et al. (2007) found significant differences between knife steels concerning sharpness retention after a repetitive third wear cycle, where the knife with the hardest steel had the highest retention. It took however three wear cycles to obtain the difference.

When it comes to meat cutter's rated exertion for the different knives, using knife F was better than the others and significantly in relation to knife S. The high interquartile ranges illustrate the complexity of factors involved in real meat cutting regarding standardized conditions, difference between meat cutters and differences between the meat cut.

Differences between meat cutters in retention of sharpness were obvious and statistically significant both concerning the decline in measured sharpness per hour of use and concerning the time each knife was used before changing to a freshly sharpened knife.

In this study, the meat cutters' specific task was the same with seemingly identical work procedures, work organization and type of meat. This means that the differences between the meat cutters most likely refer to their personal working skill and technique. What in the working skill that caused the large differences in ability to keep the knife sharp was not the scope of this study but other research may provide some clues. Some efforts to characterize working skill in deboning have been made. Madeleine and Madsen (2009) found that experienced (>1 year) deboners had a work cycle of less duration, smaller range of motion and amount of variability and higher complexity compared with workers with low experience. In this study however, all meat cutters were experienced and no correlations between experience as meat cutter and force increase s or knife usage time t was found. Musculoskeletal models might also contribute with some clues regarding beneficial working technique (Pontonnier et al., 2014). Insufficient training in knife maintenance has been noted in several studies (Claudon, 2000; Dempsey and McGorry, 2004; Karltun, 2008; Lindbeck and Engkvist, 2008; Marsot et al., 2007). This coincides with the results from the interviews in this study where the majority of the meat cutters talk of being autodidacts in knife steeling. Steeling has also been focused in a previous effort for educating meat cutters run by Vézina et al. (1999). However, it cannot be taken for granted that inadequate steeling is the only reason for poor ability to maintain knife sharpness. Most likely, there are also other factors relating to the working technique such as avoiding cutting in the bones, damaging the edge against the working table, hand or arm protections or clothes and the cutting technique itself. The characteristics of the box plots and the outliers (Figs. 4 and 5) are other signals of processes of high variability and relatively frequent individual mistakes damaging the cutting edge during cutting. As the outliers in our study were examined and found to be correct measures, we chose to use them in the calculations. It can also be noted that there are a few negative values which indicates that the knife was sharpened by using it. Some meat cutters experience their knives to be better and provide a smoother feeling after using and steeling them for a while. It is thus not possible to exclude that this can be the case.

There were two persons that distinguished themselves; one that seldom changed knife and had no physical complaints (DD) and on the other hand one person changing frequently and also having physical complaints (EE). A further analysis of working technique should favourably include a holistic approach including for example steeling technique, frequencies, body positions used, precision in cutting, forces applied, awareness of knife sensitivity and general handling of the knife.

This study showed a number of significant correlations between study measures and meat cutters' discomfort (Table 4). New knife cutting force affected discomfort after work, i.e. it was important that the initial sharpness of the knife was high. Knife usage time was another significant factor. The lower knife usage time, the higher risk for discomfort after work. How often a meat cutter changes knife or sharpens the knife can thus be seen as a risk indicator for developing discomfort. Moreover, the meat cutters' age was positively correlated to feelings of discomfort, thereby confirming the study by Dempsey and McGorry (2004). The implication of this is that with the working conditions the meat cutters in this study had, the work cannot be seen as sustainable for all ages without additional investigations. It can also be noted that the correlation between experience as meat cutter and discomfort after work was very close to be significant and it is possible that with a larger sample this could be the case.

The 3–6 freshly sharpened knives/day needed is based on the fact that some of the meat cutters only could keep a satisfactory sharpness of the average knife for a little more than 1 h and not to be forced to work with dull knives, the meat cutters either must have the number of knives they need or the opportunity to sharpen the knives during the day.

The knife sharpness may chiefly affect local exertion in muscles and joints. The connection between bad knife sharpness and high muscle load measured by EMG has been shown in several studies (Claudon and Marsot, 2006; McGorry et al., 2005a). The meat cutters reported discomfort at specific locations. These were not analysed in detail as the aim was to test a possible relation between discomforts in general and knife usage measures. Different work techniques will result in using different muscle groups and thus result in different discomfort patterns why specific discomfort locations were not of interest in this study.

Moreover, if discomfort is seen as an early warning of increased risk of MSDs (Macdonald, 2012; National Research Council and The Institute of Medicine, 2001), poor ability to keep the knife sharp is a factor that can be seen as a risk predictor for MSDs. As a consequence of this finding, training and educating meat cutters in keeping their knives sharp could be a means for reducing the risk for meat cutters to develop MSDs. These results confirm findings of other authors (Dempsey and McGorry, 2004; McGorry et al., 2003; Szabo et al., 2001), that the ability to maintain sharpness can have large impact on the forces that meat cutters are exposed to and thus risk of MSD. Our contribution is that this ability is largely dependent on the ability of the individual meat cutter during normal work and that knife steel quality will affect this as well but to a much less degree. Moreover, that frequent exchange or sharpening of the knife is a risk predictor for developing discomfort and MSD.

The knives preferred by the meat cutters were described as containing the ability to be and stay sharp as well as having a flexible blade and having a good handle. The measurements, however, show that the ability to be and stay sharp mainly is more a consequence of who is holding and maintaining the knife and less a difference between the tested knife types. The ability of the meat cutter is thus often to some extent likely projected on his knife when talking about sharpness.

The feeling of a dull knife was well known although no meat cutters said they accepted a dull knife. Dull knives were also related to bad feelings, low quality output and heavy work, exertion and discomfort in both the knife hand/arm as well as in the other hand/arm and the whole body. The meat cutters thus made these couplings to the knife sharpness, both to feelings of local exertion in the upper extremities and to general exertion and feelings of tiredness after a day of work.

In line with this, a sharp knife was related to easy, smooth, productive, high quality work with good feelings and coming home not being exhausted.

All experienced meat cutters acknowledged the importance of sharp knives and the need for being skilled in maintaining the cutting edge. From this point of view, it is remarkable that knife handling and maintenance do not exist at all in companies' training programs. Such training programs have been suggested and developed in Sweden, France and Canada (Claudon and Marsot, 2006; Vézina and Chatigny, 1996; Vogel et al., 2014).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A number of conclusions can be drawn from this study.

The initial sharpness of knives is important but cannot necessarily be taken for granted to be the same when different knives have been sharpened in the same process for sharpening. Different steel qualities thus have to be tested for how to achieve the best sharpening procedure and probably also the optimal sharpening angle.

Moreover, the ability of the meat cutters to maintain the cutting edge sharp differed significantly between individuals, both concerning edge wear and concerning time each knife was used. These differences were also of a much higher magnitude than the differences between the knives. There is thus room for radical improvement concerning the individual's ability in many cases.

Regarding the individual differences, the evaluation of the time the knives were used until considered dull indicates that according to this study a meat cutter cutting beef need at least up to six freshly sharpened knives per day to assure that work all the time is done with a satisfactory sharp knife.

The time between changing knives showed a significant relation to the experience of discomfort in the upper limbs. Meat cutters that often change or sharpen knives should thus be considered to be in the risk group for developing discomfort and ultimately MSD.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We would like to thank our funding source Swedish Labour Market Insurances (AFA) grant number 080014. No conflicts of interest have been identified. We also would like to thank Prof. Paul Yeow for valuable comments on an early version of this manuscript. The authors also would like to express their gratitude to the meat cutters, owners and other personnel of the meat cutting industries that so willingly and friendly opened their workplaces to us.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

