@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of overhead work configuration on muscle activity during a simulated drilling task

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examine influences on muscular demand in a drilling task.


                        
                        
                           
                           Encourage bilateral tasks.


                        
                        
                           
                           Forward force exertions require less muscular demand.


                        
                        
                           
                           During upwards exertions avoid reaching.


                        
                        
                           
                           Complete tasks seated when possible.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Shoulder

Fatigue

Bilateral tasks

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Overhead work is a known catalyst for occupational shoulder injury. Industrial workers must often adopt awkward overhead postures and loading profiles to complete required tasks, potentially elevating injury risk. This research examined the combined influence of multiple overhead working parameters on upper extremity muscular demands for an industrial drilling application.
                  Twenty-two right-handed males completed 24 unilateral and bilateral overhead work exertions stratified by direction (upward, forward), point of force application (15, 30 and 45 cm in front of the body), and whole-body posture (seated, standing).
                  The dependency of electromyographic (EMG) activity on several factors was established. Significant two-way interactions existed between point of force application and direction (p < 0.0001) and direction and whole body posture (p < 0.0001). An average increase in muscular activity of 6.5% maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) occurred for the contralateral limb when the bilateral task was completed, compared to unilateral tasks, with less than a 1% MVC increase for the active limb.
                  These findings assist evidence-based approaches to overhead tasks, specifically in the construction industry. A bilateral task configuration is recommended to reduce glenohumeral stability demands. As well, particularly for tasks with a far reach distance, design tasks to promote a forward directed exertion. The considerable inter-subject variability suggests that fixed heights are not ideal, and should be avoided, and where this is not possible reaches should be reduced.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Exertions are frequently performed in an overhead position in occupational settings. Overhead work is generally defined as working with the hands above the acromion, or over 60° shoulder flexion or abduction (Grieve and Dickerson, 2008). These postures reduce work capacity and joint strengths, while concomitantly increasing inaccuracy and task completion time (Grieve and Dickerson, 2008). Overhead work is prevalent in several occupational settings, including manufacturing and construction (Forde and Buchholz, 2004). Often geometric workspace constraints require workers to frequently adopt awkward and overhead postures to complete required tasks (Bjelle et al., 1979; Chaffin, 1973), with overhead work exposure frequencies ranging from 6 to 21% within a construction population, based on an observation of construction ironwork (Forde and Buchholz, 2004).

Myoelectric activity has frequently been used to quantify physical demands associated with overhead work. For instance, amongst experienced welders the supraspinatus is susceptible to fatigue during overhead work, and has the greatest strain, determined by the increase in EMG signals present during tasks involving overhead positions (Herberts and Kadefors, 1976). Specific to a drilling task, close overhead reaches have reduced biceps brachii and anterior deltoid activation (Anton et al., 2001). Increased muscular activity also results from farther overhead work locations when force is directed upwards (Chopp et al., 2010); however, when hand force was produced in other directions in this study (backward, forward, or downward), a modest forward reach (15–30° in front of the body) required lower overall muscular demand than directly overhead. This demonstrates the complex interactions present in the muscular demands of overhead work.

There is a greater risk for injury risk during overhead work. A strong relationship has been demonstrated between working with the arms above shoulder height (approximately 90° of elevation) and the development of pain and injury (Bernard, 1997; Grieve and Dickerson, 2008; Herberts et al., 1981; Punnett et al., 2000; van Rijn et al., 2010). In particular, subacromial impingement syndrome, which results from a reduction in the acromiohumeral interval width of the shoulder, is recognized as the predominant injury resulting from these awkward overhead postures (Miranda et al., 2005; Svendsen et al., 2004; van Rijn et al., 2010). Impingement accounts for approximately 50% of clinically diagnosed shoulder dysfunctions (van der Windt et al., 1995) and leads to several additional shoulder pathologies, including rotator cuff tears, subacromial bursitis, and SLAP lesions (Braman et al., 2014).

Research on overhead work has largely focused on unilateral tasks, and thus provides little insight into how bilateral strategies influence exposures. Occupational activities are often performed using both arms, particularly in the construction industry. The non-dominant limb generally acts as a whole-body stabilizer, while the dominant limb completes gross movements (Wang and Sainburg, 2007). The modification of exposure on both limbs in overhead work for bilateral tasks is unstudied, and therefore it is unknown if there is additional overexertion risk present, or a shifting of risk.

The purpose of this research was to compare muscular demands during unilateral and bilateral overhead simulated industrial drilling. It was hypothesized that a reduction in average muscular demands during the bilateral tasks would occur in the dominant arm, due to symmetric distribution of the required loads. Several scenarios were evaluated with the intention of developing evidence-based recommendations for overhead drilling to keep shoulder muscular demands as low as possible.

@&#METHODS@&#

Surface electromyographic (sEMG) data was collected from university-aged males, during simulated drilling tasks. Participants performed 24 static overhead trials with a hand-held drill in one testing session while sEMG was recorded. For the purposes of this study the right (dominant) upper limb will be referred to as the active limb, and the left upper limb will be referred to as the contralateral limb.

Twenty-two right hand dominant males (21 ± 1.1 years, 1.80 m ± 0.08 m, 81.0 kg ± 8.5 kg) participated. Gender was restricted to reflect construction sector demographics (Forde and Buchholz, 2004). Exclusion criteria were reported upper extremity or back discomfort or injury within the past year. The protocol was approved by the institutional research ethics board.

Upper extremity muscle activity and force applied by the drill were measured during experimental trials. Six upper extremity and back muscles were monitored bilaterally using sEMG with the Noraxon T2000 telemetered system (Noraxon, Arizona, USA): anterior deltoid, middle deltoid, upper trapezius, infraspinatus, supraspinatus, and lumbar erector spinae. Prior to electrode placement, the skin overlaying the muscles was shaved and cleaned with alcohol to reduce impedance. Noraxon bi-polar Ag–AgCl dual surface electrodes, with a fixed 2 cm inter-electrode spacing were placed over the described muscles using published placements (Cram and Kasman, 1998). Additionally, a ground electrode was placed over the clavicle. sEMG was recorded at 1500 Hz within the VICON Nexus 1.7.1 software (VICON, Oxford, UK). Subjects exerted a force using a hand-held drill (∼2.3 kg), which was not turned on to eliminate vibration, against a multi-axis load cell (MC3A, AMTI, Watertown, MA, USA). Visual force feedback was provided through custom Labview software (National Instruments, Austin, Texas, USA). This system provided real-time feedback to the participants, and verified the desired level of force was maintained against the force transducer.

Prior to the drilling trials, participants completed eleven standardized muscle-specific maximum voluntary isometric contractions (MVC) (Table 1
                        ) to normalize signals measured during drilling trials (Criswell, 2011). MVCs were performed twice for each muscle group to improve reliability of the results (Fischer et al., 2010) with a minimum of two minutes rest between MVCs (Chaffin, 1975). Five minutes of rest was provided between the MVC and drilling tasks. The max of each muscle was found from peak signal during MVCs, and considered 100% MVC.

Twenty-four randomized trials were completed with each trial representing a unique combination of the four parameters (Table 2
                        , Fig. 1
                        ). Participants exerted a total force of 30 N with the drill against the multi-axis transducer in the desired force direction. Each trial was approximately 10 s in duration with 60–90 s of rest provided between trials. A force magnitude of 30 N was chosen in order to elicit moderate muscular demand, emulate plausible work tasks, and be unlikely to generate fatigue during the experimental session.

Participants were verbally encouraged to remain in an upright posture and to maintain consistent arm flexion angles. They were instructed not to lean backwards or forwards, with the exception of the far reach trials for which it was necessary for some participants to lean in order to reach the target. A guard rail was placed directly in front of the participant to mimic a workplace barrier and to assist in limiting foot placements. Whole-body posture was otherwise unrestricted to encourage realistic postural selections.

All EMG data were processed in the amplitude domain to compare inter-task differences. Raw EMG signals were band pass filtered from 10 to 500 Hz and differentially amplified (CMRR >100 dB at 60 Hz, input impedance 100 MΩ). Signals were A/D converted using a 16-bit card with a ±3.5 V range and then linear enveloped using a second order dual pass Butterworth filter with a 4 Hz cutoff. For each trial, an average of the last five seconds of the trial for each muscle was computed and normalized to the peak magnitude obtained during the muscle-specific MVC exertions to allow for inter-subject comparisons. The last five seconds was selected to allow for force generation and to enable participants to reach and maintain the required force level (30 N) within ±5 N. Additionally, the last five seconds were more stable than that of the first five. If the participant did not maintain the force level, the trial was repeated. Additionally, an arithmetic average of the individual normalized muscle activity magnitudes was computed for each trial to compare overall muscle demand between trials.

A four way repeated measures ANOVA (technique, whole-body posture, point of force application and direction) with two-way interactions was used to determine the influence of each of the working parameters on both individual and average muscle activity of the active limb. A p-value of 0.05 was used to determine significance, and post-hoc analyses performed using Tukey's HSD statistics. Statistical analyses were completed using JMP software (SAS, Cary, North Carolina, USA).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Muscular activity was influenced differentially by the tested parameters, for individual muscles as well as total muscular effort measured by average EMG levels across muscles. Interaction effects existed for most evaluated parameters. A main effect of technique (unilateral vs. bilateral) existed in all muscles except the active anterior deltoid and erector spinae (Table 3
                     ).

Main effects were present for the middle deltoid, upper trapezius, and supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles on the active limb, as well as average muscle activity on the contralateral limb. The middle deltoid and supraspinatus activation levels on the active limb decreased by 2.5 and 2% MVC, respectively during the bilateral task, while a concurrent 3% MVC increase in upper trapezius occurred. Infraspinatus activation also increased on the active limb, but the magnitude was <1% MVC. Overall, the average activity of the active limb muscles showed a statistically insignificant difference of less than 1% MVC between unilateral and bilateral trials, reflecting the different muscular strategies employed. The average EMG on the contralateral limb exhibited an average increase of 6.5% MVC during the bilateral task, compared to the unilateral task, with middle and anterior deltoids having the largest increases (13% and 9% MVC, respectively). Erector spinae had the smallest increase of the contralateral limb muscles when going from unilateral to bilateral, with only a 2% MVC increase.

An interaction between point of force application (15, 30 and 45 cm) and direction (forward and upward) existed for average muscle activity on the active limb. Specifically, activity increased from 15% MVC at 15 cm, to 22% MVC at 45 cm during upward exertions, with the opposite trend occurring in forward exertions (9% MVC at 15 cm, 7% MVC at 45 cm) (Fig. 2
                        ). This interaction appeared for each individual muscle except for erector spinae and the active infraspinatus. Average muscle activity was influenced by several other interactions.

Significant interaction effects existed for average muscle activity between whole-body posture and two other work parameters. Specifically, whole-body posture (seated, standing) interacted with both direction (p < 0.0001) and point of force application (p = 0.00138). For the direction interaction, all conditions were different from one another. The forward trials were lower in both the seated and standing conditions (9 and 7.5% MVC, respectively), than that of their upwards counterparts (16 and 20% MVC). For the point of force application, there was no difference in the seated positions. However, in the standing configuration, the exertions at 15 cm required 12% MVC in the dominant arm, with 16% MVC at 45 cm (Fig. 3
                        ).

Main effects were present for each of the four working parameters for many of the individual muscles. Direction had the largest effect on the average activity and on the individual muscles on the active limb. Exerting the drill force upward had significantly higher average muscle activity (p < 0.0001) than forward exertions, with upward exertions requiring 10% MVC greater average muscle activity (18.4 ± 7.8% MVC) compared to forward (8.3 ± 7.8% MVC). This was similarly present for all active limb individual muscles (p < 0.0001) with upwards exertions requiring between 6 and 15% MVC greater activity than forward. A main effect of point of force application was present for average muscle activity and all individual active muscles, with the exception of the erector spinae. Average muscle activity increased during the point of force application as the reach distance moved from close (15 cm) to far (45 cm), with generally a 1% MVC increase from the 15 cm distance to the 30 cm distance, and a further 1% MVC increase to the 45 cm distance. Whole-body posture also demonstrated significant main effects for individual and average muscle activity, with standing generally requiring greater muscle demand, particularly for the anterior (+2.6% MVC) and middle (+2.2% MVC) deltoid muscles.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

It was hypothesized that a reduction in muscular activity on the active limb muscles would occur during the bilateral tasks. Although this was not uniformly observed, both the active middle deltoid and supraspinatus were less active during the bilateral task, while the active upper trapezius and infraspinatus increased slightly. Further, interactions between point of force application, direction, technique, and whole-body posture indicate that these parameters influence muscular demands and warrant consideration when incorporating drilling into work activities.

Although average EMG on the active limb was similar between unilateral and bilateral trials, individual muscle demand differed. The increase in upper trapezius activity with a bilateral work configuration has been previously supported (Shin et al., 2012). Specifically, a bilateral work condition with the neck maximally extended resulted in a 9% MVC increase in upper trapezius activity compared to the unilateral condition. This increase in trapezius activity corresponded with a concurrent reduction in middle deltoid and supraspinatus activity, likely resulting from the differing glenohumeral stability requirements. This trade-off in activity could imply that glenohumeral stability is less compromised during bilateral tasks compared to unilateral tasks, consequently resulting in a reduction in demand from these stabilizing muscles. The compensatory increase in upper trapezius activity may, however, have implications for scapular dyskinesis and subsequent subacromial impingement development. Thus, while a bilateral task configuration can reduce glenohumeral instability and possibly improve whole-body stabilization (subsequently preventing acute-type injuries), it poses a risk for scapular dyskinesis.

Direction influenced muscular demands in various ways, interacting with point of force application, technique and whole-body posture. The most notable interaction was between direction and point of force application. The upward direction generated higher average activation in combination with each of the parameters. Specifically, an upward force exertion located far from the body (45 cm) required the highest average activity (Fig. 2). Upward exertions require the lowest muscle activity when in a closer working position (Anton et al., 2001). Chopp et al. (2010) similarly found that with upwardly directed hand force the total upper extremity muscle activity increased as the task was moved further in front of the body. This trend has been additionally reported in wall painting which showed that the highest activation occurred when reaching upwards compared to working at elbow height or lower (Rosati et al., 2014). However, in contrast to earlier research (Chopp et al., 2010), the current results show that when force was directed forward, the closest position (15 cm) was more demanding than the furthest position (45 cm). This difference likely can be attributed to the use of the drill to exert the required force.

Considerable inter-subject variability existed in muscular responses to the overhead exertions. The large variability represents the different strategies by participants with differing anthropometrics to compensate for the fixed workstation. This coincides with previous research that reported an overhead task which was scaled to anthropometrics resulted in less muscle demand than a fixed station across a population (Chopp et al., 2010). This study aimed to replicate a realistic work scenario that is not scaled to specific anthropometric dimensions, such as height and/or arm reach. As different muscular strategies were used in this study to accommodate the fixed workstation, customizing the workstation to individual anthropometrics will help decrease or standardize reach distances.

Specific limitations should be considered when interpreting these results. First, while participants used a hand-held drill for each trial, the drilling task was simulated. Thus, a force was chosen to elicit appropriate muscular demand, and tool vibration was not considered. Vibration in an overhead drilling task causes a variable increase in sEMG (Rohmert et al., 1989). Vibration was eliminated to allow focus of this study to be on muscular activity required to produce the desired task. As well, the use of average EMG is an approximation of overall muscular demand, and does not take into account physiological aspects of muscular demand, such as volume and fiber type. Another limitation is the lack of repetition of trials. In order to reduce onset of fatigue, each configuration was completed one time, for a total of 24 trials. Additionally, the work parameters selected represent a selection of overhead working conditions, at one fixed height, thus recommendations are based on a subset of potential occupational conditions. While the different working techniques studied elicited similar average muscle demand requirements, influences on individual muscles existed and could relate to unique fatigue and injury development. Future research should evaluate the onset of fatigue from these different working configurations to confirm the recommendation to eliminate overhead working configurations where force must be exerted upwards and involving extensive reaches.

The current research suggests specific recommended practices when incorporating overhead exertions into occupational settings. These recommendations should be considered if designing work where overhead positions are unavoidable, or where ergonomic interventions have been requested. Furthermore, this work quantified physical exposures in the context of total muscular effort, as well as individual muscles. These interventions should be applied in the context of their potential effects on psychosocial and productivity aspects of work.
                           
                              1.
                              Encourage bilateral tasks to decrease glenohumeral stability challenges.

Orient tasks to promote a forward force exertion rather than upward, particularly if the task involves a forward reach ≥15 cm.

If an upward exertion is necessary, position the task as close as possible (reducing the forward reach distance)

Regardless of force direction or posture, avoid extreme reaches, particularly when the task cannot be scaled to individual anthropometrics.

Adopt a seated whole-body posture when possible to alleviate deltoid muscle demand.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Muscular demands during overhead work depend on a variety of factors, as identified in this work. Bilateral tasks generate non-uniform changes in muscular activity on the active limb. Specifically, an increase in activation occurred for the dominant upper trapezius and decreases in the dominant middle deltoid and supraspinatus muscles. Therefore, bilateral techniques may reduce glenohumeral stability challenges; however the compensatory increase in upper trapezius activity may have implications on scapular dyskinesis. Additionally, the interaction between direction and point of application show an upward exertion, with a far reach requiring the highest muscle demand.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This project was partially funded through an NSERC Discovery Grant held by Dr. Clark Dickerson, 311895-2011. Equipment used in the grant was funded through combined support from the Canada Foundation for Innovation and the Ontario Research Fund.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

