@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Integrating ergonomics into engineering design: The role of objects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Objects can play an important but often unrecognized role in integrating ergonomic knowledge into a design process.


                        
                        
                           
                           Boundary objects can help to facilitate a dialog between design actors and help to bring ergonomic knowledge into action.


                        
                        
                           
                           In a design process ergonomic guideline texts are likely to be transformed, not just transferred.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ergonomic guideline texts should be supported by an ergonomist having an active role throughout design processes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Engineering design

Intermediary objects

Boundary objects

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The objective of this study was to explore the role of objects in integrating ergonomic knowledge in engineering design processes. An engineering design case was analyzed using the theoretical concepts of boundary objects and intermediary objects: Boundary objects facilitate collaboration between different knowledge domains, while the aim of an intermediary object is to circulate knowledge and thus produce a distant effect. Adjustable layout drawings served as boundary objects and had a positive impact on the dialog between an ergonomist and designers. An ergonomic guideline document was identified as an intermediary object. However, when the ergonomic guidelines were circulated in the design process, only some of the guidelines were transferred to the design of the sterile processing plant. Based on these findings, recommendations for working with objects in design processes are included.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Integrating ergonomics into engineering design of new workplaces and production systems is believed to be an important pro-active strategy to enhance good working conditions and production efficiency (Broberg, 2010; Dul and Neumann, 2009; Jensen, 2002; Hendrick, 2008, Neumann et al., 2006, 2009). A widespread approach to integrate ergonomic knowledge in engineering design is to provide the designers with information on ergonomics, through for instance ergonomic standards or handbooks. Studies have however indicated that this approach alone does not ensure successful integration (Broberg, 2007; Burns and Vicente, 1994; Campbell, 1996; Helander, 1999; Rogers and Armstrong, 1977). Wulff et al. (1999a,b) have studied the integration of ergonomics in large-scale engineering design in the offshore industry in Norway. Here, documents containing ergonomic requirements were distributed within the design organization under the assumption that designers would integrate the requirements in their workspace design. Wulff et al. (1999a,b) found, however, that the requirements were not well known in the design organization, and even when the designers did know the requirements, they were not all integrated into the final design. Some requirements were difficult for the designers to interpret, while others created a situation of conflicting criteria. These findings illustrate possible limitations to using objects like documents to pass on ergonomic knowledge in design processes. However, so far, the human factors (HF) has not given much attention to a broader focus on how different objects can help or limit integration of ergonomic knowledge in design processes.

Traditionally, engineering designers have viewed objects, such as drawings and prototypes, as neutral: Objects are means of coming from an idea to a result (Vinck et al., 1996). A different view of objects is found within the Science and Technology Studies (STS) tradition. STS has focused on the role of different objects for several years. Objects here are regarded as mediators that can play an active role in design processes (Vinck et al., 1996), and as a result, different theoretical concepts have been developed. The concepts of boundary objects and intermediary objects, which are presented below, have been used successfully to create new insights and a greater understanding of the role of objects in design processes (Boujut and Blanco, 2003; Carlile, 2002).
                           
                              I)
                              The concept of boundary objects was introduced in Star and Griesemer's (1989) studies of scientific work. Star and Griesemer (1989) focused on the heterogeneous nature of scientific work and introduced the concept of boundary objects as a way to manage the tension at the boundary between diverse groups of actors. According to Star and Griesemer (1989), different groups of actors belong to different social worlds, and when they work together, boundary objects can help establish a shared context between them that helps create common understanding of the subject in question. The nature of the boundary objects “is reflected by the fact that they are simultaneously concrete and abstract, specific and general, conventionalized and customized” (Star and Griesemer, 1989). Carlile (2002) drew on the work of Star and Griesemer and introduced the concept of boundary objects to the area of new product development. He found that objects such as assembly drawings can be useful when cooperating across different knowledge domains in a design process. He identified three characteristics of a useful boundary object: It “establishes a shared syntax or language for individuals to represent their knowledge”; secondly, it “provides a concrete means for individuals to specify and learn about their differences and dependencies across a given boundary”; and finally, it “facilitates a process where individuals can jointly transform their knowledge” (Carlile, 2002, pp. 451–452). In this paper, we define boundary objects as objects that function as mediators in the direct communication between actors.

In contrast to the concept of boundary objects, we introduce the concept of intermediary objects. These objects are used as a means of transferring and sustaining knowledge, for instance, in a design process, when actors may not be able to meet in person. The concept was developed by Callon (1992), who presented four different types of intermediaries: texts, technical artifacts, human beings and their skills, and money. In this paper, we focus on texts. An intermediary object is an object produced by a network of designers with the specific intent of transferring their knowledge and experience to downstream actors. In relation to workplace design, the aim of the designers is to affect the final design of the workplace from a distance. An intermediary object, however, creates a new point of departure, and downstream actors might not comply with the intentions embedded in the object: After receiving an intermediary object, downstream actors do not necessarily just transfer the content of the object. When relating the object to their own profession or work practice, downstream actors may ignore or alter different parts of the intermediary object and thus transform the content of the intermediary object according to their own interest, purpose or profession (Gherardi and Nicolini, 2000; Vinck et al., 1996).


                        Vinck et al. (1996) address the view and characteristics of intermediary objects by distinguishing between “open” and “closed” objects. The characteristics of a “closed” object refer to the designers' intention: The users are not supposed to interpret or transform the intentions embedded in the object, rather to comply with them. The characteristics of an “open” object are, on the other hand, related to the interpretive flexibility of a given object, which is bound to the use of the object. When an object is interpreted and modified by the various users of the object, it is considered to be “open” (Broberg et al., 2011; Vinck et al., 1996). In an ergonomic context an example of an intermediary object is an ergonomic standard, which from the outset is produced as a “closed” object intended to transfer knowledge from ergonomists to other design actors. Whether or not the standard succeeds will depend, however, on the users interpretation of the standard as either a “closed” or an “open” object.

A few studies in the HF literature draw on the STS tradition and indicate that different kinds of objects can play an important role in integrating ergonomics. In the area of participatory ergonomics, Broberg et al. (2011) find that the characteristics of boundary objects are of great importance in enabling user participation and collaboration in design. One of the important characteristics is flexible and malleable objects, as this characteristic creates the possibility to do rapid prototyping of design solutions. In another study, Conceição et al. (2012) develop two intermediary objects, a recommendation booklet and a zoning pattern, in order to transfer ergonomic knowledge and user experience to designers working in the offshore industry. In this industry, face-to-face meetings between users and designers are not always possible, which makes information transfer via objects unavoidable. At workshops with engineering designers, the usability of the two intermediary objects was evaluated as positive, and they were recommended for use in future design processes. Both studies were based on objects designed by researchers. Objects developed in a ‘natural’ design process, without the participation of researchers, have not been given much attention in the HF literature so far.

The aim of this study is to provide greater understanding of the role of objects used in ‘natural’ design processes where ergonomic knowledge is integrated into engineering design processes. We seek to gain this understanding by applying the concepts of boundary objects and intermediary objects in an analysis of an engineering design case in which an ergonomist participated in the design process. Both theoretical concepts provide the possibility to enhance our understanding of the different roles an object might play during the integration of ergonomic knowledge into engineering design processes.

The paper is concluded by providing implications for both ergonomists and engineering designers.

@&#METHOD@&#

An explorative case study (Thomas, 2011) was carried out in an engineering consultancy firm for the purpose of increasing understanding of the role objects play in the process of integrating ergonomic knowledge in design. We begin by describing the case scenario.

An engineering consultancy firm was hired by a hospital to design a sterile processing plant. The design task involved designing the logistics and layout to deliver as a project proposal for the hospital and their building contractor. The design team included engineers with different areas of expertise; a consultant (C1) who was a trained nurse; a project manager (PM) who was an engineer and the head of the hospital division.

The physical space designated for the sterile processing plant was rather cramped; therefore, the project team decided to involve one of the engineering consultancy firm's own ergonomists in the project. The coordinator of the ergonomists' “hospital group” was in charge of selecting the ergonomist to assign to the design job. Based on his experience from other design jobs, he selected a trained physiotherapist. The ergonomist's job was to make sure that the design proposal complied with existing occupational health and safety (OHS) legislation, and to complete an ergonomic guideline document (EGD) with her recommendations for the design.

After the design proposal had been completed and submitted, the hospital contacted the engineering consultancy firm again for assistance during both the construction and start-up phases at the sterile processing plant. At this time, the PM assigned another consultant (C2) from the same consultancy firm to assist the hospital. She was a former manager of a sterile processing plant, and her main job was to support the hospital with overall guidance, help the hospital draw up specification requirements for new equipment, and implement a computer system for stock control. Table 1
                         illustrates the phases of the design process and the central design actors involved.

The data material was collected over a five-month period through interviews, observation and document study.

Twelve semi-structured interviews (Kvale, 1996) were carried out. Purposive sampling (Miles and Huberman, 1994) was used to select whom to interview. We were interested in actors who had been engaged in integrating ergonomic knowledge into the engineering design job. Within the engineering consultancy firm, the interviews included the head of the hospital division, the project manager, two consultants, an ergonomic group leader and two ergonomists. Within the hospital organization, the interviews included the manager of the sterile processing plant, a health and safety representative and two ergonomists. All interviews were audio recorded and afterward transcribed.

The first author visited the completed sterile processing plant to observe the design in operation. She observed the users and interviewed four of them while they were working, and identified whether or not the ergonomic recommendations from the EGD had been realized in the final design.

A study was made of the documents related to the project. The objective was to gain an overview of the design process and understand the degree to which ergonomic issues were discussed at project meetings. The document study involved examining minutes of meetings, project presentations, project plans, drawings, working documents and finally the EGD. Based on these documents, we were able to create a flow chart displaying the progress of the design process.

Based on an inductive analysis approach (Thomas, 2006), all transcriptions and the selected documents were coded for the theme “written objects used to integrate ergonomic knowledge in the design process”. After identifying all text segments related to this theme, we started going back and forth between the data material and the theoretical concepts of boundary objects and intermediary objects. This iterative process continued throughout the writing process, where the theoretical concept helped us to make sense of the empirical findings, and the data material helped us to make sure our claims and findings were grounded within the data. The theoretical concepts helped us to gain new insights about how the objects had helped or limited the integration of ergonomic knowledge in the design process.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Through thorough analysis of transcriptions and the project documents, it appeared that two objects had played a central role during integration of ergonomic knowledge into the design process: The EGD and layout sketches of the sterile processing plant. The first document we address is the layout sketches.

The layout sketches were used at meetings between the ergonomist, C1, and the project manager in their discussions of the future design of the sterile processing plant. The discussions can be characterized as dialogs, where C1 and the project manager presented the ergonomist with their layout suggestions. The ergonomist then commented on the layout sketches and suggested changes, and in this way contributed her knowledge of ergonomics. As described by C1:
                           “We had made some sketches with accurate dimensions, and then I explained how much space we had available and how we had placed the tables, and then I asked her [the ergonomist] if it was all right in relation to legislation. We talked back and forth and realized that we had to redo the layout sketches, because it turned out that there was not enough space in the proposal we had made. It was absolutely great that we had involved her [the ergonomist].”
                        
                     

At some meetings, a draftsman also participated and adjusted the layout sketches as new ideas for the layout arose. The ergonomist explained:
                           “… I was to relate to the layout proposal and evaluate whether or not the proposal met ergonomic requirements. It was a lot of fun. Sometimes, when we had meetings, a draftsman participated and then we talked through the sketches and had new suggestions. Well, then she [the draftsman] just entered the drawing programs and came back with new sketches right away… That was amazing, because we were able to say ‘okay, that part is good, but that means that…’. It worked very well.”
                        
                     

The on-the-spot adjustments supported the dialog and helped to clarify pros and cons of different layout solutions. Based on the layout sketches, the ergonomist, C1 and the project manager addressed a number of issues such as space, glare caused by sun coming through the windows, and noise from washing machines. The layout sketches also helped them address consequences of the different design suggestions and bring forward their different professional viewpoints. Based on these discussions, the layout was adjusted. The version agreed on by all three design actors ended up being the layout that was recommended to the hospital (see Fig. 1
                        ).

The development of the EGD was based on the discussions between the ergonomist, C1 and the project manager. As the ergonomist said:
                           “It was not enough just to sit there and talk about it at the meeting. It was important to get it in writing as well – all those considerations.”
                        
                     

The ergonomist was the main author of the EGD. C1 and the project manager also wrote some paragraphs in the document. The ergonomist also contacted a colleague in the ergonomics department who contributed a paragraph on indoor environment, noise and acoustics to the report. Table 2
                         presents the content of the EGD.

The main issues in the document were workplace and workstation design revolving around physiological and physical aspects of ergonomics. The document's recommendations were based on six guidelines issued by the Danish Working Environment Authority (WEA). WEA is an agency under the Danish Ministry of Employment and has the authority to draw up rules on occupational health and safety (OHS), provide information about OHS and carry out inspections of companies. The WEA guidelines are all “easy-to-understand” guides for grasping legislation on OHS and workplace design in Denmark.

In some paragraphs of the EGD, the ergonomist quoted the WEA guidelines verbatim, and in other paragraphs, she translated the guidelines and related them to the work practice she expected at the sterile processing plant. Throughout the EGD, the ergonomist also referred to the layout sketch, which is presented in the document's appendix. Focusing on the formulations in the EGD, we found that more than half of the recommendations were generally or vaguely formulated, using such phrases as: “…as much as possible” or “there should be…”. An example of one of the specifically formulated recommendations in the document is: “All workstations must have daylight access”. There were also recommendations where specific measures for recommended distances were given.

After having completed the EGD, the ergonomist handed it over to C1 and the project manager. She then left the project. C1 and the project manager then circulated the EGD, including the layout sketch, to actors in the hospital organization and to the hospital's contractor. At the hospital, the EGD was given to the manager of the technical department, the manager of the sterile processing plant, a health and safety representative and an ergonomist. The EGD was also given to C2, who used the EGD in her consultancy work.

When the first author visited the sterile processing plant, the plant was still in the start-up phase and had been running on and off for six months. Observations and interviews with employees revealed that they were pleased with some aspects, but they also experienced problems in a number of areas. Comparing the recommended layout and recommendations in the EGD with the actual layout and work practice in the sterile processing plant showed that some of the recommendations had been complied with, while others had not. In Table 3
                        , the main recommendations are related to the findings in the sterile processing plant.

Interviews with C2 and the daily leader at the sterile processing plant indicated why some of the recommendations were not transferred to the final design. For example, it was recommended that the transportation vehicles be equipped with handles, but in the specification requirement for the transportation cart, the handles were not included:
                           C2: “There are no handles. [The hospital] distinctly deselected the handles. They don't make sense. They are extra, take up space, and they would mean that there would be room for fewer carts in the lift. And no matter whether you are short or tall, you can just push by, holding on to the racks of the cart.
                        
                        
                           Interviewer: “So someone has simply deselected the handles?”
                        
                        
                           C2: “I participated… …I have made all the specification requirements.”
                        
                        
                           Interviewer: “Did you contact an ergonomist who then said, ‘yes, with or without the handles – that doesn't really make a difference’?”
                        
                        
                           C2: “No, that is a judgment we made. You know, it's not just about ergonomics. It also has to do with finance.”
                        
                     

Considerations of both financial aspects and overall efficiency of work practice were used as arguments for not including the ergonomic recommendations in the specification requirement. Another example is related to a recommendation to implement a self-propelled cart for transportation to and from the sterile processing plant, due to the sloping floor in a tunnel connected to the sterile processing plant. C2 argued that the recommendation did not make sense:
                           C2: “It is an extremely expensive solution… Well, actually, I think it is fine to recommend it…. To me the recommendation says that when a cart has been packed, then it should be placed on a robot, which then takes it to the sterile processing plant and drops it off…. I think it sounds reasonable, but can you imagine… a robot going down that aisle with all those cabinets and people going back and forth…. The robot would have to stop a hundred times…. It wouldn't work, really…. At least, I think that's what it means – without really knowing for sure….”
                        
                     

In this example, the ergonomist's recommendation for a self-propelled cart is interpreted by C2 as a robot and consequently rejected as being unworkable and too expensive. A follow-up interview with the ergonomist revealed, however, that she never intended to recommend a robot. Rather, her recommendation was a transportation cart with an electric motor that could create propulsion, but would be steered by the employees.

Interviews and observations also revealed that there were issues related to the working environment that were not addressed in the EGD. For example, the sterile processing plant's employees and daily leader experienced problems related to the psychosocial working environment during the start-up phase, when a whole new group of employees were brought together; they also became aware that many chemical issues needed to be considered; and they experienced communication problems with the surgery units. Also, there was no break room for the employees.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In the following, we mobilize the theoretical concepts by relating them to the findings presented above, and we illuminate how the objects played a role in integrating ergonomics in the design process.

During the meetings between the ergonomist, C1, and the project manager, the layout sketches served as boundary objects. They helped facilitate a constructive dialog between the three actors, and helped make the design object more tangible. Drawing on Carlile's (2002) characteristics of an effective boundary object, we find that the layout sketches were able to establish “a shared syntax or language” (Carlile, 2002, pp. 451–452) across the different knowledge domains, and this enabled the ergonomist to contribute with her professional knowledge. With the layout sketches placed in the middle, the three actors were able to discuss the pros and cons of different solutions. During these discussions, they “learned about their differences and dependencies” (Carlile, 2002, pp. 451–452): The project manager contributed with knowledge on engineering design; C1 contributed with her practical knowledge about the work processes and flow in a sterile processing plant; and the ergonomist contributed her knowledge on ergonomics and the Danish OHS legislation. Even though they were not able to fully understand each other's work practice, they were able to complement each other. The layout sketches facilitated this process and enabled the actors to “jointly transform their knowledge” (Carlile, 2002, pp. 451–452) and their professional views into a layout. The ergonomist's involvement led to changes in the layout (tables etc. were moved), and through dialog the three actors were able to agree to a layout they could jointly recommend.

Using the layout sketches as a boundary object helped to integrate ergonomic knowledge into the engineering design process, but the study also revealed some limitations. The ergonomist explained that especially the meetings where a draftsman participated had worked well. We can address this finding by applying the distinction between ‘open’ and ‘closed’ objects (Vinck et al., 1996). The draftsman's involvement in the meetings created an ‘open’ boundary object, because the draftsman was able to make changes in the layout as the dialog unfolded. This enabled C1, the ergonomist and the project manager to explore and elaborate different solutions during the meetings. When the draftsman did not participate, the dialog between the three actors was based on a “traditional layout sketch”, which constitutes a ‘closed’ boundary object. They were able to discuss the presented solution, but they were not able to make on-the-spot changes and thereby clarify pros and cons. Broberg et al. (2011) also draw on the distinction between open and closed objects and argue that an open object allows a transformation of the object, which enables participants to design with the objects.

When the final layout was agreed upon, it was handed over to the hospital and its construction contractor. The role of the layout sketch now changed from being a boundary object to being an intermediary object. The layout sketch communicated the recommended layout to the downstream actors in the design process. This can be seen as an attempt to produce a distant effect on the sterile processing plant's layout. The downstream actors were supposed to transfer the recommended layout, including the ergonomic recommendations embedded in the layout sketches. However, as presented in the result section, adjustments were made to the packing area and the sterile area. Evidently, the design process continued during the implementation of the recommended layout, and as an intermediary object, the layout sketch was not able to perform a distant effect on all areas of the sterile processing plant.

In the EGD, the ergonomist stated recommendations for the future design of the sterile processing plant. The intent of the document was to pass on ergonomic knowledge in the further design processes. This can be seen as an attempt to produce a distant effect, since the ergonomist did not participate in the remaining design phases in person. However, the document was not able to perform the full distant effect the project team had hoped for. Some of the recommendations were transferred to the design of the sterile processing plant, while others were transformed. Furthermore, some ergonomic aspects had not been addressed in the document. These findings indicate that using an EGD to pass on ergonomic knowledge in a design process has some limitations. This is also indicated in studies on ergonomic information transfer in design, like Burns and Vicente (1994) and Burns et al. (1997).

In the following, we address the findings in this study, and, guided by the concept of intermediary object, we focus on the role of the EGD – first by focusing on the framing of the ergonomic knowledge in the EGD and the network participating in making the document; and subsequently, by analyzing why some guidelines in the document were transferred, while others were transformed.

The actors who participated in making the EGD wanted to create a sterile processing plant with a safe working environment that complied with existing legislation on OHS. The content of the EGD reveals that not all aspects of ergonomics were addressed. A framing of ergonomic knowledge had taken place, and only areas related to the human musculoskeletal system and to a minor degree, the physical aspects of ergonomics were addressed in the document. Issues related to psychosocial or chemical aspects were not addressed.

Drawing attention to the network participating in making the document we find that the framing of the ergonomic knowledge begun even before the ergonomist entered the project. The engineering design team was hired to “design the layout and logistics of the sterile processing plant”. Given this scope, the design team's focus was capacity analysis, layout of the sterile processing plant, and flow of the future work processes. This scope of the design job indicates that the predominant view of the sterile processing plant was of a physical container for work processes. This view was also found among the ergonomist involved in the design job: a physiotherapist was assigned and only issues related to the musculoskeletal system and physical aspects of ergonomics were addressed and circulated to other actors in the design process. We argue that a different scope of the engineering design job – for instance, to design a new department for sterile processing – might have created an opening toward integrating more organizational/psychosocial aspects of ergonomics. Using layout sketches as a boundary object may have contributed to the framing, since the interviews revealed that the layout sketches primarily encouraged input and suggestions related to the physical set-up of the sterile processing plant. The appointment of a physiotherapist as the ergonomist to participate in the design project may also have contributed to the specific ergonomic framing.

We also identified a great deal of focus on legislation in the EGD. Throughout the EGD, the ergonomist based her recommendations on the WEA guidelines. By referring to these guidelines, the ergonomist drew on the ergonomic knowledge of the different networks that participated over time in making the WEA guidelines and in developing the OHS legislation. Hence, the ergonomic knowledge mobilized by the ergonomist is institutionalized ergonomic knowledge, and her references to the WEA guidelines can be seen as an attempt to make the document more powerful and increase its chances of producing a distant effect on the further design process.

The main arguments given for disregarding guidelines were related to either cost, hygiene, space or efficiency of the workplace. This finding is in line with Wulff et al. (1999b), who also found time and costs to be the main constraints in relation to implementation of ergonomic recommendations.

We found that the guidelines were transformed when they did not make sense within the downstream actors' rationale. When discussing the guidelines with C2, she often stated that "...it does not make any sense" – for example, the handles for the transportation carts. This can be explained through the notion of “social worlds” as put forth in the work of Star and Griesemer (1989) and Garrety and Badham (1999). Actors from different disciplines come from different social worlds; thus, they have different ways of seeing the design object in question, which can create a semantic mismatch. When recommendations are solely based on a guideline document, they may be transformed in the processes of translation, despite references given to the WEA guidelines. We also identified an example where a guideline was rejected due to a misinterpretation: The notion self-propelled cart was interpreted as a robot, which was viewed as unworkable. The document failed to elaborate or explain the underlying rationale and intentions behind this guideline. Hence we support Wulff et al. (1999b), who found that there can be a problem in using “health and safety documents” to pass on ergonomic knowledge, in that the documents do not clarify how to optimize when different criteria are conflicting – or when there is a misinterpretation.

Other authors have found that recommendations in ergonomic standards are often ignored, due to vague or general formulations (Broberg, 2007; Burns et al., 1997; Rogers and Armstrong, 1977; Wulff et al., 1999a,b). Wulff et al. (1999a,b) found that generally formulated recommendations leave the designer with a translation problem of how to transfer a general recommendation to a specific design solution. They suggest that ergonomic criteria should be formulated as specific requirements. Relating this to the distinction between open and closed objects introduced by Vinck et al. (1996), the suggestion can be seen as an attempt to create a ‘more’ closed object. In present study, we found that some of the specific recommendations were transferred to the sterile processing plant, while others were transformed. The same was true for the general recommendations. Both the specifically and the generally formulated guidelines in the EGD seemed to be interpreted as ‘open’ recommendations – and not as ‘closed’ requirements that had to be complied with.

The above finding directs our attention to the intermediary object itself, and indicates that a written object, like the EGD, has limitations beyond the formulations of the guidelines. The EGD was created as a ‘closed’ object with specific focus on passing on ergonomic guidelines in the design process, but even so, downstream actors experienced a freedom of use and regarded the document as ‘open’. There seems to be an embedded flexibility in the EGD in relation to the use of guideline documents per se, and there also appears to be limitations related to the design of the document. Burns et al. (1997) studied interfaces between research literature and designers and argued that the design of intermediaries should be based on the characteristics of designers and the constraints of the environment in which the guidelines are supposed to be used. If too little attention is paid to this matter, the guidelines might not be used. We did not find any evidence showing that C1, the ergonomist and the project manager had given any thought to what kind of obstacles the document might meet in the further design process and how these obstacles could be overcome. In line with Wulff et al. (1999a,b) and Conceição et al. (2012), we argue that the use of written objects to transfer ergonomic knowledge in design processes needs to be supported by organizational initiatives – for instance, by establishing a hotline for ergonomic support when designers experience conflicting criteria, or through involvement of an ergonomist throughout the design process.

A single-case study was chosen, since the aim of the study was to explore and gain in-depth understanding of the role of written objects in integrating ergonomics in engineering design processes. However, a limitation of a single-case study is that the findings cannot be generalized to a larger population (Thomas, 2011). The case study was also conducted retrospectively. Doing a case study retrospectively implies interviewing people about incidents in the past. In some cases, the interviewee had problems remembering what really happened in the design process. The interviewee might also have a ‘selective memory’. For instance, they might retell the case in the way they remember it, but this may not necessarily be how the case actually unfolded. Another limitation is that two of those interviewed left the engineering consultancy firm during the period of data collection, which limited the possibility to do follow-up interviews. For further research, it would be interesting to make a longitudinal study, where it would be possible to observe a design team during design situations either as an anthropological study or as an action research study.

We argue that objects can play an important and often unrecognized role in the integration of ergonomic knowledge in a design process. In the role of a boundary object, layout sketches, particularly when they were melleable, helped to facilitate dialog between the involved actors and bring ergonomic knowledge into action in the design process. In the role of an intermediary object, an ergonomic guideline document was intended to transfer ergonomic knowledge to other actors in the design process. The study shows, however, that the ergonomic guideline document had some limitations in fulfilling this role. When downstream actors experienced a conflict between a guideline and other design criteria, the document was not able to enter into a negotiation process and elaborate or explain the underlying reasons for the ergonomic guideline. As a consequence, some of the given ergonomic guidelines were transformed by downstream actors. Finally, the study also shows that throughout a design process the same object may have different roles and function both as a boundary object in direct communication between involved actors and as an intermediary object that functions as a means of transferring ergonomic knowledge to downstream actors in the design process.

This study suggests the following implications for practitioners:
                           
                              -
                              When planning to integrate ergonomic aspects in design processes ergonomists and engineering designers should discuss and map how objects, like texts, drawings, and spaces, can help integrate ergonomic knowledge. Objects should be classified either as boundary or intermediary objects (or both) in order to better understand the potential role they might play in the design process.

Boundary objects that are open for ‘on-the-spot’ visualization of different design possibilities are better able to support dialog between the ergonomist and engineering designers.

When designing an intermediary object, ergonomists and engineering designers need to look ahead in the design process and consider what kind of obstacles the intermediary object could meet on its way, and evaluate how such obstacles might be overcome – for example, by including the aim or reasoning behind a guidelines in the intermediary object to minimize misinterpretations and/or by arranging follow-up dialogs during design, construction, and implementation phases, where decisions affecting the work conditions are also made.

Ergonomists should also pay attention to the framing of ergonomic issues, as both the choice of boundary object and intermediary object may affect the framing of the ergonomic issues that is brought into action in the design process. The ergonomic issues that are important to address may vary depending on the scope of the design task, the design process and the organizational context.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

