@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A static organization in a dynamic context – A qualitative study of changes in working conditions for Swedish engine officers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Maritime engine room officers commonly agree that the rapid technological development and reduced staffing onboard have contributed to higher workload and altered work tasks.


                        
                        
                           
                           Engine room officers have not been given enough or proper resources to handle the new requirements of the altered working conditions in the shipping industry.


                        
                        
                           
                           Collegial support and comradeship are seen as the main resources of the onboard organization.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Working conditions

Engine officers

Ships

Grounded theory

Focus groups

Automation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  During the last decades the shipping industry has undergone rapid technical developments and experienced hard economic conditions and increased striving for profitability. This has led to reduced staffing and changes in task performance, which has been reported to increase workload for the remaining seafarers. The working conditions on board have a number of distinct and in many ways unique characteristics, which makes the job demands and resources for seafarers unique in several ways. The purpose of this study was to assess how engine room staff perceives how these major technical and organizational changes in the shipping industry have affected job demands as well as resources. The study compiled individual interviews and focus groups interviews with engine crew members where they were asked to elaborate on the psychosocial work environment and the major changes in the working conditions on board. Engine crew describes a work situation where they feel a lack of resources. The content of the work has changed, staffing has been reduced, new tasks are being added but the organization of the crew and the design of the work place remains unaltered.
               
            

Working conditions in the shipping industry have a number of distinct characteristics, which make the job demands and resources needed to handle these demands unique in several ways. While most shore-based workers spend approximately 8 h per-day five days per week at work, seafarers spend each hour of their time at sea on their work site. By necessity, the work onboard is a 24/7 operation, and seafarers often experience extended shifts and variable work hours. In the Swedish merchant fleet, work is regulated to 72 h per week (Arbetsförmedlingen, 2011), although overtime is common in the shipping industry (Salyga and Kusleikate, 2011).

In a classical study, Aubert and Aner (1958) described the social organization on board the ship as a “closed institution”, characterized by hierarchical organization and authoritarian leadership, with many obvious restrictions to the individual crew member. Recent studies have shown that the hierarchical work organization has remained unaltered despite rapid technological and economic changes in the shipping industry (Lundh, 2010). When the ship is sea-bound, the crew members have hardly any possibilities to escape the institutional requirements and restrictions. The seafarer is restricted to spend all off-work time within the perimeters of the hull of the ship during their turns. This means that seafarers are constantly exposed to many of the well-documented physical work hazards in the shipping industry – eg. noise, pollutants, seaways and vibrations, restricted space (Lundh, 2010), during a period that often extends over 6–8 weeks for the seafarers with Swedish employment contracts. But while sea-bound, the individual is also exposed to potential psychosocial stressors that may limit recovery during the time off-work (Lundh, 2010; Mårtensson, 2006). The seafarer is separated from his/her family, friends and shore-based network during the time onboard and restricted to exclusively interact with fellow crew members. Reduced staffing onboard and the often nationally mixed crews with different mother languages may create further restrictions. Furthermore, life onboard is associated with a number of minor limitations in everyday life that can possibly be perceived as hassling – e.g. not being able to choose his/her meals or deprived from most leisure activities.

The working conditions onboard have been shown to be associated with chronic fatigue and sleeping problems, disturbed circadian rhythms, and various stress-related and psychosomatic health problems (Jensen et al., 2006; Wadsworth et al., 2008). In an epidemiological study of the US merchant fleet, Zeitlin (1995) found midlevel managers in both deck and engine room departments to have significantly elevated rates of health problems such as cardiovascular disease and emotional disturbances. Higher stress levels for officers, as compared to subordinate crew members, were also found in the German merchant fleet (Oldenburg et al., 2009). Recent studies on psychosocial working conditions among engine room officers have identified negative relationships between role stress (conflict and ambiguity) and mental wellbeing and perceived safety climate onboard (Rydstedt and Lundh, 2010, 2012).

The shipping industry has undergone major changes in organizational ergonomics due to rapid technological developments and reduction in the number of crew members onboard (Allen et al., 2008; Lundh, 2010; International Ergonomics Association, 2015). Shipping is now characterized by e.g. container transports, increased engine room automation, computerization and improved communication systems (Bloor et al., 2000; Ivergård et al., 1978; Lundh, 2010; Olofsson, 1995). This, in combination with harder economic conditions and increased striving for profitability in the shipping industry, has led to reduced staffing, which in turn has been reported to increase and change the character of workload for the remaining seafarers (Bloor et al., 2000; Hetherington et al., 2006; Håvold, 2005; Lundh, 2010). The altered technological and economical environment has had consequences for the work role and work content, not the least for engine room officers. A study of the Swedish merchant fleet (Lützhöft et al., 2008) showed that the technological development in the shipping industry has led to changed work tasks, more administrative duties and increased and conflicting work tasks.

While the technical development has led to greater efficiency for many tasks, some tasks, e.g. maintenance of the equipment or machinery, have not been affected by the technical development and must still be handled manually in an often time-consuming manner (Lundh, 2010; Lundh et al., 2011). Due to reduced staffing, these tasks must now be carried out by fewer employees and Lundh and colleagues found that many engine room engineers reported to use unauthorized shortcuts to be able to handle these tasks under time pressure.

The model most frequently applied during the last decades to analyze the work-related stressor-strain relationship has been the job Demand-Control-Support (DCS) model (Karasek, 1979; Karasek and Theorell, 1990). In its original version, Karasek (1979) suggested the joint effects of high psychosocial job demands (e.g. time pressure; quantitative overload) and low control of the work content and working conditions, to be the primary cause of work-related health outcomes. Later a third dimension, work-related social support, was added to the model (Karasek and Theorell, 1990). The main effects of the job dimensions included in the model have received empirical support in relation to a wide range of work-related health outcomes, while the hypothesized interactions between the main variables have received mixed support (de Lange et al., 2003; Häusser et al., 2010; Van der Doef and Maes, 1999). Despite its frequent utilization, some critical objections towards the DCS model have been raised in the literature. A major line of critique over the years has been that the DCS model is over-simplistic and includes a too narrow range of possible work stressors (De Jonge and Kompier, 1997; Fletcher and Jones, 1993; Verhoeven et al., 2003). A possible price for this simplification may have been the loss of distinction in the analysis of the influence of more unique job-specific stressors and the resources needed to handle them (Pousette and Johansson-Hanse, 2002; Sparks and Cooper, 1999). The concerns about the complexity optimally required for analyzing the impact of work characteristics on human wellbeing have been grouped in three major issues (Van Veldhoven et al., 2005) – the number of work characteristics, the specificity of the relationships between the work characteristics, and the situation specificity of the models. Van Veldhoven et al. (2005) found consistent calls in the literature for higher degrees of precision in regard to these three issues.

In response to these concerns, the more complex and flexible Job Demand-Resource (JD-R) model (Bakker and Demerouti, 2007; Demerouti et al., 2001; Demerouti and Bakker, 2011) has been gaining attention as an alternative conceptual model. In resemblance with the DCS model, the JD-R model identifies the balance between potentially negative (job demands) and positive (resources) job characteristics as crucial for work-related health and wellbeing outcomes (Schaufeli and Taris, 2014). But in contrast to the DCS model, the JD-R model neither provides a generic definition of what specific demands are to be considered as causes for job strain, nor exactly which type of resources are required to handle the job demands or support work motivation. An important assumption behind the JD-R model is that job demands as well as the necessary resources to handle them are occupation-specific and, therefore, must be assessed and analyzed in relation to the specific requirements of the occupation (Bakker and Demerouti, 2007; Demerouti and Bakker, 2011; Schaufeli and Taris, 2014).


                     Bakker and Demerouti (2007) define resources as “those physical, psychological, social, or organizational aspects of the job that are either/or – functional in achieving work goals, reduce job demands and the associated physiological and psychological costs/and/stimulate personal growth, learning, and development” (p. 312). Job resources may, according to the initial version of JD-R model, be at the organizational level, in the interpersonal relations, in the work organization or at the level of the job tasks (Bakker and Demerouti, 2007). In a further development, individual characteristics and traits that may contribute to successful coping with job demands, e.g. extraversion, emotional stability, self-esteem or optimism, were included as resources in the J-DR model (Xanthopolou et al., 2007). According to the revised JD-R model (Demerouti and Bakker, 2011; Schaufeli and Taris, 2014), an imbalance characterized by high job demands and a lack of adequate resources to handle the demands leads to strain and eventually to negative health outcomes. On the other hand, having access to the specific type of resources needed to master demands not only reduces the potentially harmful health impact of the job demands, but also promotes wellbeing, job motivation and work performance (Demerouti and Bakker, 2011; Schaufeli and Taris, 2014).

The main purpose of the present study was to assess how engine room officers perceive how the major technical and organizational changes in the shipping industry described above have affected their job demands and work environment, as well as the resources available for them to meet these demands.

@&#METHODS@&#

This paper reports the findings of two separate studies. Study 1 was based on semi-structured interviews about the psychosocial situation on board, while Study 2 consisted of three focus group interviews concerning changes in work performance and their consequences.

In both studies, prior to the interviews, the participants were informed about the purpose of the study and how the data were to be used and published. They were assured confidentiality and they were told that they had the right to withdraw their participation without reason at any time. The participants also signed a written consent to participate.

In total 20 participants were interviewed: 15 engine officers (9 chief engineers, 3 s engineers, 1 third engineer 2 electrical engineers) and 5 unlicensed seamen (repairmen, motormen, 1 electrician) with mean age 50 years, ranging between 26 and 70 years. All participants were Swedish citizens. Fifteen interviews were performed on board different ships, and four interviews were done at Chalmers University of Technology and one at Kalmar Maritime University.

The interviews were semi-structured and the participants were interviewed individually. All interviews were performed by one researcher. The interview was divided into three themes: (1) Engine room, (2) Engine Control Room and (3) Psychosocial Work environment. Every theme was addressed with the following questions: (a) “What changes in your work have you experienced?”, (b) “How have they affected the work environment?” and (c) “Which requirements need to be fulfilled for you to have a good work environment on board?” The participants were asked to express their thoughts on each theme, and open follow-up questions were asked, e.g. “Could you explain this further?” and “Could you give some examples?”, to further elaborate the answers given by the participants.

The interviews lasted from one to one and a half hour, and were recorded, transcribed verbatim and consecutively analyzed using Grounded Theory (Corbin and Strauss, 2008). The location of the interviews was not considered to be of importance to the outcome of the results since none of the questions required on board equipment or was in any other way contextually dependent.

This study was included in a field study of six Swedish shipping companies. Each shipping company assigned a ship to the study and the engine crew was asked to participate in this interview study, a total of 15 persons volunteered. The other five participants had heard about the study from colleagues and contacted the researchers to participate, they were interviewed ashore.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

A Grounded Theory approach was used for the analysis of the interviews using the analytic tools of coding, constant comparison and theoretical comparison (Corbin and Strauss, 2008). Micro coding was first used on the first interview in order to supplement and complement the subsequent more general macro analysis. The purpose of the micro coding was to open up the data in order to generate ideas, to focus on pieces of data, which appear to be relevant to the themes mentioned in the interview, and to capture those parts whose meaning seem elusive. Using the software MAXQDA (MAXQDA2007), an open macro coding followed with the purpose of generating a more general coding of the different concepts.

In the subsequent analysis of the interviews, information was added to the different codes found in the micro coding. Each theme was coded and memos written to explain the analysis and the conclusions drawn. As the interviews were analyzed consecutively, each interview added more information to the different codes and their corresponding memos. As the analysis progressed themes could be merged into core categories, which are presented as the results of the study. This process and arguments for merging codes was followed by a description in the memos. The concept of theoretical saturation of Corbin and Strauss (2008) was used to decide on the sample size.

In total 15 participants were interviewed, 12 (5 chief engineers, 2 s, 3 third and 2 electrical engineers) engine officers and 3 unlicensed seamen (2 repairmen, 1 motorman), mean age 47 years ranging between 29 and 60 years. All participants were Swedish citizens. The study included three focus group interviews; two were performed on board ships and one at Chalmers University of Technology. The first focus group consisted of four participants, the second seven and the third focus group four participants. Focus groups one and two included a mix of officers and unlicensed seamen, while focus group three only included officers.

The theme for the focus group was to discuss the most important changes participants encountered in their work situation on board. The participants were asked to agree on five major changes. Once they agreed on a list of five major changes, they were asked to agree on a ranking starting with the change that had the most impact on the work situation. The duration of each focus group was 1 h. The focus group was recorded and led by one researcher. The researcher took notes during the session and the notes made by the participants were collected after the focus group. The lists from the three focus groups were then compared, which resulted in three common changes presented as the result of the focus groups interviews.

Information about the study and asking for volunteers were displayed in the Department of Shipping and Marine Technology at Chalmers University of Technology. This resulted in two focus groups conducted at Chalmers. The researchers were also contacted by one chief engineer who said that his engine crew would participate, for practical reasons the focus group had to be performed on board.

Results from the two studies were initially analyzed separately and integrated in a second step. The different categories from the two studies showed concordance, but the focus groups added a relative order among the different sub-categories. In total, four sub-categories were found, which formed one core category. Starting with the three major changes and their relative order found in the focus groups, we identified major areas of change and their relative order. These areas were then formulated as core categories in the results from the semi-structured interviews and provided an explanation for the different major changes.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results are graphically shown in Fig. 1
                      and described in Table 1
                     .

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The results of this study support the view that the shipping industry has undergone major changes and development while the organization of the crew and the resources on board have remained static. The crew is still organized in a hierarchical structure although the number of crew members, especially the number of unlicensed seamen on board, has been cut down (Mårtensson, 2006). Because of reduced staffing, the tasks performed by unlicensed seamen, mainly maintenance and repair work, are now often performed by higher qualified personnel.

The introduction of digital technology and the increased automation on board led to changes in the role of the marine engineers from engineering to system operating. Concurrently, the digitalization and automation on board have changed work performance. The core activity of moving the ship safely from A to B has to be performed in addition to other tasks (e.g., administration). New tasks and new routines to carry out old tasks require new knowledge (Allen, 2009). From a demands-resource perspective (Demerouti and Bakker, 2011), reduced staffing on board can be understood in terms of altered and increased job demands along with a resource reduction for the remaining engine room officers due to the downsizing. These competing demands and the increased imbalance between demands and resources reported by the participants may be a cause of the stress associated with role conflicts among marine engineers as reported in previous research (Rydstedt and Lundh, 2010). As suggested by e.g. Zeitlin (1995), the increased workload due to the altered organization onboard may also have contributed to the increased health hazards experienced by licensed maritime officers.

In terms of organizational ergonomics (Hendricks and Kleiner, 2001; IEA, 2015), a mismatch between the work tasks and the design of the ships was also reported by many participants. It has become salient that the physical design initiatives incorporated in the ship do not support the tasks to be performed. Tasks that are not supported by the design may trigger unsafe behaviors among the crew members (Cohen, 2011), who find alternative and sub-optimal ways to perform their tasks. In doing so, the crew members put themselves at risk (Forsell et al., 2007; Lundh, 2010; Lundh et al., 2011). Despite technical and organizational changes described by the participants, the design of the engine departments on board has remained unaltered (Lundh, 2010).

The results of this study point out that the present work situation produced new ergonomic, cognitive and temporal demands, which need to be met by the design of the working environment on board. Especially the engine control room has to be suited for digitalization and the ergonomic demands (considering technological developments) associated with this type of work and adjusted to support the primary task of shipping (Wagner et al., 2008). It would be of obvious advantage to take the experience and requirements of the end users into consideration in the design process.

From a demand-resource perspective (Demerouti and Bakker, 2011; Schaufeli and Taris, 2014), the findings in this study indicate that the altered working conditions onboard have led to new and often more complex job demands – in terms of workload and time pressure as well as due to new type of work tasks. This development may have led to the need for new types of resources for the individual engineer, not the least increased computer skills. But the participants commonly reported that they have not been provided any the appropriate resources to meet these new demands and requirements. Rather the reduced staffing has meant decreased organizational resources. This demand-resource imbalance may be a cause of the health problems among seafarers reported in several studies (e.g. Rydstedt and Lundh, 2010; Wadsworth et al., 2008; Zeitlin, 1995).

Previous studies have found that the engine crew does not oppose the new technology, but expects proper training and education to be able to handle the altered job content brought about by technological development (Allen, 2009). In the early seventies, Werthén (1973) studied the technological advancements on Swedish merchant ships. A conclusion of that study was that, in this early phase of the technological development, the engine officers experienced increased work satisfaction on more technologically advanced ships compared to older ships, since these ships offered an environment that contributed to a development of the engineers' skills (Werthén, 1973). This was probably due to the education of the engine officers, which was suited for a more technologically advanced environment. This study suggests, however, that there are now increasing demands on the engineers for developing their skills and knowledge due to rapid technological developments. Likewise the design and work organization have to be adjusted to support the tasks. Also the training and education of the engine room crew need to be adjusted to meet the new demands.

When the interviewed participants were asked to single out the one factor that had the most impact on the work environment on board, their answers were unanimous: their fellow crew members. The leadership, the team and the absence of conflicts were described as the most important component for the comfort and well-being on board and contributed to the ability to perform well, despite limited staffing and high demands. From a demands-resource balance perspective (Schaufeli and Taris, 2014), the social support and coherence in the crew were found to be crucial resources for the wellbeing and work performance of seafarers. While not explicitly mentioned in this study, Rydstedt and Lundh (2010) previously found engine room officers to report relatively high control in their work roles. This in combination with supportive collegial atmosphere in the crew seems to be the main resource to handle predicted as well as emerging requirements in daily shipping operations.

Despite the last decades of altered work content and technical alterations, and reduced staffing on board, the formal work organization of crew members has remained unaltered. As shown by the results of the study, the engine room officers often feel compelled to perform work tasks previously assigned to the unlicensed seamen, e.g. maintenance work, in order to meet onboard operational requirements. The work organization onboard is at times informally adjusted to meet the immediate demands of daily shipping operations. While this may be a good solution in the short term, it may be a concern for the shipping industry if highly qualified engineers must spend a substantial part of their work time to do these tasks.

Since participants of the present study were Swedish citizens employed in the Swedish merchant fleet, this may limit generalizability of the findings to worldwide conditions in the shipping industry. On the other hand, the findings are similar to what has been reported in numerous studies on the working conditions in the maritime sector of industrialized nations. The fact that some of the participants were included on their own request may also have affected the results of the study.

Due to the technological development and reduced onboard organization, participants describe a work situation where they feel a lack of resources, in terms of staffing and organizational design, level of ability in certain areas as well as in the design of the work space on board. Social support and a supportive informal work organization, in combination with a fairly high decision latitude, appear as major resources to help the individual engineer to cope with altered and increased demands in the work situation.

While the problems of working conditions in contemporary shipping industry – e.g. in terms of the mismatch between the work organization and the actual work requirements, work strain or health hazards – have been thoroughly described and analyzed in the literature, there has so far been little attempt to intervene and improve the conditions on board. A major concern for future research on working conditions in the shipping industry should be to suggest and evaluate concrete interventions to improve physical and psychosocial working conditions, aiming to support good work performance, reduce health hazards and to improve maritime safety.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

