@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A case study of the implementation of an ergonomics improvement committee in a Brazilian hospital – Challenges and benefits

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Improvement committees (ICs) can elevate the discussion of ergonomics in the organizational structure.


                        
                        
                           
                           ICs allow workers to engage effectively in these processes, in an emancipatory perspective.


                        
                        
                           
                           ICs do not have to provide answers for everyone, but should be of a more political nature.


                        
                        
                           
                           ICs should be given strategic prominence in order to facilitate ergonomic changes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Macroergonomics

Improvement committees

Work organization

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This article discusses the creation of an improvement committee (IC) to implement policies aimed at improving working conditions in a public health institution in the city of São Paulo. Suggestions were proposed for future implementations of this organizational mechanism, pursuant to the presentation of the process of its formation and the main results achieved. The findings led to the conclusion that good outcomes require autonomy and support from management, and the adoption of effective measures to improve and legitimize the improvement committee's existence. Another important issue is facilitating worker involvement and creating a locus for dialog among people with different visions within the organization. Thus, two approaches converge: a top-down approach in which policies are defined and improvement actions are actually implemented based on a general outlook of the production and work system, and a bottom-up approach specific to employees who are also engaged in improvement policies and in putting them into practice. It is also possible to point out problems and opportunities arising from actual work situations to the higher levels of management. This kind of approach fits with macroergonomics, because it integrates strategy, organization and work issues. It is possible to discuss the benefits of this approach for companies and provide conditions for workers to engage effectively in these processes. In conclusion, these proposals can be considered from an emancipatory perspective, given that different actors should be able to codetermine working conditions and work content, thus directly influencing their individual and collective experiences. The support and commitment of upper management are essential elements of success in maximizing the effectiveness of this organizational approach.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The purpose of this article is to describe and analyze an experience in implementing an improvement committee (IC) at a university hospital in Brazil. Based on a macroergonomic perspective, what can be learned about implementing an improvement committee in a healthcare organization and about its role and impacts? The principal aim of this paper is to describe the process that led to the formation of an improvement committee in an organization and to analyze the interest in implementing this kind of organizational approach in order to achieve benefits for the organization as well as for workers. The point of view supported by this paper is that the improvement of working conditions is an issue not limited to specialists, since different actors within production systems have contrasting experiences and can contribute to those processes, as proposed by various macroergonomics-based participatory approaches and activity-centered ergonomics. As such, a focus of this paper is the role played by hospital management, technical divisions, supervisors, and workers directly involved in different operations.

The main requirement for the intervention that served as the basis for this case study was to incorporate an ergonomic approach into institutional policies and into the organizational structure, given that various improvement actions proposed in the past produced only partial, limited or short-term results. This was attributed to the fact that ergonomics was not a reference for conceiving tasks and production processes (Seim and Broberg, 2010).

One of the concepts of macroergonomics is the implementation of ergonomics committees to address issues that go beyond purely workplace-based approaches. Work design must be treated at a broader level (Haro and Kleiner, 2008; Hendrick and Kleiner, 2001; Hendrick, 2005; Imada and Carayon, 2008). Implementing this type of mechanism is essential for participatory processes, just as it is central to an activity-centered ergonomics approach (Wisner, 1997; Guérin et al., 2001; Falzon, 2004). Participatory processes are considered essential for obtaining better and more permanent results (Haines et al., 2002; Hendrick and Kleiner, 2001). Participatory approaches consider that workers have different kinds of knowledge about the reality of the work they do, and their engagement is important for analysis and to devise solutions (Daniellou, 2004).

Innovating within the organizational structure is a major challenge for companies (Nelson, 1991). One possible innovation is the establishment of committees. Snook (1993) defines committees as working groups that may be permanent or temporary, usually composed of people from different areas who share common goals, such as the completion of specific projects or the management of a process that involves many areas. Committees in an organization, for example, aim to increase productivity and efficiency (Sajjadi et al., 2011) as well as quality (Jiang et al., 2009). Committees can also be established to address health and safety issues or to devise improvements aimed at providing the conditions required for workers to develop professionally and safeguard their health.

Ergonomics can be introduced into organizations through one or more specialized professionals or by specialized departments. However, the scope and size of projects, as well as the number of workers involved, have revealed the need to bring together a larger number of professionals from different areas of expertise. When the field of ergonomics was expanded to include organizational design, new corporate initiatives for the organizational implementation of ergonomics were introduced, which included ergonomics committees – EC (Hagg, 2003), a type of improvement committee. The EC is an application that is set up according to the needs and opportunities of each specific situation. Improvement committees deal with safety and health problems, but their purpose is to provide a broader view of working issues, relating them to strategic decisions rather than leaving the discussion to specialist groups, such as ergonomics teams.

Ergonomics committees have been established in different business sectors to address different requirements and purposes (see Table 1
                     ).

One or more committees may be established, depending on the size of the company and the number of manufacturing plants. In larger companies, two types of committee are introduced at different organizational levels, with a central committee responsible for the overall activities and other local committees with operational responsibilities (Hagg, 2003; Moore and Garg, 1998; Silverstein et al., 1991). Up to three types of committees with separate but complementary mandates can be introduced in a large-scale project (Villeneuve et al., 2007). It is also possible to have two different structures working cooperatively: a steering committee and a technical committee. The former, which defines the project guidelines and makes strategic decisions, comprises all the key stakeholders and should be clearly supported by senior management (Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007; Villeneuve et al., 2007). The technical committee is responsible for designing and carrying out the project. It is also useful to propose a user committee in order to define requirements and offer informed opinions about the design proposals, based on executives' and workers' expertise in the field (Villeneuve et al., 2007).

The participants in ECs (divided among committees of different levels) are from heterogeneous areas. According to Marras (1997), there should be a balanced representation of management and workforce, and it is advisable to have the presence of people involved in the physical layout of the work area, who are empowered to control scheduling. ECs may include ergonomists (Hagg, 2003; Moore and Garg, 1998; St-Vincent et al., 1998) and representatives from the plant manager's staff and health and safety, medical, engineering, and maintenance sectors (Silverstein et al., 1991; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007). Engineers responsible for projects and other professionals may also play a helpful role in the articulation of different viewpoints. There should also be an initial training phase to help the committee gain an understanding of ergonomics and foster more effective dialogue among the members, as ergonomics is not the only concern at hand – there is also the challenge of exchanging experiences and developing a common and shared language (More and Garg, 1998; St-Vincent et al., 1998; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007).

ECs are proposed based on needs identified by top management and are chaired by individuals at senior management levels (Acosta and Morales, 2008; Marras, 1997; Moore and Garg, 1998; Villeneuve et al., 2007). However, in some cases, they are implemented based on a middle-out and bottom-up vision (policies drawn up with the participation of operational workers), in which one of the priorities is to facilitate information collected from the workplace to be discussed by the participants (St-Vincent et al., 1998; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007). It is possible to have a dedicated professional within the organization, whose role is that of coordinator and facilitator. This responsibility may, but does not necessarily have to, be taken on by an ergonomist (St-Vincent et al., 1998; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007; Dul and Neumann, 2009; Seim and Broberg, 2010). The participation of specialists from outside the company may be necessary in some situations – for example, to assist in the implementation of the EC or to answer specific questions.

The proper functioning of the EC depends on a number of important elements. Top management commitment from the beginning of the project and its continued support are crucial (Neumann et al., 2009; Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007; Villeneuve et al., 2007). The success of this type of program depends not only on statements (words), but also on making financial resources available and on providing access to company information (Marras, 1997; Hendrick, 2003).


                     Dul and Neumann (2009) state that linking ergonomics to the company's strategy can give managers greater “positive” motivation to apply ergonomics and to potentiate its impacts. In a top-down approach, it is top management that can act upon organizational factors, which, according to Ku and Smith (2010), have a direct impact on the social aspects and welfare of the people in the organization.


                     Hasle and Jensen (2006) show that more effective results are achieved when professionals linked to health and safety change their mode of action in companies and act as agents of transformation. Dawson and Jensen (2001) discuss experiences that produced interesting results, such as the “experimentarium,” which focuses on problem-based learning rather than on the development of specific projects. In a similar context, Mathiesen and Hvenegaard (2001) focus on workers' participation in discussing broader issues, and their contribution to more strategic decisions in cooperation with managers is a major challenge, given that, while such participation could be beneficial, worker attitudes, views and responsibilities differ from those of management.


                     Maggi (2006) describes worker empowerment from an emancipatory perspective, meaning that favoring actions that enable workers to engage actively in these processes could result in better implementation of ergonomic projects, which underscores the importance of combining a bottom-up and top-down approach. Dejours (2008) states that a path toward emancipation is the effective participation of individuals in organizations that encourage rather than discourage cooperation, enabling individuals to participate in in-house deliberation processes (Dejours, 2009). According to Torma-Krajewski et al. (2007), people should feel they are part of the process so as to ensure the success of endeavors such as ergonomics committees, preventing procrastination and the delegation of responsibilities. Another reason for encouraging emancipation is that people possess crucial information about their own work (although their knowledge is sometimes not explicit or underpinned by a specific rationale) and should therefore participate actively in studies and in improving processes (Abrahão et al., 2009; Falzon, 2004). These authors believe it is important to obtain more specific knowledge about what people actually face in work situations, and to improve participatory processes.

Not only participation but also employee involvement seems to drive satisfaction and could potentiate positive results. However, the outcomes of interventions in this field are difficult to assess because of numerous variables and the lack of adequate data (Morag and Luria, 2013). Another difficulty is that modifications in work situations do not immediately produce tangible changes in companies.

Facilitating communication among people from different areas of the organization allows for more successful projects, favoring an alignment that starts with employees providing information and assistance in decision-making processes (Torma-Krajewski et al., 2007). To this end, similarly to the “workspace design” group proposed by Seim and Broberg (2010), the IC must work autonomously and be a bureaucracy-free means of dissemination in the organizational structure, a place of dialogue among people from different organizational levels and a catalyst for improvement actions.

The IC experiences that have been described were all introduced at institutions operating under quite traditional and functionalist forms of organization. In every case, the implementation of ICs was adapted to the needs of the institution, albeit without attempting to change its organizational structure. The experience analyzed in this article contributes to the discussion about ensuring organization alignment in order to attain better outcomes in IC implementation programs. The proposal here is based on a less functional and more integrated and organic IC that empowers people to make decisions about their work. Empowerment and autonomous decision-making processes should be considered part of an emancipatory path for everyone, enabling them to improve their specific working situation regardless of their hierarchical position in the organization.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

This study is based on an action research project involving the process of discussing and implementing an “improvement committee” at a hospital in São Paulo, Brazil. Starting in 2007, as a result of the institution's increased awareness of the positive outcomes of different ergonomic interventions, the researchers decided to propose a 3-year action research project in order to broaden the scope of ergonomic interventions, and to include working improvements as a strategic option in the institution's decision-making processes. The purpose of this project was also based on the need to integrate and reinforce a number of experiences that had been developed previously. Collaboration between the hospital and the research group began in 2000. In the initial years, undergraduate students supervised by professors conducted Ergonomic Work Analysis (EWA) studies. The main objective was to improve specific situations and to disseminate ergonomic concepts in various areas of the organization. In those analyses, actions were directed at small groups of workers through the diagnosis of and proposals for improvements, especially of physical structures, workstations, equipment, organization and work processes. The main question, then, had to do with the challenge of integrating those experiences and developing a more permanent and effective policy. Achievements and difficulties faced in implementing the committee and fostering its continuity are discussed.

The project was developed through cooperative and participatory involvement of the research team and members of the institution (Checkland and Holwell, 1998; Coughlan and Coghlan, 2002; Thiollent, 2004). The action research was developed in action research cycles, each comprising three phases: understanding the context and purpose; gathering, reporting and analyzing data, and planning, implementing and evaluating action; and monitoring (Coughlan and Coghlan, 2002). The first phase consisted of collecting written information and conducting many unstructured interviews in the organization; the second phase was the effective participation of the research team in the creation and implementation of the committee; and the final phase consisted of monitoring learning processes through questioning. The duration of the program was three years, and one of the researchers worked full-time on the program for six months.

The first phase consisted of interviewing the hospital board members and discussing with them the relevance of the implementation of a permanent committee. From the first meetings with the superintendent, the decision emerged to implement the committee and the selection of an individual to lead the process. Meetings with different players at the hospital were organized by the research group in order to understand the main demands concerning working conditions and their impact on workers' health and performance. Meetings were held with representatives of nursing staff, medical staff and physiotherapists, the procurement manager, IT manager, medical records manager, human resource manager, health and safety committee members, and a member of the board of directors. The members of the research group participated in the project by providing support at various meetings, collecting and analyzing data and writing up reports about each action implemented.

In addition to active participation in the action research, in the final phase of the project, semi-structured interviews were held with the key stakeholders involved in order to understand their perception of the implementation of the committee. A script was developed to guide the researcher, and additional questions that had not previously been defined were introduced, according to the evolution of the conversation about some of the issues that emerged. Participants formulated a number of recommendations for the future of the committee (Corbetta, 1999; Godoi et al., 2006; Creswell, 2007; Kvale, 2007).

The main topics of the interviews were as follows:
                        
                           ─
                           Superintendent and advisor: knowledge about ergonomics, the relevance of improving working conditions and the outcomes needed to improve productivity, quality and health. The interviews shed light on their points of view about the IC, its contribution, limitations, and the future with regard to strategic issues.

Committee participants: experience about their participation in the committee, in particular, if the purposes of the committee were known and clear, their criticisms about the results and the future, their engagement in the committee and the participation of other actors in the hospital.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The hospital management was interested in developing different and more coherent projects and to enhance the effectiveness of work improvements. This research began in 2007. Since it is a teaching institution, it was important for the hospital to support investigations and practices pertaining to organizational improvements. One of the challenges was the fact that policies did not tend to be lasting, given the constant changes in hospital management – superintendent mandates expire after four years.

At the time of the intervention, the hospital had approximately 1800 workers; about 70% of them were women and more than 55% of them were between 36 and 50 years old. Not only was this an aging population, but fewer workers were able to perform certain tasks, and a significant number of them were on long-term sick leave. As a public institution, one of the policies governing work force characteristics is the difficulty for employees to be fired, leading to a low turnover of employees, who normally only leave as a result of voluntary termination.

For the superintendent, adopting policies such as outsourcing of certain services was not a good way to solve this type of problem, since the hospital included a community of workers who had been involved in the success of operations and had been employed since its creation in 1980 – indeed, they had, after all, built this institution. As such, improving working conditions should be considered one of the main business policies of this institution. Both brief and prolonged absences produced work “overload,” as remaining colleagues had to meet the demand for services in order to avoid discontinuity.

In the Brazilian context, depending on their size and risk, companies delegate their responsibilities for working conditions to an occupational health and safety department. This practice is based on the premise of delegating this responsibility to specific departments or specialized professionals. With respect to the participation of worker representatives, Brazilian legislation stipulates that companies must create joint committees to address worker health and safety issues. These committees are known as Internal Accident Prevention Commissions (CIPAs), whose the main role is to discuss existing health and safety problems and propose remedial actions based on standards. There is a great deal of discussion about the scope of their application and effectiveness. Ergonomic analyses should be developed for all company positions, and this statement can be interpreted as a simple application of checklists based on biomechanical issues. On the other hand, it opens up the possibility of implementing real actions involving an ergonomic approach based on activity-centered ergonomics and macroergonomic principles. The approach proposed at the hospital was based on those principles, adopting a matrix-based perspective and assigning ergonomic issues to a higher organizational level.

The main purpose of creating the IC, which was outlined at the beginning of the project, was to define policies for the improvement of working conditions, so that such improvements could be implemented and new projects created. From the standpoint of this research, another objective was to help the organization build its own ergonomics processes without requiring the support of specialists, by involving different stakeholders of the institution in the design, management and operation processes. Initially, the research team supported all of the committee's actions, aiming to identify, with other participants, the main health problems existing at the hospital and to introduce ergonomic concepts. In the first meeting, the committee was designated an Improvement Committee (IC), since actions other than those proposed by an ergonomic approach could be defined. The IC was composed of an adviser directly linked to the superintendent and responsible for this project, the heads of the nursing and physical therapy departments, and a representative from the purchasing department. Other professionals from the hospital joined the group, according to the subject under discussion and the needs of the IC. Four researchers with backgrounds in production engineering, medicine, ergonomics and work psychology also participated in the project.

A number of objectives were defined and the committee took on the responsibility of disseminating the discussion among other stakeholders in the hospital. After the end of the second year, the research team purposely reduced its participation and an agenda was defined to implement different actions in the organization.

The first stage of implementation required monthly meetings, which were the prelude for the proposal of the purposes of the IC, the construction of the research group and the definition of the institution's participants in the IC. Four researchers from the areas of production engineering, medicine and work psychology were involved directly in this intervention.

In this initial phase, the researchers helped to coordinate the group, overseeing the agenda, acting as mediators at the meetings, and introducing the concepts of ergonomics to be shared among the members and, whenever possible, assisting in their dissemination within the organization. Thus, several themes and activities were proposed for the committee to become effective. Until that time, the role of the local staff had been to be actively involved in specific issues and discussions pertaining primarily to their respective work situations.

Each line of action proposed by the committee was developed independently with the creation of specialized groups. These groups were composed of different actors, always including a researcher and a varying number of participants from the local staff interested in the issue at hand. The relations among the members of the groups were of collaboration, without the presence of a formal leader. Thus, the ergonomic actions developed in the organization became the focus of the committee's discussions and analyses. Over time, the meetings became more infrequent and were held bi-monthly. The researchers' participation ended in September 2010 with the closure of the activities implementing the lines of action proposed by the IC. The goal was to maintain the activities, incorporating them into the hospital's actions and continuing the committee's activities to coordinate them.

An educational program based on ergonomics work analysis (EWA) was devised by the research team in parallel with the IC implementation (ten-month program with 20 of the hospital's employees). The program participants, who worked in different departments, developed a work analysis of ten different working situations at the hospital. Their findings indicated that each situation presented different challenges, and some recommendations were put forward for the implementation of solutions based on ergonomic concepts. The main purpose of this program was to disseminate these concepts throughout the organization and to assist in the implementation of the IC's policies.

Five main lines of action were defined, relating to the main problems considered at a macro-level and to most relevant issues, in order to implement the committee:
                           
                              1.
                              
                                 Epidemiological surveillance. Focused on the need to improve managerial knowledge about the incidence and prevalence of work-related diseases, accidents and their consequences insofar as they pertain to work force management. The need to rehabilitate workers with restrictions after a long period of sick leave was also considered a priority, since the existing data were considered insufficient to enable a more systemic understanding of the problems, which would be needed in order to decide what actions should be developed and to define different levels of priority.


                                 Policies for workers with restrictions and special needs. Focused on the fact that an increasing number of workers require rehabilitation after long periods of sick leave, along with the hospital's aging population, reduced work force availability, correlated with the existence of legal requirements to hire people with special needs (disabled persons), in order to develop a special policy to meet the needs of these workers in terms of work conditions.


                                 Purchasing policies. Another line of action was implemented to include ergonomics principles pertaining to materials, equipment and software purchasing. Many of the problems workers faced when performing their activities had to do with inadequate tools and technologies. To implement this policy meant that different actors had to be involved in the purchasing process rather than only the team directly responsible for it. Thus, it became the rule to include in the process workers who would be the users of the equipment to be purchased.


                                 Adequacy and suitability of the facilities. In order to establish a different approach to workplace reform, an ergonomic work analysis was included in the process in order to determine the requirements that would be included in contracts.


                                 Implementation of actions based on principles of the psychodynamics of work were also defined due to the growing incidence and prevalence of sick leave-related psychic problems.


                        The results achieved at the end of the project were as follows:

From the standpoint of epidemiological surveillance, a computerized data collection and processing system was set up to support management decisions (number of active employees, number of employees with restrictions, and type, sex, age and length of service of each employee, as well as data on diseases and work-related accidents). This was achieved through IC meetings in the content definition phase, and subsequently in the creation and testing phase through meetings between a researcher, the advisor responsible for the project at the hospital, a technician from the information technology department and the head of human resources. The commitment of the advisor, the active research group, and the technical support of the head of human resources and the IT technician were crucial to the success of this activity.

Little was done about policies for workers with restrictions and special needs, despite the direct involvement of the head of the physical therapy department, who, after participating in a Training and Qualification Group, conducted an EWA of the most critical areas in which there was a high prevalence of workers with work restrictions. The fact that these analyses did not result in structural changes (only specific changes) took up a considerable amount of the head of physical therapy's time and made her feel she was acting alone on this project, so this initiative was gradually sidelined.

Several discussions about the acquisition of materials, equipment, information systems and services were held during the IC meetings, and some actions were developed externally. One of them involved the purchase of new chairs, which meant that all the leaders that wanted new chairs for their departments would have to consult the future users in order to understand their needs and difficulties encountered at their workstations, including details about the old chairs. Another action was conducted based on an EWA to justify the purchase of autoclaves for sanitizing baby bottles, and a milk bottling machine. Another EWA was developed with workers concerning the activities of meal distribution to patients at the hospital. One of the main outcomes of this last analysis was that it revealed the need to replace the current devices so as to facilitate the handling of food carts and to prevent errors, such as giving a patient the wrong meal.

The suitability of the facilities was also a focus of the IC, and practical steps were taken to apply suggestions resulting from EWAs developed previously at the institution. However, although the advisor played a key role in obtaining its support, the committee failed to take an active role, neglecting, for example, to draw up a plan of goals for adapting facilities based on ergonomic assumptions and actions.

An action based on the psychodynamics of work approach was developed with the nursing staff. Two groups were created, one with nurses and the other with nursing assistants. The results were forwarded to workers and leaders, which led to a discussion about significant issues, such as the relationship between “technical” activities and the importance of compassion, which is essential to care-related activities.

This part of the results contains a summary of the responses to the main questions of the interviews.

The main factors that influenced the relative initial success of the IC's actions were the participation of the superintendent, the advisor and the representatives of some of the hospital's strategic departments (human resources manager, IT manager, purchasing manager, health and safety professionals). Significant contributions came as a result of the advisor's influence and her desire to implement the committee, and the superintendent's decision to empower the IC to develop new policies at the hospital. Meanwhile, difficulties were encountered regarding the participation of other committee members, who had other priorities involving their primary roles. Other employees cooperated in the analysis jointly with the researchers in some actions, but did not sit on the IC.

After several months, it became clear to the members that the IC did not have enough autonomy to implement the improvements that were proposed. The decisions were the superintendent's responsibility, but he lacked the power to change some policies, such as one intended to facilitate the hiring of new professionals and the purchase of material more suitable for use at the hospital. Moreover, there was no long-term structured plan for the IC. Even so, the scope of the project expanded substantially. The actions were developed particularly with the support of the advisor, although many things could not be developed due to the paradox of urgent needs on the one hand, and the difficulties in achieving greater involvement of members on the other, in addition to the lack of cooperation from others, since proposals and the actions required for change were not a priority over other obligations.

It should be noted that the prospect of granting greater autonomy to hospital workers on the issues addressed by the committee, particularly with regard to working conditions, required a radical change in attitude. To improve employee participation, as intended by the IC, some processes that had theretofore been carried out by specialists would have to be altered, such as purchasing of new items and analysis of working conditions. Worker involvement requires time, and most of the workers had no spare time because of their very intense work schedule, allied to the fact that reflecting together about working conditions and how to improve working situations and change task content was not part of the mainstream culture.

The advisor's participation in this project gave her a better understanding of the hospital's problems, affording a more comprehensive and systemic view. Nevertheless, she quickly understood that actual changes were very difficult to implement. Upon analyzing the different proposals made by the IC, she considered the results of ergonomic actions at the hospital to be extremely positive. Conversely, however, it was not possible to gain the involvement of lower-level managers and workers themselves, which was crucial to the success of the IC.

The superintendent reported similar issues. According to him, the multi-year ergonomics project was given the highest possible priority, but a more structured policy could not be introduced due to the lack of structure and human resources at the hospital. There are also organizational constraints. The hospital does not operate autonomously from the university, and the superintendent lacks authority concerning strategic issues, such as hiring new workers or replacing those who retire or resign. This limits not only his power of action but also that of the institution as a whole. He believes it is useless to propose solutions without having the authority to implement them; to establish sustained ergonomic policies would require having the means to develop them. In short, he considers the IC very important, but the hospital needs specialized people, a physical area, and specialized health and safety services in order to draw up and develop strategic plans. Without these resources, it would be pointless to offer more than simple support. Issues of greater employee participation were not raised; the idea of having these actions supported by specialized professionals stems from a more traditional view which is contrary to the IC's proposal. Restricting those issues to specific departments at the hospital meant that the organizational structure would remain unchanged, without a more transversal and effective way of acting.

Six IC participants were also interviewed, all of them strongly engaged in the project. The decision to interview people who had effectively participated was necessary to restrict the number of interviewees to the stakeholders who actually participated in the implementation of the IC.

The semi-structured interview was divided into five main themes: personal involvement, the degree of institutional involvement of the other IC participants, understanding specific committee objectives, evaluation of the outcomes and the future of the committee. The extent of personal involvement in the IC reveals something about each participant's views about the importance of the project. Answers to the question about objectives indicate whether, at the end of the ergonomic action, the participants' expectations were compatible with the initial objectives planned jointly within the IC. Questions about the future shed light on their vision about the possibilities of continuity for the IC. Some interesting points can be analyzed based on these semi-structured interviews: the personal involvement of those who failed to grasp the specific objectives of the IC and believed it was intended exclusively for support. Those whose personal involvement was proactive were familiar with the objectives and were skeptical about the strategic role of the IC in the organization. On the other hand, those aware of the limitations expressed positive opinions about the IC.

The responses concerning the degree of involvement of other participants in the IC and of the institution is interesting in order to understand the context. This enabled us to distinguish the respondents' perception about the commitment of the IC members and of the rest of the institution. For them, acting within a committed group is important and directly affects the extent of their motivation and involvement. Otherwise, the perceptions about the commitment of other IC members was restricted. Greater engagement was reported when the issues at hand involved their personal interests. Their opinion was that only two members were truly engaged. As for the degree of support provided by the institution, two people expressed no opinion, recognizing that their perception was limited, while all the others were in agreement about the institution's limited support, since the IC would not be part of its strategic plans.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This is a specific case, and the learning experience gained during the process raises a number of questions about social processes, particularly when the purpose is to implement practices aimed at changing perceptions about work in institutions. Adopting a practice that introduces ergonomic issues is not a trivial endeavor and it requires progressive implementation to prevent this type of project from failing.

Extensive support from top management, the training of different actors and effective changes are very important to keep the participants of an IC motivated and to avoid the centralization of responsibilities by disseminating the experience among the institution's workers. One of the greatest risks that was identified in this project was the imminence of discontinuity. The main objectives of implementation, its effectiveness and permanence over time constitute major concerns. The project's sustainability should be ensured notwithstanding the scenario of changes in the hospital board.

Another issue has to do with the research team. The project must be considered as resulting from the will of the institution. It should involve different actors and hierarchical levels, and as such, should not depend on external agents but instead be made up of people belonging to the organization. This would be possible if the committee were included as an intrinsic part of the hospital's organizational structure and if its various participants were effectively dedicated to it. However, this involvement was not feasible, since working with the committee was an activity considered secondary to the main tasks of the participants. For people to be motivated to continue the experience and to disseminate it, they would first have to perceive improvements in their own activities. This was clearly expressed in the statements of the different committee members and of other workers who participated in work analysis processes and in ergonomic training. It would mean that, to a certain extent, IC activities would have to be considered as part of everyone's job, i.e., the hospital staff would need to have more time to spend on this kind of activity, in addition to all their other obligations. In order to build such a scenario, the hospital would need to augment its staff, since, in this specific situation, the need for new employees was chronic given the characteristics of the population and the working conditions.

According to the advisor, although these limitations were known, the results of the ergonomic actions were positive. Some improvements were implemented in specific areas, and were recognized as important for the institution, e.g., the creation and implementation of new software to support managerial activities involving sick leave and workforce availability in order to organize work shifts, and improvements of working conditions after performing EWAs.

It would also be necessary to devise a strategy to prevent the centralization of improvement actions within the committee itself, because there is a considerable risk of endless demand. In this case, all work-related problems would be referred to the committee, maintaining the same functionalist perspective. This would be a major failure, as one of the aims is to replace the functionalist and fragmented organizational structure with a more integrated and multi-centered one. To avoid this pitfall, the committee proposes to be a disseminating agent for policies, with actions that can be incorporated into different hospital procedures.

One of the examples cited in this paper has to do with the purchasing process. Notwithstanding the effective participation of department representatives in the committee, greater familiarity with the activities of future users from the very beginning of the acquisition process would be necessary to enable the procurement process to incorporate issues related to workers needs. Accurate information about real needs is important for the acquisition of more suitable equipment and materials, since the most traditional technical purchasing process does not include an evaluation of the future use of a given piece of equipment or work tool. Based on an analysis of current activity, success in this regard is possible if specifications are underpinned with a good level of detail. Providing less refutable arguments is helpful, making it clear why it is more advantageous, for example, to buy a device that is easier to use, or why a more comfortable operation would be regarded as a principle to promote workers health. This is important because, as a public institution, the hospital's purchasing process is based on competitive bidding in which the lowest bid is approved. If real needs are not described and translated into technical requirements, purchases will always be made on the basis of the lowest price, which is not necessarily the best choice. This could lead to poor results and sometimes even render work activities more hazardous.

This is a clear example of how ergonomics could be incorporated into various organizational procedures, preventing it from depending exclusively on a specific and specialized sector that would be responsible for solving all the problems. Doing something that is not within the exclusive realm of ergonomics specialists would be a key point for hospital decision-making to lead to greater autonomy.

The lessons learned from this experience show that the IC's role is to integrate different visions, enabling the alignment of two distinct approaches, which Hignett (2001) also describes as strategies. The first is a top-down approach conducted by upper management, which considers the organization from a general viewpoint regarding the work system and related processes, establishing and implementing improvement policies. The second is a bottom-up approach, conducted by the employees of the areas to be improved, who put these policies into practice and can pinpoint the real problems and opportunities in work situations, as well as cooperate to devise better solutions (Fig. 1
                     ). The alignment of these two approaches is one of the main issues involved in the introduction of an IC. This type of project has the potential to bring widespread benefits to the organization.

Various studies have demonstrated results obtained by incorporating participatory ergonomic principles in projects and improvements of work systems (Haines et al., 2002). The modalities discussed in the literature differ considerably, and experiments may be more limited, considering, for example, certain issues dealt with by workers. These studies are based on interviews or the creation of specific discussion groups. The creation of specific committees is not frequently reported in the literature. This is the case even when management commitment is reinforced, considering the results as an essential issue for the success of such policies (Acosta and Morales, 2008; Forsman et al., 2012; Garcia et al., 2012; Glina et al., 2011; Määttä, 2007; Neumann and Village, 2012). Other articles discuss the benefits of worker participation at various levels, including economics (Guimarães et al., 2012). Jensen (2002) defines the role of participants in this type of committee as that of “organizational activists.” Emphasis on setting up multidisciplinary teams to identify and design goals, actively participate in equipment development, make decisions and solve problems is also referred to as effective (Broberg et al., 2011; Santos et al., 2011). Laing et al. (2007) argue that committees are important because they are more effective in developing diagnoses and obtaining results in cases where effective participation from both workers' representatives and organizational professionals from different departments is ensured.

These experiences, as well as the one discussed in this paper, illustrate several important challenges in creating improvement processes that in fact open up opportunities for more effective participation by different social actors in companies. For the current study, the stated aim of the hospital management to implement more participative processes was actually more a desire than a concrete action to effect changes in the institution. This is because the organizational structure still reflects a strongly functional rationality, with each sector playing its role and workers' tasks defined according to their profession. Thus, there was neither time nor willingness for greater involvement. To implement real changes would require breaking away from a longstanding tradition that pays little attention to participatory processes and to the implementation of policies that empower people to make decisions about issues pertaining to their own work. Changing this reality would require supporting durable experiences that provide tangible and intangible improvement outcomes for production and for workers.

Other authors discuss difficulties in creating committees, especially when dealing with groups comprising both worker and management representatives. Dixon and Theberge (2011) state that there is a risk of marginalizing workers' representatives, as well as the difficulties they face in bringing up issues examined by the committees for discussion at higher levels of the hierarchy. In this case, management representatives accept this role, because they should have a greater influence on management. Thus, the committees' actions are dependent on management decisions, which jeopardizes their own legitimacy in the organization. In the case discussed in this paper, the purpose was not to ensure parity in the committee by having the same number of worker and management representatives. Instead, the main issue was to implement an effective policy, beginning at the highest level of the hierarchy, given that it is very important to consider work as a fundamental anchor to provide quality and productivity. The second issue was to disseminate the experience throughout the organization, since working conditions are not a question only for specialists but for everyone, especially those who are directly engaged in a specific working situation.

In the current case of the hospital, the committee's proposal was not to constitute a joint mechanism with the participation of worker and management representatives. This does not mean that the representatives' participation was deemed irrelevant. On the contrary, it is important to foster negotiations that effectively consider different interests. To this end, engaging in discussions with trade unions is one of the paths to be pursued.

Finally, the main purpose of this project was to create a mechanism to enable the dissemination of practices and to gradually involve the entire institution in these issues. The engagement of everybody in the organization should also be considered a path towards greater autonomy, as an emancipatory process (Dejours, 2009; Lancman and Uchida, 2003).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The topic discussed in this article is challenging and should be considered from a complex point of view. During the development of this work, numerous variables affected the success (or failure) of the implementation of sustainable and far-reaching ergonomic actions. Other elements could have been examined and analyzed in greater depth in this study, but many of them were not perceived at the time of implementation, and were only understood more clearly afterward. The focus was on a number of prioritized elements, seeking to stay as close as possible to the points of view expressed by the participants in the project. Other elements could emerge with a more extended longitudinal approach, for example, considering the possibility of analyzing the outcomes several months or years after the IC experience was concluded. One of the main reasons for discontinuing the IC was the change in the composition of the hospital board. The new managers did not see eye to eye with their predecessors and did not propose to continue the experience. What effectively remained as a policy in the organization?

Our results demonstrate the potential for the adoption of macroergonomics and activity-centered ergonomics in the development of improvement actions in a company. Some results obtained through the actions of the IC indicate that profound changes can be fostered in terms of enriching different points of view and effectively implementing work transformations and improvements. The challenge lies in ensuring longer continuity of actions and their dissemination throughout the institution.

As for the main objectives of this paper, which include discussing the experience of an improvement committee project in a specific institution, it is important to analyze the achievements and difficulties faced by participants. First of all, the main outcomes clearly indicated the need to create an effective policy to discuss and improve working conditions, given that most of the actions adopted before the IC was set up were isolated and not tied to an overall strategic view. The work developed by the IC so far shows that the main problems the participants face, as well as the difficulties in disseminating the policy to others in the organization, stems from the fact that no other organizational changes were introduced. For example, the participants did not have sufficient time to develop actions related to the committee's aims, ergo, the IC's main suggestions were not implemented. Another problem was the fact that this experience could be considered a top-down policy, since there was no demand from the workers for a more equitable participatory approach that would include different workers directly involved in the hospital's operations. However, even if this experience cannot be deemed an unqualified success, it is important to stress that it shows a new stance on the part of managers, since they implemented and sustained the initiatives, at least at first. Another positive aspect is the fact that other actors in the hospital understood the need to introduce changes in working conditions and work content. Those issues should be addressed starting from the first steps in the conception and design of processes related to the production system.

To achieve these goals for future projects, it will be essential for the highest echelons of the hierarchy in the organizational structure to be engaged, since implementing new ergonomics-based work-related policies is not a simple action. This is not a process to be overseen solely by ergonomics specialists, but rather a political process that must be supported by different stakeholders. Another point worth mentioning is that workers believe in concrete and effective changes and quickly notice if their efforts are meaningful. Confidence is also important, constituting an intangible value resulting from actions related to board efforts that focus on the quality of working life and health, as well as improvements in production quality and productivity aligned with a sustainable perspective of social, economic and environmental issues.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

