@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The application of an industry level participatory ergonomics approach in developing MSD interventions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A participatory ergonomics approach was applied at an industry level to develop MSD interventions.


                        
                        
                           
                           This approach was required to help overcome industry scepticism and to deal with industry level MSD risks.


                        
                        
                           
                           Key stakeholders developed collective ownership of the interventions and increased their own awareness of MSD prevention.


                        
                        
                           
                           An industry-supported key stakeholder group, and a mandate for the initiative, are important prerequisites for success.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Participatory ergonomics

Meat processing

Musculoskeletal disorders

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Participatory ergonomics projects are traditionally applied within one organisation. In this study, a participative approach was applied across the New Zealand meat processing industry, involving multiple organisations and geographical regions. The purpose was to develop interventions to reduce musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) risk. This paper considers the value of an industry level participatory ergonomics approach in achieving this. The main rationale for a participative approach included the need for industry credibility, and to generate MSD interventions that address industry level MSD risk factors. An industry key stakeholder group became the primary vehicle for formal participation. The study resulted in an intervention plan that included the wider work system and industry practices. These interventions were championed across the industry by the key stakeholder group and have extended beyond the life of the study. While this approach helped to meet the study aim, the existence of an industry-supported key stakeholder group and a mandate for the initiative are important prerequisites for success.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Over half the land area of New Zealand is pastoral and correspondingly, the largest two merchandise export earners are dairy (21%) and meat produce (8%) (Statistics NZ, 2015). The meat processing industry is therefore not only an important part of New Zealand's export-based economy but also a large employer in many regions, providing work for 1.8% of the New Zealand workforce. There are approximately 70 meat processing plants, owned by more than 20 companies, servicing more than 32,000 farms producing sheep, beef, veal, venison and pork. Sizes range from small plants processing single species (30 employees) up to very large plants employing more than 2000 people.

Meat processing has the highest annual incidence of musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) work compensation claims of all major industries nationally (Tappin et al., 2008b; ACC, 2007). More recent figures show that while figures are declining, the injury rate in meat processing remains the highest across the manufacturing sector, with MSD the most common injury type (ACC, 2014). In direct costs alone (medical costs, earnings compensation costs), the amount paid by the industry in 2005/6 for MSD claims accounted for 64% of the total cost of compensation claims (ACC, 2007). Where earlier data for compensation claims are available they show a similar pattern (ACC, 1996), while overall injury data from 2011/12 show this trend continuing (ACC, 2014).

A number of factors have helped to shape the development of MSD risk in the industry and how this risk is managed. As the first link in the supply chain, farmers exert significant influence over processors which has affected plant design and layout over time (Curtis, 1992). In the 1930's the industry moved from solo butchering to mass production. The conditions under which this occurred and the scientific management principles that were implemented resulted in the workforce becoming heavily unionised and the relationship between processors and unions adversarial (Inkson and Cammock, 1988). Moreover, as animals are pasture-grazed all year, this creates seasonal fluctuations in processing volumes and corresponding fluctuations in employment as processors try to manage these peaks and troughs. The subsequent development of a seniority system to provide some job security and to manage staff numbers during seasonal fluctuations has in some cases introduced further risk through creating barriers to task training and rotation. Further changes have occurred since the 1980's, with plant closures and downsizing a common occurrence, brought about by factors such as economic deregulation, a mismatch between processing capabilities and market demands, and task automation. These factors have all contributed to MSD risks being firmly embedded across the industry through employment and work practices, cultural norms, and physical design.

Attempts to address MSD risk in New Zealand meat processing have largely focused on secondary and tertiary prevention, with primary level initiatives mostly targeting physical risk factors (OSH, 1997). In an earlier initiative where a wider perspective was adopted, industry scepticism and a lack of stakeholder involvement limited implementation of the findings (Slappendel et al., 1996; Blewden and Wyllie, 1998).

In response to the high rates and costs of MSD claims, a three year government-funded study to identify MSD risks in meat processing and develop interventions to address them commenced in 2004. High MSD-risk tasks, risk factors and intervention ideas were collected through health and safety personnel in processing plants, and through face to face interaction with 237 staff (processors, managers, union delegates) in a national sample of 28 plants. This however was simply ergonomics in action (Wilson, 2005) and is not described as participative. Further details on these two earlier stages of the study are reported in Tappin et al. (2008a, 2008b). A participative approach was adopted for the final stage of the study; the development of interventions for the industry. Previous involvement in the industry had emphasized how entrenched MSD were, how they were commonly perceived, and the narrow view of their causation and prevention (Slappendel et al., 1996). The embattled industrial relations history of the industry had also contributed to a general distrust of people and advice from outside the industry, including information on such a longstanding issue as MSD (Inkson and Cammock, 1984).

Participatory ergonomics (PE) is described as a complex and diverse concept (Haines and Wilson, 1998), and is seen as an umbrella term for a range of different ideas and practices. This same breadth is apparent in the literature defining PE, or describing the tools and methods used in PE research. Reflecting this diversity and the evolving nature of the field, the literature about PE places more importance on considering why it is used than on defining it (Wilson, 2005), or on being prescriptive about the approach taken (Morris et al., 2003; Van Eerd et al., 2010). Participation therefore, is often viewed by ergonomists as a means to achieve a goal and not a goal in itself (de Jong, 2001; Haines and Wilson, 1998).

The benefits that can accrue from comprehensive PE programmes in reducing MSD prevalence and severity are well established (Cole et al., 2005; Rivilis et al., 2008; Cantley et al., 2014), although methodological and organizational challenges of such studies are also recognized (Hignett et al., 2005; St-Vincent et al., 2006). Furthermore, very few studies have applied a participative approach across multiple organisations or an entire industry. Apart from the obvious additional resourcing that such an approach requires, there are other unique issues to consider. Drawing on research from health care and computer security, Carayon (2006) highlighted how interactions among people who work across organisational, geographical, cultural and temporal boundaries can increase the complexity of work system and how this might affect a PE program. Commissaris et al. (2006) described the modification of a change management model to suit the ergonomists' role in large multiclient projects, describing the difficulties of conflicting interests when dealing with unions, organisations and government, and working with multiple projects simultaneously. de Jong and Vink (2000) also worked at an industry level in developing mechanical aids to reduce musculoskeletal loading for glaziers. While employee and sector level involvement was considered successful in defining the needs and testing solutions, the researchers questioned whether the large effort involved was the best use of resources. In a study by de Jong et al. (2003), the involvement of different companies in identifying and developing solutions was highlighted as a difficulty.

Other studies have involved a number of different companies in PE research and initiatives, but not an entire sector. These few studies have often involved the implementation of a specified work tool or work method; a relatively low-threat intervention that is not reliant on industry agreement for its success. However, they raise some of the same issues highlighted in the sector level studies. Axtell et al. (1995) looked at IT departments in one company over multiple sites and found that the organizational context, such as people in different offices facing different demands, can impact on outcomes. In a longitudinal case study, Kardborn (1998) looked at hand-tool development across six manufacturing companies and mentioned hesitancy by stakeholders to get involved due to concerns over intellectual property rights and patents. Pehkonen et al. (2009) evaluated a PE study to reduce musculoskeletal load in municipal kitchens and experienced difficulties in gaining the support of management across the kitchens, and sustaining the study through unexpected changes in some of the participating companies. In a manual handling study in four underground coal mines, Burgess-Limerick et al. (2007) described how staff turnover affected momentum of the research and raised the need for an on-site champion. Similarly, in three multi-site case studies, Dixon et al. (2009) also found difficulties with management commitment and competing priorities for resources. In a study exploring the processes involved in PE programmes in two worksites, Dixon and Theberge (2011) highlighted the erosion of participation that can occur during the implementation stage, with aspects of the social context such as power-distance reducing the influence of worker representatives at this crucial stage. Gunningham (2008) reporting on worker participation in health and safety in the mining industry, referred to the difficulty of meaningful participation in ‘cold’ industrial relations climates, bringing into focus the close relationship between industrial relations and health and safety in highly unionised workforces such as that within the NZ meat processing industry.

Some studies have also indicated factors that would increase the level of success of a sector or multi-site PE approach, including: allowing additional time for changes and unforeseen events, establishing and maintaining good communication, and harnessing enthusiasts to keep the project running (Kardborn, 1998), and the need for an on-site champion (Burgess-Limerick et al., 2007). Moir and Buchholz (1996) also identified specific barriers within the construction sector that a participative approach can help to overcome, such as: mobility of the workforce, resistance to change, existing labour – management relationships, and the number of small employers. Many of these success factors are consistent with those found in smaller PE studies, and are well summarized by Wilson et al. (2005) and Vink et al. (2006).

Despite the difficulties raised by other studies, these were not considered to outweigh the rationale supporting the use of an industry level participative approach in this case. In fact, the complexity of the work systems involved, the relationships between organisations working for a common purpose (Moir and Buchholz, 1996), and even working within the same organisation (Carayon, 2006) made it sensible to consider a participative approach. The paramount need was for the resulting MSD interventions to be accepted by as much of the industry as possible, with the primary objective of overcoming industry scepticism, distrust and parochialism which have affected injury prevention initiatives in the past. It was intended that a participative approach would help to allay such concerns, through involving a representative cross-section of plants and processing staff in a study driven by key stakeholders for the industry. Another highly significant need was to enable intervention development to account for industry-level MSD risk factors, along with physical and psychosocial risk factors that can subsequently occur. Finally, it was anticipated that a participative approach would help to identify and understand task and cultural variations within different companies, regions or sectors, and ensure that these were also considered in the development of ‘barrier-free’ interventions. This paper aimed to critically review the value of an industry level participatory ergonomics approach through the experience of the MSD intervention study. In doing so, it presents an account of the industry level participative approach, findings from key phases of the intervention development process in which the participative approach was applied, as well as the post-study evaluation of the approach.

@&#METHOD@&#

The main industry stakeholders were represented by a government initiated industry-based group with the mandate of preventing all types of injuries in meat processing. This group, the Meat Industry Health and Safety Forum (MIHSF), was already in existence at the time of the study. They were established by the state insurer Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) and funded jointly by them and the employer group Meat Industry Association (MIA). MIHSF members included health and safety personnel from the largest companies involved in meat processing (n = 8), along with representatives from the national union (n = 1), the national training body (n = 1), the meat inspectorate (n = 1), MIA (n = 1) and government injury prevention agencies (n = 3). The group was chaired by one of the meat processing company members. Although the MIHSF had no regulatory powers, they had strong authority through inclusion of representatives of the main industry stakeholders. Furthermore, more than 80% of the industry processing capacity was represented by processing company members, and greater than 95% of the industry workforce was represented by the national union member. Industry acceptability of the MIHSF was further enhanced by its tripartite structure and its backing by government agencies responsible for enacting health and safety and employment legislation.

The MIHSF, as direct representatives of the key stakeholders and with a mandate to address MSD at an industry level, became the primary vehicle for formal participation during the study. The roles of the MIHSF in the study were therefore to act as: conduits into the industry, champions of the study, information providers and decision-makers at stages throughout the study, and champions of the subsequent MSD interventions beyond the study timeframe. These roles closely matched the founding objectives of the MIHSF.

While the researchers had most control over the research process in this study, all the power rested with the MIHSF regarding industry access, intervention development, knowledge dissemination, and implementing industry-level change, acting as the definitive stakeholder with power, legitimacy and urgency, whereas the researchers adopt the role of dependent stakeholder (Dul et al., 2003). Some rebalancing of power and control was helped by the study being externally funded thus enabling greater independence of the researchers.

Relationships and communication channels established over the course of the study are illustrated in Fig. 1
                        . This includes the relationships developed over eighteen months during the two earlier stages of study when identifying high MSD-risk tasks and intervention ideas. As previously stated and reported elsewhere (Tappin et al., 2008a, b) this involved analysis of injury data, a survey of processing plant health and safety staff, and on-site data collection involving 237 staff from 28 plants. By the time the final stage of the study reported on here commenced, relationships between the researchers, MIHSF members and other industry stakeholders were well developed and awareness of the study was growing. Line thickness represents frequency of contact and the strength of relationship from the researchers' perspective. This illustrates that while the primary link remained with the MIHSF and the plants they represent (indicated by the dotted line in Fig. 1), additional networks also developed between the researchers and other party's as the study progressed.

Interventions from the semi-structured interviews conducted earlier in the second stage of the study were sorted into 28 themes that emerged throughout the data collection process (detail on this earlier stage is reported in Tappin et al., 2008a). Each intervention also included a brief outline of the relevant MSD risk factors and implementation barriers. Supporting evidence from the literature on MSD interventions in meat processing was added, along with data on the number of plants who had implemented an intervention, or were considering doing so. Background information on the study was also added to the document, along with a description of how the interventions were presented and what feedback was being asked of them.

As the intervention data were summarised, it became apparent some form of prioritising was needed to help make sense of the long lists of interventions and provide users with a tool to gauge their relative importance. While the plant-related evidence improved credibility, a rating assigned to each intervention would help people make decisions on which interventions to implement by adding to a sense of perspective between high and low ratings, and would enable comparisons between them. Prioritising the interventions would also assist in breaking up the large amount of information, and as the interventions were industry-derived, the addition of priorities - particularly by the MIHSF, would provide further validation of the interventions for people using the document in industry.

After discussion with individual MIHSF members, different criteria were given to the researchers and the MIHSF. The researcher priorities were planned to provide initial guidance to MIHSF members in differentiating between the interventions and to highlight interventions that the researchers saw as the most important. The MIHSF priorities in developing the final document for industry were intended to improve credibility of the document, and help to illuminate those interventions seen as having most merit for the industry.

Prioritisation criteria used by the researchers were: the predicted effect of the intervention on addressing key MSD risk factors (based on MSD intervention literature as identified by Tappin et al. (2006)), the breadth of industry applicability (at a task, department, species or industry level), and the opinion of the researchers on the overall merits of the intervention. Criteria for the MIHSF prioritisation were: the predicted acceptability by industry, the predicted ease of implementation, and the likelihood of implementation.

Two researchers independently rated each intervention for each of their criteria using a scale of 1–5, with 1 being highest priority and 5 the lowest priority. Interventions were then ranked under each intervention heading from highest to lowest priority.

The completed version of the draft intervention document was piloted with two people working in meat processing health and safety, two research ergonomists external to the study, and other members of the research team for their feedback on document structure, layout, readability, and usability.

The draft intervention document was sent to MIHSF members for their individual and collective comment. The document presented the MSD intervention data under 28 intervention headings grouped into five categories (Job design, Organisational design, Physical Design, Training design and Task-specific design). This was done to assist with navigation and to make sense of the more than 280 intervention ideas. The categories and headings are illustrated in Table 1
                        . More detail on the final interventions can be found in Tappin et al. (2007).

A literature review on MSD in meat processing written for the industry was also sent to members a month before the draft intervention document (Tappin et al., 2006) to provide background information. Individual members had four months to familiarise themselves with the document, to discuss any matters with the researchers and provide their individual feedback on the document. This included: commenting on the overall structure of the document and the intervention categories used, to comment on each intervention – suggesting changes or deletion, to prioritise each intervention according to the criteria provided, and to add any material that they felt was missing.

A full day workshop, facilitated by the MIHSF chairperson, was then held to discuss the document as a group. Members were sent reminders of what they were required to do prior to the workshop which took place in the usual venue for MIHSF meetings in a geographically convenient location for stakeholders away from the processing environment. Thirteen of the fifteen members were present. The remaining two were asked after the workshop to send their feedback directly to the researchers. The workshop commenced with a presentation by the lead researcher on the desired outcomes for the day, an update of ACC MSD claims incidence for meat processing, and a recap of MSD causation in meat processing. The MIHSF then worked their way systematically through the interventions, making amendments and agreeing priorities as they went. Clarification was sought from the lead researcher on content where required. At the completion of the workshop, the facilitator provided the lead researcher with the intervention document containing their priorities and comments. This, along with feedback from individual members, was then summarised collectively and included in a final draft for MIHSF approval.

Eighteen months after completion and dissemination of the final report to industry, MIHSF members were asked to take part in a telephone survey discussing their involvement in the study. While there was likely to be deterioration in their ability to recall details of the study this may be offset by the richer range of responses through having time to implement changes themselves, develop a greater understanding of MSD through exposure from the MIHSF, and reflecting on the study. Another potential weakness was that of participants report positively on a process in which they were heavily involved. This was recognized but was offset by the value of the information about the process that only they could provide.

Initial questions asked MIHSF members to rate on a scale of 1–5 (1 strongly disagree – 5 strongly agree) their level of agreement on: their involvement in the study, the amount of control they had in the study, satisfaction with the study outcomes, usefulness of the MSD intervention report, and the level of influence the MIHSF had on the interventions being implemented in industry. Open questions were also asked on what they would like to have seen done differently, what industry changes have occurred as a result of the study, and what changes they anticipate will occur. The survey drew from Moore and Garg (1994), and Haines et al. (2002) for the initial design, and was piloted among members of the research team before being finalised. A telephone survey was chosen over a postal questionnaire as experience indicated that the response rate and amount of discussion was likely to be higher, possibly due to the lower priority given to MIHSF tasks compared with their main work role and reluctance to commit their thoughts to paper. The researchers conducted the survey as it was felt that MIHSF members would be more candid with someone they knew rather than a third party, given the importance placed by them on industry credibility and relationships. This was a rare opportunity to provide an evaluation of a participatory ergonomics project – an identified shortcoming in the participatory ergonomics literature.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A flowchart of the MIHSF involvement throughout the entire study is provided in Fig. 2
                        , with emphasis on the topic of this paper, the development of interventions for the industry, highlighted dark grey. One of the expected outcomes of this process was that the MIHSF would either remove contentious or difficult interventions (e.g. those that were politically difficult such as modifying staff seniority precedents, or that would incur cost such as payment system changes), or de-emphasise them through applying a low priority. This assumption was based on negative responses to the intervention document from some MIHSF members (n = 3) soon after they received it. Typical comments were, 
                           “The quicker we automate, the better.”
                        
                        
                           “There's nothing new here, we used to do some of these things years ago.”
                        
                     

However, countering these initial responses were a number of MIHSF members (n = 6) who were positive towards the interventions and were beginning to apply some of them in their own plants, or refer to them in their interactions with plants. More positive comments included, 
                           “What's been done in the past hasn't worked, so we need to follow through with some of these ideas.”
                        
                        
                           “This is a helpful report, … we will need to work together to make some of the big changes, but a lot of things can be done by plants straight away.”
                        
                     

The first point of discussion by the MIHSF was on the prioritising process. The group agreed on four significant changes. Firstly, rather than provide one combined priority, the MIHSF wanted separate priorities for the likely impact of interventions on reducing MSD and the likelihood of their implementation in the industry. Secondly, the decision was made to express the priorities as high, medium and low rather than from 1 to 10. Thirdly, with the large number of interventions, priorities would be given to intervention headings - dealing by exception with individual interventions where required. Finally, the MIHSF would agree on priorities as a group rather than as individual members. The rationale behind these changes was partly for expediency – making it feasible to cover all the material during the workshop and making it easier to reach agreement on priorities, and partly to improve the usefulness of the document for themselves by having priorities that were meaningful to them. This was a welcome sign as it indicated a significant degree of ownership of the intervention report. The remainder of the workshop was spent discussing amending the interventions and assigning their priorities.

Other changes that were suggested for the document included modifying wording to better explain some terms and reduce ambiguity, to change the priorities from numbers to letters to avoid confusion with other data columns, and to soften language around sensitive interventions such as task rotation and seniority to sell their MSD prevention benefits.

Over the four-month period for considering the intervention document, MIHSF members who initially appeared negative moved to a position of reluctant acceptance. Although this was not formally assessed, it was clear that by the time the workshop took place there was too much support for the document to not proceed with its development. This support came from the government agencies, unions, and other processors. Subsequently, very few interventions were deleted (n = 3) and one idea was added by the MIHSF. Members had also begun to develop an understanding and an interest in the broader range of interventions, beyond the traditional focus of the worker and their workstation. The priorities assigned by the MIHSF to each group of interventions reflect this.

Following the workshop, amendments suggested by the MIHSF were made before sending the intervention document back to MIHSF members for their final approval. The final document (Tappin et al., 2007) was then distributed widely through the network of contacts established during the study along with a copy of the literature review on MSD in meat processing.

Fourteen of the fifteen people involved with the MIHSF could be contacted and each agreed to take part in the survey. The average length of time that the respondents had been involved in the meat processing industry was 12 years, and ranged from one to 41 years. A summary of responses to the first five questions are shown below in Table 2
                         (where 1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree).

The high level of agreement with the first question (all participants agreed or strongly agreed) indicates strong support for the approach taken and the level of involvement of the MIHSF throughout the study. There was slightly less agreement about the amount of control they felt they had in the study (10 agreed, 4 neither agreed or disagreed). One person stated they would like to have had more control over which staff were interviewed and which work areas were visited at the sample plants. However with most of the power resting with the MIHSF and the processing companies, it was fortunate that this level of control did not extend to the plant visits as this would have significantly limited researcher independence.

Most respondents were satisfied with the outcomes from the study (5 agreed, 7 strongly agreed), with two choosing to reserve judgement to see whether momentum continued to build or began to wane. Opinions on the usefulness of the intervention document showed the widest variation in the survey. The most critical comment was that it was too long for many people in industry to want to use. Others commented that only parts of the document were relevant to the staff they represented (e.g. less commonly processed species). Interestingly, the critical comments related to the format of the document rather than its contents. Opinions on the influence of the MIHSF were also varied. Some were undecided (n = 5) while others felt their influence was strong (n = 8) as they represented most of the industry, were well funded, and had the support of government injury prevention agencies.

Over half the respondents answered ‘no’ on whether there were aspects of the study they would like to have seen done differently indicating an acceptance of the process adopted. However, other comments concerned the format of the intervention document and the desire to have had more time for developing the document. Two respondents commented that more information on industry contacts, industrial relations and protocols could have been provided by the MIHSF to the research team at the beginning of the study.

When asked about what changes in industry have occurred as a result of the study, most respondents (n = 9) referred to the development by the MIHSF of a resource guide on strains and sprains and the ACC funding of a coordinator for the MIHSF to implement ideas from the study. Several respondents (n = 4) also felt that the MIHSF and others in industry now had a better understanding about MSD and their prevention. Other changes were mentioned that were occurring at an organisation level. Most were low cost or easy to implement and included: improved content of task training and structure of task rotation systems, changes in work procedures to reduce understaffing and workload peaks and the development of best practice examples based on material from the intervention document.

When asked what changes they anticipate will occur as a result of the study, people referred to the difficulties of initiating and implementing change within such a traditional industry, and the effects of the current economic downturn on funds for injury prevention (n = 6). However respondents felt that there would be gradual adoption of the interventions by companies as the ideas became more familiar and widespread. Several respondents (n = 5) also mentioned that many interventions may be adopted when restructuring (physically and/or organisationally) as this would incur the lowest implementation costs.

Seven respondents mentioned that they thought the study was worthwhile as it provided direction and a plan for MSD prevention. The intervention document was also seen to carry weight as it was industry-based, and was thought likely to be used for some time by the industry. These same respondents also recognised the importance of the MIHSF in achieving any changes.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Industry level studies are uncommon in the participatory ergonomics literature. Difficulties such as creating momentum, having sufficient resources, and overcoming barriers to industry level changes are some of the likely reasons for this (Morris and Wilson, 2003). However, in this study the need to actively involve the industry and the requirement of a broad assessment process to unearth MSD risk factors and interventions suited the application of such an approach. Furthermore, the existence of the MIHSF and their use as a ‘Trojan horse’ (Cotton, 1993) made an industry level participative approach possible as they represented key stakeholders and had authority and acceptance within the industry.

Involving the MIHSF in the development of the interventions was intended to improve their relevance to the industry, while also giving credibility to the study and to the interventions themselves. It was also hoped that encouraging ownership of the interventions by the MIHSF would increase their application in industry and their longevity (Hagberg et al., 1995). The role of the researcher was also an important element of the study (Wilson, 2005), with the high potential for role conflict in balancing the differing demands of MIHSF members, plant staff and management, government agencies and funders.

However, the study has highlighted both strengths and weaknesses of such an approach.

As de Jong and Vink (2002) stated, there is no single approach that can be effective in every case, while Haines and Wilson (1998) argued that “the most appropriate strategy should be chosen for each project”. It is unknown whether industry level participation with the MIHSF and engagement with a sample of industry staff and plants resulted in less useful outcomes than would the same industry level MIHSF participation, but also with plant-level staff participation. Certainly there is support in the PE literature for combining expert-guided and participatory processes (Eason, 1995; Wilson, 2005), particularly when concerning work organisation issues (Haims and Carayon, 1998).

A strength of the approach was utilising and building on the support of the MIHSF as ‘champions’ of the study while also involving all plants in a complementary network. This served to improve industry representativeness, provide a wider level of participation, enable greater dissemination of knowledge, and ensured that politically difficult or sensitive intervention ideas were identified and discussed. Across-sector support for an initiative of this kind would otherwise be unlikely to occur with the number of companies involved and the level of industry competitiveness. It is hypothesized that focussing in more depth on a smaller number of plants or tasks would have produced results less applicable to the wider industry, and probably not accepted by them. Conversely, working only at a high industry level would not have exposed process-level ideas and implementation barriers.

The tangible effects of industry involvement in the development of interventions were numerous. The information in the document was made more industry-specific, reflecting what the industry was currently doing about MSD. Ownership of the intervention document was demonstrated by the MIHSF deciding to change their prioritising criteria and the way in which they were assigned. These changes were made so that the document better suited their own injury prevention objectives. More fundamentally, agreeing to comment on the interventions and add their priorities to the document endorsed both the process and the final document. This endorsement greatly increased the status of the interventions to industry users. The intervention document has formed the basis of subsequent industry-level guidance documents and become a good practice document for agencies involved in meat processing as it is based on interventions already practiced by parts of the industry, and has the support of key stakeholders.

An industry level approach does, however, bring additional factors into consideration which may impact on its feasibility or affect its efficacy. Most important is the existence of an industry ‘champion’ to provide support for the initiative (Wilson, 2005; Gyi et al., 2013). Additionally, there are potential barriers to participation such as agreeing a structure and an approach that enables companies to work together, determining representation, funding, overcoming concerns about competition and confidentiality, and the logistics of meeting together and facilitating the people involved. It is also likely to be harder to create momentum for involvement and change across multiple organisations. Practically, the process is very time and resource intensive and it may not be applicable to similar projects involving larger industries or larger geographical boundaries. The inertia from working with an entire industry may also be difficult to overcome. In this study, relationships were developed with industry stakeholders and the MIHSF members for eighteen months before this stage of the study commenced. This was a necessary element in this study for gaining credibility and trust. Being unable to commit this amount of time to establishing rapport may hinder industry-level participative approaches.

In the case of the MIHSF, while supportive of the study they had a number of injury prevention concerns other than addressing MSD, many of which were considered a higher priority than MSD. Additionally, the MIHSF was more reactive than proactive in their management of health and safety risks. This made it difficult to create and maintain momentum for preventing MSD instead of simply managing cases as they occur. This difficulty in maintaining momentum for MSD prevention was further hindered by the lead researcher being external to the MIHSF rather than as an ‘in-house’ team member.

There are arguably also a number of prerequisites for applying this approach. Engaging with the industry, establishing and maintaining good relationships, developing credibility, and providing education on MSD causation and prevention are steps that ideally need to be in place before a participatory ergonomics programme is established. This implies a collaborative and pre-emptive approach between funders and industry such as occurred with Moore and Garg (1998). However, unlike company-initiated projects, involvement with an industry is through their goodwill rather than a requirement or expectation. This brings into focus the need to balance research rigour with industry pragmatism so that findings are meaningful and are also accepted by the industry. Perhaps the common ground of health and safety and employment legislation, as well as organisational and industry-level health and safety management systems (Yazdani et al., 2015) might help to provide a stronger rationale to become involved and commit resources to the project.

The Participatory Ergonomics Framework (PEF) of Haines et al. (2002) is seen as having an applied role for setting up and helping support PE initiatives, and also contributes to better understanding of what is involved in participatory ergonomics changes. There are some potential changes to the PEF which may improve its suitability for industry-wide initiatives. Table 3
                      describes the study using the dimensions of the PEF, and includes the addition of the dimension ‘project boundary’ as suggested by Haines et al., to help define the study. This addition would help to draw a distinction between ongoing PE projects or projects with limited constraints, and discrete projects with a clear scope and tightly defined constraints – such as were present in the current study. Two additional categories are also included, based on experiences from the study. ‘Obligatory participation’ better describes the involvement of many MIHSF members, and ‘injury prevention’ more accurately describes the topics addressed.

There were some limitations in the study which impacted on the approach taken and the intervention development process. The level of participation varied between MIHSF members due other injury prevention priorities taking precedence, other business priorities external to the MIHSF, and their widespread geographical location. The threshold of time available for the study also varied widely between individuals and within the same individual across time. Similar findings concerning commitment levels, limited resources and collaborating difficulties were reported by Driessen et al. (2010) in a study identifying PE programme barriers and facilitators.

The decision to rate interventions on their impact on MSD risk factors was potentially flawed as there is rarely a direct link between MSD risk factors and interventions. Additionally, although significant interventions were more likely to reduce MSD risk than others, the priority was highly subjective. There were also limitations in the selection of prioritising criteria for the researchers and the MIHSF. Clearer and fewer priorities would have made the task easier for both groups, as well as being easier to explain in the intervention document.

Reflecting on the approach taken there are some modifications that would have been beneficial. Arranging more meetings with the MIHSF to raise their awareness and understanding of MSD may have improved the level of feedback during the process of intervention development and increased their motivation to tackle some of the more complex interventions. Providing more time and resources for the MIHSF to develop and trial the presentation of interventions may also have resulted in a range of documents and formats for different audiences.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The approach used in this study appears to be a feasible method of meaningfully engaging with all levels of an industry. A key limitation to its use in practice, however, is its reliance on the existence of a key stakeholder group that has the support of the industry and is sufficiently well resourced to actively participate in the study. While the approach was successful in identifying a wide range of MSD interventions in response to industry-level MSD risk factors, the question remains on how well it works over time in addressing industry level issues that require the cooperation and commitment of all stakeholders. Preliminary indications from this study are hopeful, however. Following completion of the study and dissemination of the intervention document to industry, the MIHSF made MSD their top injury prevention priority and focused their resources on the highest rating interventions, indicating a degree of ownership of the MSD interventions by the MIHSF and a preparedness to seek industry level change. Further publications by the MIHSF continue to draw on material from the intervention document.

Further research would help to clarify how some of the barriers to an industry level participative approach might be overcome, including; how to achieve greater worker involvement in large-scale projects with multiple layers of participation (Haines et al., 2002) and what conditions would enable meaningful participation by people in different organisational roles (Dixon and Theberge, 2011); where loss of income are disincentives to participation; where there is high staff turnover (Laing et al., 2007), managing confidentiality and competition concerns. The use of the PEF for helping to conceptualise and plan complex participative studies, and its further development as a planning and reviewing tool, could also be considered.

In conclusion, the industry level participative process achieved through involvement of the MIHSF was effective in meeting the study aim of determining the value of an industry-level PE approach in developing MSD interventions, and although the level of participation had limitations, it was ‘sufficient to achieve the goal’ (de Jong, 2001, p. 1273).

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We gratefully acknowledge the involvement of the Meat Industry Health and Safety Forum and of plant staff in the project. The research was funded through the Partnership Programme involving the Health Research Council of New Zealand, Accident Compensation Corporation, and the New Zealand Department of Labour.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

