@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effect of cardboard under a sleeping bag on sleep stages during daytime nap

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We compared usage of sleeping bags on corrugated cardboard or flooring during naps.


                        
                        
                           
                           Using corrugated cardboard decreased the number of awakenings.


                        
                        
                           
                           Skin temperature and subjective warmth increased in the corrugated cardboard group.


                        
                        
                           
                           Increasing the thermal insulation under the body reduces cold stress.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results can be used for practical application in future disaster circumstances.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Sleep

Sleeping bag

Mild cold

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Fourteen healthy male subjects slept from 13:30 to 15:30 under ambient temperature and relative humidity maintained at 15 °C and 60%, respectively. They slept under two conditions: in a sleeping bag on wooden flooring (Wood) and in a sleeping bag with corrugated cardboard between the bag and the flooring (CC). Polysomnography, skin temperature (Tsk), microclimate, bed climate, and subjective sensations were obtained. The number of awakenings in the CC had significantly decreased compared to that in the Wood. The mean, back, and thigh Tsk, and bed climate temperature were significantly higher in the CC than that in the Wood. Subjective thermal sensations were warmer in the CC than in the Wood. These results suggest that using corrugated cardboard under a sleeping bag may reduce cold stress, thereby decreasing the number of awakenings and increasing subjective warmth; the mean, back, and thigh Tsk; and bed climate temperature.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the Great East Japan Earthquake of 2011, approximately 105,947 victims (10% of the population of Sendai city) were evacuated to 266 shelters set up in structures such as schools, gymnasiums, and parks across Sendai city, Miyagi prefecture (Sendai and City, 2014). We found instances of severe sleep disturbance using actigraphic sleep measurements in elderly individuals who evacuated to the school gymnasium in the first several days after the earthquake; these disturbances were found to result from cold sensations from the floor, anxiety, and aftershocks (Mizuno and Okamoto-Mizuno, 2014). Environmental factors may thus have had a considerable impact on sleep in the first several days following an earthquake. In the days following this earthquake, available heating systems were limited to oil heaters because of an electrical blackout. However, these were not used while sleeping in the shelter, because aftershocks, which often occur immediately following an earthquake, could have caused a fire. Personal space in the shelter was restricted due to an excessive number of evacuees (Sendai and City, 2014); there were approximately 400 evacuees per shelter, which may have exceeded the capacity of the shelters, as was the case with the Hanshin earthquake (Tanida, 1996). Regular bedding cannot be used because of a lack of personal space and the difficulty of transporting bedding from evacuees' homes to the shelter. Under such conditions, using a sleeping bag has been proposed as a practical solution for both victims and rescue teams (Takeda, 2011).

In cold ambient temperature (Ta), thermal insulation and type of the sleeping bag may affect thermoregulation as well as subjective sensation during sleep. Sleeping bags with polyester filling have been linked to higher skin temperature (Tsk), microclimate bed temperature, and greater subjective sensations of warmth during sleep than down filling owing to the higher weight that increased thermal insulation in polyester-filling sleeping bags under cold Ta (Kawabata and Tokura, 1990). Although the weight of the sleeping bags was equal, the sleeping bag with thicker padding for the lower half of the bodily area showed decreased rectal temperature, heart rate, chest Tsk, increased foot Tsk, and more positive subjective sleep evaluations than sleeping bags with either uniform padding or thicker padding in the upper half during sleep (Kawabata et al., 1995). These results indicate the importance of selecting an appropriate sleeping bag for the Ta in terms of thermal insulation, composition, and insulation distribution. The thermal insulation of the sleeping bags may also, however, change depending on the quality of the mattress underneath the sleeping bag. A sleeping bag placed directly on the floor was 0.5 clo below that of a bed underneath the sleeping bag and 1 clo below that of a bed with a bed mattress (Inagaki, 1985). Thermal insulation, as measured by thermal manikins according to the European standards for sleeping bag requirements (EN 13537: 2002), was affected by the insulation of the mattress under the sleeping bag (Kuklane and Dejke, 2010). A mattress with low thermal insulation may increase temperature values for safe usage limits of sleeping bags by 5–6 °C (Kuklane and Dejke, 2010). In light of these results and the cold sensation from the floor reported by evacuees sleeping on the floor after the earthquake, it is possible that thermal insulation under the sleeping bag positively affects sleep and Tsk during sleep. Previous studies have indicated a strong modulating effect of Tsk during sleep on sleep onset and depth (Raymann et al., 2008), suggesting that Tsk might act as an input signal for the sleep regulation system (Van Someren, 2006). However, as far as the authors know, no studies have focused on the effects of placing different types of thermal insulation under sleeping bags on both sleep and Tsk. In the shelter, it is difficult to change sleeping bags and the Ta can be lower than the thermal insulation capacity of the sleeping bag. Increasing the thermal insulation of sleeping bags using items that may be easily supplied for a large number of people might be the most important and practical way to avoid the cold. This study aimed to investigate the effects of thermal insulation of sleeping bags, achieved by using corrugated cardboard, on sleep stages and Tsk during daytime nap. Corrugated cardboard was selected because it is widely available at many shops, apartments, and homes, and is used for transporting relief supplies in an emergency. The study was conducted during daytime nap because the elderly (Mizuno and Okamoto-Mizuno, 2014) and victims (Okamoto-Mizuno, 2012) of the Great East Japan Earthquake of 2011 residing in shelters took daytime naps owing to a lack of nocturnal sleep. Furthermore, a change in the distal Tsk during sleep onset period did not differ depending on circadian phase (Lack and Gradisar, 2002). The increased distal Tsk and decreased rectal temperature during sleep onset was observed and no further thermoregulatory effects were induced after sleep stage 2, both during the afternoon nap and nocturnal sleep (Krauchi, 2007a, b). Taken together with the results of previous studies, our findings may shed new light on thermoregulation during the initial periods of nocturnal sleep.

@&#METHODS@&#

Fourteen male volunteers served as the subjects. The mean and standard deviation of their physical characteristics were as follows: age, 23 ± 3.63 yrs; height, 1.70 ± 0.06 m; weight, 64.8 ± 8.48 kg; and body surface area, 1.75 ± 0.13 m2. They were informed of the protocol of the study and provided their written consent. This study was approved by the ethics committee of Tohoku Fukushi University. A standardized sleep health questionnaire (SHQ) (Tanaka and Shirakawa, 2004) was given to subjects, and individual scores within one SD range of the standard score of 50 in adults were considered normal. The subjects answered a questionnaire regarding their physical and mental conditions. The subjects who had counseling history, chronic disease, insomnia, habit of snoring, taking naps, were taking medication, attending hospital and/or counseling, and extremely long or short sleepers were excluded from the study. All participants were confirmed to be physically and mentally healthy.

The experiment was carried out from December to March. Subjects rested for 2 h in the test chamber before sleeping, with a room temperature maintained at 20–21 °C. After this acclimation period, subjects moved to a climate where the Ta and relative humidity (RH) were maintained at 15 °C and 60%, respectively, and slept under two conditions: in a sleeping bag on wooden flooring [Wood] and in a sleeping bag with corrugated cardboard between the bag and the flooring [CC]. Four 8-mm thick, 90-cm wide, and 225-cm long corrugated cardboard layers were used; thus, in total, participants slept under 3.2-cm thick corrugated cardboard. This was the same thickness as two layers of folded corrugated carton. The Ta and RH changes within the climate chamber were stable and never exceeded ±0.5 °C and ±3% from the set Ta and RH levels, respectively. The subjects used sleeping bags and slept wearing shorts, cold protective trousers (100% polyester), long-sleeve high-neck T-shirts (100% cotton), sweat (100% cotton), fleece jumper (100% polyester), and socks (42% cotton, 36% polyester, 13% nylon, 9% acrylic, and others). The estimated thermal insulation of the clothing was 1.4 clo. The sleeping bag was 80 cm wide and 210 cm long, was a mummy type, and weighed 1.6 kg. Both the outer shell and the filling were 100% polyester. Subjects were fully covered by the sleeping bag, except for their faces.

The subjects entered the chamber at 11:30 am, whereupon electrodes were attached while the subjects were at rest sitting on a chair. At 12:00 pm, subjects took a plain, calorie-controlled meal with water. Calories were adjusted to one-third of the estimated basal metabolism based on body weight, and each subject had the same quantity of meals between the two conditions. A simple computer task, which involved pushing a button when a target was shown on-screen, was performed by the subjects at 13:10 for 8 min. After the computer task, subjects moved to the climate chamber and were asked to sleep from 13:30 to 15:30. The subjects slept alone in a climate chamber. Polysomnographic recordings and Tsk were assessed and the temperature and humidity of the microclimate inside the clothing, sleeping bag, and the area immediately under the sleeping bag were continuously measured. Before, during, and after their sleep, subjective thermal, humid, and comfort sensations were measured. To discover the sensations during sleep, the subjects were asked, after sleep, how they had felt during sleep. A questionnaire about the sleeping bag was completed before and after their sleep. A subjective sleep evaluation was also made by each subject upon waking up after 2 h of sleep.

Each subject participated in both conditions, with an interval of at least 2–5 days between the two sleep sessions. Subjects were not informed of the order of the two conditions, which were balanced at random. The outside temperature and humidity during the experimental period ranged from 0.1 to 5.8 °C, and 55–70%, respectively. The subjects were also asked to go to sleep and wake up according to their regular schedule and keep a sleep diary beginning one week prior to the experiment until the end of the experimental period. They were asked to record their sleep times, waking times, naps, mealtimes, and the time they laid down. Subjects were requested to wear wrist actigraphs (Micro-mini, AMI) on their non-dominant wrists for two consecutive days prior to the experiment. The sleep parameters were determined according to an actigram-based sleep-wake identification algorithm (Cole et al., 1992). The experiments were conducted when the subjects' nocturnal sleep time immediately prior to the experiment exceeded 420 min based on their sleep diary, and the actigraph data showed more than 420 min in bed with at least a 90% sleep efficiency index (SEI). No significant differences were observed in sleep parameters of the actigraph during nocturnal sleep prior to the experiment. The means and standard errors of the sleep time, wake time, total sleep time, and SEI in both conditions were as follows: sleep time, Wood 0:46 ± 0:17, CC 0:38 ± 0:18; wake time, Wood 8:27 ± 0:17, CC 8:14 ± 0:18; total sleep time (min), Wood 429.5 ± 10.1, CC 440.2 ± 10.6; SEI (%), Wood 95.2 ± 0.8, CC 93.8 ± 0.8. All subjects slept and woke on a regular schedule without taking naps, and the means and standard errors of the sleep and wake times in the sleep diary were 0:36 ± 0:16 and 8:13 ± 0:15, respectively. Excessive exercise, excessive alcohol intake, and medicine consumption were forbidden beginning one week prior to the experiment, lasting through the entire experimental period. Consumption of alcohol and caffeine was forbidden starting the day before the experiment through to the end.

Electroencephalographic (F3-A2, C3-A2, C4-A1, O1-A2), electrooculographic, and mental electromyographic readings were recorded using a portable multi-medical amplifier-collecting device (Polymate AP1000, TEAC). Sleep recordings were blind-scored visually every 20 s using the standard manual compiled by Rechtschaffen and Kales (Rechtschaffen and Kales, 1968). Local Tsks were continuously measured at time intervals of 20 s using a thermistor (LT8A, Gram Corporation). Thermistors were attached to each subject's back, foot, hand, forehead, and Ramanathan's location (Ramanathan, 1964) (i.e., arm, chest, thigh, and leg). Mean weighted Tsk was calculated according to Ramanathan (Ramanathan, 1964). The microclimate inside the clothing (hereafter, simply “microclimate”) and the climate between the subject and the sleeping bag (bed climate) were measured using a thermistor and hygrometer probe (LT8B, Gram Corporation). The thermistor and hygrometer probe were attached to a 5-mm thick, 1 × 1.5 cm heatproof board to avoid direct effects of Tsk. The microclimate was measured through probes on the skin of the chest. The bed climate of the chest was measured by placing probes over the fleece jumper (i.e., exterior of the jumper), and the climate of the foot area was measured through probes on the skin of the foot. The probe was also placed on the back, waist, and foot areas of the sleeping bags beneath the subjects' bodies, and between the sleeping bag and the wooden flooring/corrugated cardboard.

The subjective thermal, humid, and comfort sensations were evaluated using visual analogue scales (VAS). The scales used ranged from very hot to very cold, very wet to very dry, and very comfortable to very uncomfortable, respectively. A questionnaire regarding the sleeping bag also used VASs, and the following ranges was used: very hot to very cold, very comfortable to very uncomfortable, very wet to very dry, hard to soft, smooth to rough, limp to springy, and silky to sticky. Subjective sleep evaluations were made by subjects filling out the OSA sleep evaluation questionnaire (Oguri et al., 1985).

To analyze the data, Student's t-tests were used to assess the effect of condition on sleep parameters and subjective sensations. A two-way repeated measures ANOVA (condition × time) was used to assess local Tsk, mean Tsk, microclimate, and bed climate. The level of significance was set at P < 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The mean values of each sleep parameter under the two conditions are shown in Table 1
                        . No significant differences were observed between the conditions in onset latency and time spent in each sleep stage. The number of awakenings (“wakefulness (N)” in Table 1) had, however, decreased in the CC compared to the Wood. SEI showed individual differences with a minimum of 42% in two subjects, 50%–70% in three subjects, and over 80% in nine subjects with a maximum of 97%, in both conditions.

Mean Tsk was significantly different between the CC and Wood (F1, 26 = 4.28; P < 0.04), being notably higher in the CC than the Wood. Concerning local Tsk, the CC was linked to a significantly higher temperature than the Wood for the back (F1, 26 = 11.97; P < 0.01) and thigh (F1, 25 = 7.47; P < 0.01; Fig. 1
                        ).

Significant differences between conditions failed to emerge for both the chest microclimate, and for the bed climate of the chest and foot areas. Significant differences between the CC and Wood were, however, observed for bed climate temperatures of the back (F1, 26 = 15.14; P < 0.0006) and waist (F1, 26 = 24.13; P < 0.0001) areas of the sleeping bag, with the CC temperature significantly higher than that of the Wood (Fig. 2
                        ). Furthermore, the temperature in the back (F1, 26 = 22.17; P < 0.0001) and waist (F1, 26 = 18.84; P < 0.0002) areas between the sleeping bag and the wooden flooring/corrugated cardboard, were also significantly higher in the CC than in the Wood. The temperature level and trend were similar in both the back and waist areas, as well as between the sleeping bag and the wooden flooring/corrugated cardboard. In the foot area of the sleeping bag, an interaction was observed (F28, 728 = 2.12; P < 0.0007), with temperature significantly higher in the CC than in the Wood in the later segments of sleep; the temperature of the foot area under the sleeping bag had also increased in the CC compared to the Wood (F1, 26 = 17.58; P < 0.0003). No significant difference was observed in absolute humidity.

No significant differences were observed with regard to the subjective sleep estimations. However, a significant difference was observed in thermal sensations before, during, and after sleep. With regard to thermal and comfort sensations during sleep, the thermal sensations of the foot and back were significantly warmer, and more comfortable, in the CC compared to the Wood (Fig. 3
                        ). Comfort of the foot area of the sleeping bag was judged to be significantly greater and was accompanied by a reduction in hardness in the CC compared to the Wood prior to sleep; ratings also showed that subjects were significantly warmer and more comfortable and that the sleep surface was less limp in the CC than in the Wood after sleep. For the back area of the sleeping bag, the CC was associated with significantly greater warmth, comfort, and springiness, and lesser hardness than the Wood before sleep; only comfort was found to be greater in the CC than in the Wood after sleep (Fig. 4
                        ). In the comments after sleep section of the questionnaire, lower back pain (number of subjects who commented, 5), discomfort due to difficulty in turning over the body (4), no pillows (4), restriction in sleep posture (e.g., could not fully bend the knees) (3), and cold on the face (2) were observed in both conditions. Three among 14 subjects felt no discomfort.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The most notable finding of this study was that CC enhanced sleep stability and increased Tsk during the daytime nap. The number of awakenings significantly increased in the Wood compared to the CC. Increased wakefulness and frequent awakening has been observed in individuals using a sleeping bag in a Ta of −25 °C (Buguet et al., 1979). Furthermore, the number of stage 1 and rapid eye movement sleep (REM) was significantly higher in subjects who used an electric blanket in a Ta of 3 °C than in those who did not use an electric blanket in the same Ta (Okamoto-Mizuno et al., 2005). In light of these results, it is possible that cold stress affects sleep stability. Although our conditions were not as severe as those used in previous studies, and despite the effect of time spent in wakefulness not being observed, the increased number of awakenings may be indicative of fragmented sleep and increased cold stress in the Wood. This possibility is also supported by the results of the Tsk, bed climate, and subjective sensation measures. The mean, back, and thigh Tsks were significantly lower in the Wood than in the CC. In previous study, mean Tsk was significantly lower during sleep in 15 °C environments compared to 25.5 °C environments (Kreider et al., 1959). A significant decrease in mean Tsk was observed in sleeping bags with lower thermal insulation compared to that in higher thermal insulation under the Ta of 5 °C (Kawabata and Tokura, 1990). In thermal manikin studies, the insulation properties of the mattress under the sleeping bag considerably affected the total insulation of the sleeping bags (Kuklane and Dejke, 2010). Sleeping bags that proved comfortable for use between a Ta of 3.2 °C and −18.1 °C are those that increase the Ta to 9.1 °C and −10.6 °C, respectively, if the standard EN13537 mattress is not used (Kuklane and Dejke, 2010). These results indicate that the thermal insulation of sleeping bags may vary considerably depending on the thermal insulation of the mattress under the sleeping bags; the insufficient thermal insulation in the Wood, therefore, likely led to decreased mean Tsk and increased cold stress. With regard to local Tsk, a significant decrease in the Wood was limited to the back and thigh regions. This result may be related to the contact area with the floor, which is greater in these sites than in others.

The Tsk results were also related to bed climate temperatures and subjective sensations. The bed climate temperatures of the waist and foot areas were significantly lower in the Wood than in the CC. These differences were limited to the sensors placed on the sleeping bag under the subjects' bodies, and we found no difference for the chest and foot areas where sleeping bags were draped over the bodies. These results indicate that thermal insulation under the body affects the area in direct contact with the floor. The temperature difference in the back, waist, and foot areas, between the inside and the area beneath the sleeping bag, was approximately 4 °C in the CC and 8 °C in the Wood. Thus, it is clear that the cardboard mattress helped maintain bed climate temperatures. In the Wood, the subjective comfort and thermal sensations during sleep were rated as less comfortable and colder, respectively, in the back and foot areas, than in the CC. These results indicate that decreased Tsk and bed climate temperatures may lead to subjectively colder and more uncomfortable sensations during sleep in the Wood, and further support the notion that cold stress was increased in this condition.

Another interesting finding was the difference in thermal sensations following sleep between the foot and back areas. The foot area of the sleeping bag was significantly colder in the Wood than in the CC after sleep, despite there being no significant differences for the back area. Previous studies indicated that toe temperature corresponds with thermal comfort when using sleeping bags (Lin et al., 2013; Livingstone et al., 1988). In men sleeping in a Ta between 0 and 5 °C and using sleeping bags, foot Tsk dropped considerably towards morning, which was a major reason for disturbed sleep (Scholander et al., 1958). However, there were no significant differences in foot Tsk between conditions in this study, and decreased bed climate temperatures for the foot area in the Wood compared to the CC were observed at only 10 min prior to sleep offset. One reason for the weak relationship between subjective thermal sensation, Tsk, and bed climate temperature in this study may have been that Ta was not as low as it was in previous studies. Another reason might have been the short sleep period. The effect of cold Ta on foot Tsk and bed climate temperatures of the foot are concentrated in later segments of sleep (Okamoto-Mizuno et al., 2005; Scholander et al., 1958), when REM is dominant. In low Ta, peripheral Tsk decreases during REM compared to control conditions, regardless of the total duration of REM (Palca et al., 1986). The Tsk decrease during REM is considered to reflect a reduction in the thermoregulation capacity against cold stress during REM (Sewitch et al., 1986). Although there were no significant differences, both foot Tsk and bed climate temperatures of the foot area tended to decrease from 60 min—approximately the timing of REM in this study. The decreased thermoregulatory capacity during REM, leading to a decreased foot Tsk and a decreased bed climate temperature of the foot area just prior to sleep offset might be reflected in thermal sensation after sleep. These results indicate that thermal sensations of the foot might be more affected by cold than are those of the back. The thermal sensations in the feet might be useful indicators of the thermal insulation efficiency of sleeping bags. Another factor that should be considered for sleeping bag use is firmness. A significant increase in firmness was observed before sleep in the Wood compared to that in the CC, while there was no significant difference after sleep. These results indicate that perceived firmness before sleep might change during sleep itself. In future studies, it will be important to confirm whether these subjective sensations change after nocturnal sleep. Furthermore, our result could not define whether the main problem in Wood is firmness or low temperature and a future study is needed to clarify this issue.

There are several limitations to this study. First, the results of our study should be interpreted with caution with regard to data obtained during daytime naps. Although this result is valid during a nap, it may not be the same for nocturnal sleep. However, the change in distal Tsk during sleep onset period has been shown to not differ depending on circadian phase (Lack and Gradisar, 2002). The increased distal Tsk and decreased rectal temperature during sleep onset was observed, and no further thermoregulatory effects were induced after sleep stage 2 during both afternoon nap and nocturnal sleep (Krauchi, 2007a, b). In addition, the quantity of slow wave activity does not affect thermoregulation (Krauchi, 2007b; Krauchi et al., 2006). These results indicate that our results may at least help in understanding thermoregulation during the initial periods of nocturnal sleep. Second, the core body temperature was not measured, which may have further added to the cold stress in the Wood. Third, there was no adaptation trial prior to the two conditions, although the order of the conditions were balanced. In future research, it will be important to measure core body temperature and confirm these effects during nocturnal sleep. It is important to note that the thermal insulation of the sleeping bags and clothing need to be carefully examined when confirming these results during nocturnal sleep because there is no standard for comfort temperature of the sleeping bags under such conditions. The standards for evaluating thermal insulation of the sleeping bags (EN13537) and the manufacturers' minimum temperature labels are both based on the use of ground mattresses. The manufacturers employ different methods to label the minimum temperature use of sleeping bags, and these often lack validity (McCullough and Rohles, 1983). Further modifications are required for EN13537 (Lin et al., 2013). Discomfort not attributable to thermal factors were reported by 11 out of 14 subjects (e.g., lower back pain), and these should also be taken into account.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In conclusion, these results suggest that increasing the thermal insulation under sleeping bags may reduce cold stress, thereby decreasing the number of awakenings and increasing the mean, back, and thigh Tsk; bed climate temperatures; and subjective sensations of warm and comfort. It is essential to keep in mind that increasing the thermal insulation under the body is effective in reducing cold stress during nap. In the case of disasters occurring during cold weather, insulating material placed under sleeping bags are recommended if mattresses are unavailable. Although the present study includes several limitations, our study findings can contribute in terms of practical application in future disaster circumstances as well as in disaster prevention.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This study was supported by Program of Funding Basic Research Centers in Private University (MEXT S1291001 ) to the Kansei Fukushi Research Institute, Tohoku Fukushi University (2012-2016).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

