@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Anthropometry of external auditory canal by non-contactable measurement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We use the non-invasive computed tomography technology to measure the geometric shape of external auditory canal.


                        
                        
                           
                           The length and width of ear canal openings for men are longer, wider than those for women.


                        
                        
                           
                           The difference between the length and width of the ear canal opening is about 40%.


                        
                        
                           
                           The circular cross-section shape of the earplugs should be replaced with elliptical cross-section shape for better fitting.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

External auditory canal

Computed tomography

Anthropometry

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Human ear canals cannot be measured directly with existing general measurement tools. Furthermore, general non-contact optical methods can only conduct simple peripheral measurements of the auricle and cannot obtain the internal ear canal shape-related measurement data. Therefore, this study uses the computed tomography (CT) technology to measure the geometric shape of the ear canal and the shape of the ear canal using a non-invasive method, and to complete the anthropometry of external auditory canal. The results of the study show that the average height and width of ear canal openings, and the average depth of the first bend for men are generally longer, wider and deeper than those for women. In addition, the difference between the height and width of the ear canal opening is about 40% (p < 0.05). Hence, the circular cross-section shape of the earplugs should be replaced with an elliptical cross-section shape during manufacturing for better fitting.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Article 21 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act Enforcement Rules defines workplaces with noise levels greater than 85 dB as specially or highly hazardous working environments or as including specially or highly hazardous working operations. Article 300 of the Occupational Safety and Health Facilities Regulations states that in environments where workers are exposed to noise levels greater than 85 dB for eight working hours a day or when the exposure is over 50%, employers shall require workers to wear effective earplugs, earmuffs, or other noise reduction apparatus. Although the soundproofing performance of earmuffs is superior to that of earplugs, especially for mid-to high-frequency domains, and although earmuffs conforming to the European standards (EN) provide better soundproofing effects, earplugs are more widely accepted by workers at actual worksites.

The requirements of EN 352-2 are concerned primarily with the physical and acoustic performance of the earplugs. It covers disposable, re-usable, custom moulded and headband ear-plugs. In the case of headband ear-plugs, the standard specifies sizing requirements which enable the great majority of the industrial population to be fitted satisfactorily by medium size range ear-plugs. Populations of other sizes may be accommodated by “small size range” or “large size range” ear-plugs, which are required to be accompanied by information regarding the range of sizes which they are designed to fit.

The United Kingdom commenced implementing noise reduction apparatus standards in 1994, and developed standards that countries within the Committee of European Standardization (CEN) must follow with regards to all European countries. The purpose of the hearing protection device is to reduce the damage caused by loud noises to workers and prevent subsequent hearing impairment. Factors that require consideration for hearing protection devices are the noise protection effects and whether the comfort level is accepted by workers. In addition to being able to reduce the noise level that workers are exposed to, ideal earplugs must not affect the workers' experience of peripheral voices or sounds in the worksite, such as communication between staff, talking, and machinery and equipment operating conditions on work premises. An overprotection condition is more likely to cause ear canal discomfort, difficulties in conversation and verbal communication, and significantly reduces the workers' willingness to wear earplugs, thereby causing earplugs to lose their hearing protection effects. Moreover, existing earplugs in Taiwan are primarily imported. Foreign-made earplugs are generally a poor fit for the ear canal size of domestic workers or are even too large. However, because they have no other choice, domestic workers are forced to wear earplugs that are too large and sometimes cause discomfort because the wall of the ear canal is squeezed by excessively large earplugs. In consideration of comfort, manufacturer data related to earplug characteristics, such as material, weight, production methods, and ear pressure measurement must be referenced. Whether the size of the earplugs is suitable for workers must also be considered. If the wearing comfort of the earplugs can be increased, usage rates will also improve.

Because the external auditory canal (EAC) is a critical channel for sound reception (Oliveira, 1997), the effect of ageing on changes in the external shape of the ear canal is a frequently discussed topic (Sforza et al., 2009) in clinical practice. Shaw (1974) suggested that the human EAC wall can be categorized as two sections. The lateral 1/3 portion is comprised of cartilage, and the medial 2/3 portion near the eardrum is the bony structure. The average length of the adult ear canal is approximately 22.5 mm (Shaw, 1974). Shanks and Lilly (1981) stated in their publication “An evaluation of tympanometric estimates of ear canal volume study” that if tympanometry is employed to measure the ear canal volume, the human ear canal cross-sectional area must be presumed as a fixed value and the volume of the ear canal would not change as a result of variations in the soft tissue in the ear canal or changes in the eardrum (Shanks and Lilly, 1981). Zemplenyi et al. (1985) developed a novel approach that uses the optical method to measure the length between the opening of the ear canal and the eardrum (Zemplenyi et al., 1985). Egolf et al. (1993) used computer-aided tomography (CAT) to scan ear canals of cadavers to measure the volume of the external ear canal and compared the results with the those obtained using the injection measurement method, and observed a 6.12% difference between the two methods (Egolf et al., 1993). Shahnaz and Davies (2006) used tympanometry to measure tympanometric peak pressure and ear canal volume (ECV) and examine differences in the tympanum figure measurement values between Chinese people and Caucasians. The study included a total of 159 participants (303 ears) between the age of 18 and 34 years.

When the tympanometric examination is conducted at a frequency of 226 Hz, the ECV can be obtained according to the principle of energy reflectance (ER) (Shahnaz and Davies, 2006; Yu et al., 2012). Voss et al. (2008) developed a non-invasive acoustic reflection measurement method to measure the ears of nine cadavers to calculate the ECV and volume of the middle ear cavity by applying ER. The results indicated that the measuring position affected the obtained measurement values. The downward trend of the reflective level of the ear is at its most sensitive when the frequency is below 2000 Hz; however, it does not significantly affect the eardrum area. They also summarized that the ear canal measurement position, ear canal cross-sectional area, and middle ear cavity volume produced the three greatest variances (Voss et al., 2008). Al-Hussaini et al. (2011) investigated the tympanometric measurement accuracy of the external ECV, and used the Kamplex tympanometer to measure the ECV. The study shows that the ECV is approximately 1.4 cm3, indicating that the Kamplex tympanometer is an accurate measurement tool for the ECV (Al-Hussaini et al., 2011). Yost (2000) stated that the length of the human ear canal is between approximately 2.3 and 2.97 cm.

The standards for earplug specification verification items vary among nations, and there is no standard size for earplugs. The ANSI S12.6 standards for U.S. hearing protection devices employ five plastic balls with different diameters: extra-small (7.26 mm), small (8.48 mm), medium (9.27 mm), large (10.46 mm), and extra-large (11.53 mm), to measure the ear canal diameter using the direct contact method. However, this standard does not specify any provision for differentiating earplug sizes. However, the content of earplug-related tests under the CNS national standard in Taiwan specify large, medium, and small sizes (CNS T2012 8454, 1982). However, because Taiwanese earplugs are often imported and these earplugs were designed based on foreign ear canal sizes, they occasionally do not match the ear canal size of Taiwanese people. When earplugs do not fit properly, users may feel discomfort and choose not to wear them on a long-term basis or may be unwilling to wear them.

Therefore, this study employs a non-contactable and non-invasive measurement method to measure the EAC size of Taiwanese workers, and provides a reference for earplug options and fittings. Preliminary planning of this study entailed researching the ear canal of the Taiwanese labor population, using a non-invasive method to measure the geometric shape of the ear canal. This study employs high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) and medical imaging software for experiments to calculate the ear canal opening external shape and volume for Taiwanese workers. The participants of this study are 40 Taiwanese workers (20 men and 20 women).

This study uses HRCT (TOSHIBA/Aquilionm, Tokyo, Japan) to obtain two-dimensional EAC images of the 20 men (average age: 25.5 y) and 20 women (average age: 24.67 y). Each CT image is composed of 512 × 512 pixels, with each pixel size set at 0.175 × 0.175 mm2; slice thickness was 0.5 mm and voxel size was 0.175 × 0.175 × 0.5 mm3. The study uses Amira® imaging software 4.1(Visage Imaging, USA) to display images for the external ear area of the skull's temporal bone for a living person. The zoom and data window are used to adjust the minimum/maximum threshold values. The minimum and maximum are adjusted to the lowest and highest threshold values, respectively, to display the EAC image, which includes: (a) cavum conchae, (b) ear canal opening, (c) ear canal, and (d) eardrum (Fig. 1
                     ). The brush and magic wand functions are used to circle and select the required sections for each HRCT, and the SurfaceGen application's stack calculation tool was used to reconstruct the selected two-dimensional cross-section into a three-dimensional image of the normal ear canal (Fig. 2
                     ). This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Chang Gung Memorial hospital, and informed consent was obtained from all participants. The experiment was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

This study uses the Amira® medical imaging software to rotate the ear canal opening in the ear canal three-dimensional image model to its sagittal plane. The application's Measure anthropometry tool is then used to identify the longest part of the coronal plane as the base to obtain the baseline for measuring the height of the ear canal opening. The base points for measuring ear canal opening height are (a) and (b), as shown in Fig. 3
                        . The height of the ear canal opening was then measured (0.97 cm). Furthermore, to measure the width of the ear canal, the widest part of the axial plane, which is perpendicular to the coronal plane, was used as the base to establish base points (c) and (d) for measuring width, as shown in Fig. 3, and to obtain the baseline for measuring ear canal opening width. The Amira® application's Measure tool was then used to determine the width of the ear canal opening (0.52 cm).

In addition to using the Amira® medical imaging software to reference base points (a) and (b) for ear canal opening height measurement and base points (c) and (d) for ear canal opening width measurements (Fig. 3) for the three-dimensional image model of the ear canal, we also divided the ear canal length measurement into the first bend, second bend, and upper and lower ear canal length according to the coronal plane. The measurement of the first bend upper ear canal length starts from base point (a) for measurement of the ear canal opening height and extends to the first bend turn and base point (a1) using the projection method. The measurement of the first bend lower ear canal length starts from base point (b) for measurement of the ear canal opening height and extends to the first bend turn and base point (b1) using the projection method, as shown in Fig. 4
                        . The second bend upper ear canal length starts from base point (a) for measurement of the ear canal opening height and extends to the second bend turn or base point (a2), and the second bend lower ear canal length starts from base point (b) for measurement of the ear canal opening height and is extended to the second bend turn and base point (b2), as shown in Fig. 4. The measurement of the entire upper ear canal length starts from base point (a) for measurement of the ear canal opening height and extends to the first bend turn and base point (a1), the second bend turn and base point (a2), and the eardrum as another base point (a3) using the projection method. The measurement of the entire lower ear canal length (bb3) starts from the base point (b) for measurement of the ear canal opening height and extends to the first bend turn and base point (b1), the second bend turn and base point (b2), and the eardrum as another base point (b3).

The measurement of the anterior length of the first bend starts from the base point (c) for measurement of the ear canal opening width and extends to the first bend turn and base point (c1) using the projection method, as shown in Fig. 5
                        . The measurement of the posterior length of the first bend starts from the base point (d) for measurement of the ear canal opening width and extends to the first bend turn and base point (d1) using the projection method, as shown in Fig. 5. The measurement of the anterior length of the second bend starts from the base point (c) for the measurement of the ear canal opening width and extends to the second bend turn and base point (c2). The measurement of the posterior length of the second bend starts from the base point (d) for measurement of the ear canal opening width and extends to the second bend turn and base point (d2), as shown in Fig. 5. The measurement of the anterior length of the ear canal starts from the base point (c) for measurement of the ear canal opening width and extends to the first bend turn and base point (c1), the second bend turn and base point (c2), and the eardrum as another base point (c3). The measurement of the posterior length of the ear canal starts from the base point (d) for measurement of the ear canal opening width and extends to the first bend turn and base point (d1), the second bend turn and base point (d2), and the eardrum as another base point (d3), as shown in Fig. 5.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In this study, the researcher performed CT for 20 men and 20 women and established the scan data files. However, some ear canals could not be reconstructed because of ear canal deformation. Therefore, the reconstruction process was completed for only 18 women and 20 men who participated in this study.

The obtained data indicates that the women's left ear canal openings have an average height and width of 0.91 and 0.63 cm, respectively, and their right ear canal openings have an average height and width of 0.92 and 0.63 cm, respectively. The difference between the height and width for women's left and right ears are 44.44% (p < 0.05) and 46.03% (p < 0.05).

The men's left ear canal openings have an average height and width of 0.96 and 0.68 cm, respectively, and the right ear canal openings have an average height and width of 0.96 and 0.67 cm, respectively. The difference between the height and width for men's left and right ears are 41.18% (p < 0.05) and 43.28% (p < 0.05). Fig. 6
                         shows that the height and width of both ears are greater for the men than those of their female counterparts.

The women's average lengths for the left ear first bend upper and lower portions are 0.96 and 0.59 cm, respectively, and average lengths for the right ear first bend upper and lower portions are 0.97 and 0.59 cm, respectively. The men's average lengths for the left ear first bend upper and lower portions are 0.99 cm and 0.61 cm, respectively, and average lengths for the right ear first bend upper and lower portions are 0.99 and 0.61 cm, respectively.

The women's average lengths for the left ear first bend anterior and posterior portions are 0.75 and 0.75 cm, respectively, and average lengths for the right ear first bend anterior and posterior portions are 0.75 and 0.75 cm, respectively. The men's average lengths for the left ear first bend anterior and posterior portions are 0.78 and 0.78 cm, respectively, and average lengths for the right ear first bend upper and lower portions are 0.78 and 0.78 cm, respectively. Fig. 7
                         shows that men's first bend upper, lower, anterior, and posterior lengths for both ears are longer than those of the women (P < 0.05).

The average lengths of the women's left ear second bend upper and lower portions are 1.49 and 1.16 cm, respectively, and the average lengths for the right ear second bend upper and lower portions are 1.51 and 1.24 cm, respectively. The average lengths for the men's left ear second bend upper and lower portions are 1.64 and 1.2 cm, respectively, and the average lengths for the right ear second bend upper and lower portions are 1.63 and 1.24 cm, respectively.

The average lengths for the women's left ear second bend anterior and posterior portions are 1.38 and 1.39 cm, respectively, and the average lengths for the right ear second bend anterior and posterior portions are 1.43 and 1.43 cm, respectively. The average lengths for the men's left ear second bend anterior and posterior portions are 1.39 and 1.38 cm, respectively, and the average lengths for the right ear second bend upper and lower portions are 1.39 and 1.4 cm, respectively. Fig. 8
                         shows that men's second bend upper and lower lengths for the left ear and second bend upper length for the right ear are longer than those for women (p < 0.05). However, the length for the right ear second bend lower portion and left ear anterior and posterior lengths for both men and women are similar. Finally, the right ear second bend anterior and posterior lengths for women are longer than those for men (p < 0.05).

The women's average left ear upper length is 2.52 cm, average left ear lower length is 2.26 cm, average right ear upper length is 2.55 cm, and average right ear lower length is 2.28 cm. The male participants' average left ear upper length is 2.72 cm, average left ear lower length is 2.48 cm, average right ear upper length is 2.71 cm, and average right ear lower length is 2.49 cm. Fig. 9
                         shows that men's upper and lower lengths for ear canals in both ears are longer than those for women (P < 0.05).

The women's average left ear anterior length is 2.49 cm, average left ear posterior length is 2.5 cm, average right ear anterior length is 2.51 cm, and average right ear posterior length is 2.51 cm. The male participants' average left ear anterior length is 2.68 cm, average left ear posterior length is 2.67 cm, average right ear anterior length is 2.72 cm, and average right ear posterior length is 2.71 cm. Fig. 9 shows that men's anterior and posterior lengths for ear canals in both ears are longer than those for women (P < 0.05).

@&#DISCUSSIONS@&#

This study used CT scan technology to measure the anthropometry of human ear canals. In addition to conducting the ear canal shape measurements in a non-invasive manner, this research also established the ear canal measurement data of Taiwanese workers.

Women's left ear canal openings have an average height and width of 0.91 cm and 0.63 cm, respectively, and their right ear canal openings have an average length and width of 0.92 and 0.63 cm, respectively. Men's left ear canal openings have an average height and width of 0.96 and 0.68 cm, respectively; and their right ear canal openings have an average height and width of 0.96 and 0.67 cm, respectively. This data shows that the average heights and widths of men's ear canal openings are greater than those for women (p < 0.05).

Women's left ear first bend upper portions have an average length of 0.96 cm, first bend lower portions have an average length of 0.59 cm, whereas their right ear first bend upper portions have an average length of 0.97 cm, and first bend lower portions have an average length of 0.59 cm. Women's left ear first bend anterior portions have an average length of 0.75 cm and first bend posterior portions have an average length of 0.75 cm, whereas their right ear first bend anterior portions have an average length of 0.75 cm and first bend posterior portions have an average length of 0.75 cm. Men's left ear first bend upper portions have an average length of 0.99 cm and first bend lower portions have an average length of 0.61 cm, whereas their right ear first bend upper portions have an average length of 0.99 cm and first bend lower portions have an average length of 0.61 cm. Men's left ear first bend anterior portions have an average length of 0.78 cm and first bend posterior portions have an average length of 0.78 cm, whereas their right ear first bend anterior portions have an average length of 0.78 cm and first bend posterior portions have an average length of 0.78 cm. Based on these data, men's first bend upper, lower, anterior, and posterior lengths for both ears are longer than those for women (p < 0.05).

Under the current CNS standards, the range for small earplugs is 0.5–0.7 cm, the range for medium earplugs is 0.8–1.1 cm, and the range for large earplugs is 1.2–1.4 cm. The results of this study indicate that, under the CNS standard, 9% of the participants are within the large size range, 88% within the medium size range, and 9% within the small size range for ear canal opening length. For the participants' ear canal opening width, under the CNS standard, none of the participants are within the large size range, 21% are within the medium size range, 74% within the small size range, and 5% of the participants' ear canal opening sizes are smaller than small size range. Therefore, for width, the researcher recommends that small size (S) should be less than 0.5 cm, medium size (M) should range between 0.51 and 0.85 cm, and large size (L) should be greater than 0.86 cm. For length, small size (S) should be less than 0.7 cm, medium size (M) should range between 0.71 and 1.3 cm, and large size (L) should be greater than 1.3 cm.

Because the ear canal opening heights and widths between Taiwanese men and women are different, the researcher recommends that the circular cross-section of the earplugs be replaced with an elliptical cross-section with a universal width between 0.63 and 0.68 cm and height between 0.91 and 0.96 cm during manufacturing.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study established a three-dimensional ear canal model using a non-invasive method by CT and measured the geometric shape of the ear canal. The results of the study show that the average height and width of ear canal openings and the average depth of the first bend for men are generally longer, wider and deeper than those for women. Therefore, it's to accommodate the differences in ear canal size between men and women workers. In addition, the difference between the height and width of ear canal opening is about 40% for women's and men's. Hence, the circular cross-section shape of the earplugs should be replaced with an elliptical cross-section shape during manufacturing. Furthermore, the results of this study can be used as an important tool for earplug development design, can be employed for basic statistics and research for otology, and can be adapted as a reference for worker earplug option and fit data. The results of this study can also give references for fitting and choosing earplugs, achieve the objective of hearing protection for noise-generating worksites, reduce occupational injuries, and prevent workplace hazards caused hearing loss and impairment.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Support for this project was provided by Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, Council of Labor Affairs (1003076) in Taiwan. Facilities were provided by the Biomedical Engineering Center in Chang Gung University.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

