@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Impact of online training on delivering a difficult medical diagnosis: Acquiring communication skills

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Design and evaluation of a web-based self-training package.


                        
                        
                           
                           Web-based training for the acquisition of communication skills.


                        
                        
                           
                           Web-based training that enriches how physicians view diagnosis delivery.


                        
                        
                           
                           Interviews showed how physicians' mental picture of diagnosis delivery evolved.


                        
                        
                           
                           The exercises identify changes in practice and acquisition of new skills.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Training

Assessment

Skill

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This paper deals with developing and assessing the training of physicians to deliver a difficult diagnosis to patients. The training is provided by a web-based self-training package. This online training emphasizes the structural, functional and relational dimensions of interviews delivering a serious diagnosis, and a logical set of recommendations for behavior towards the patient. The content is illustrated by numerous delivery interview sequences that are described and for which commentary is provided. This online package was expected to enable physicians to acquire new skills and change their mental picture of diagnosis delivery. Here we discuss the assessment of training in managing the delivery of a serious diagnosis. The approach taken and the methods used to measure knowledge and skills are presented.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

This paper deals with training to deliver a difficult medical diagnosis. The training is given through an online package designed to develop communication skills.

Having to deliver a difficult medical diagnosis to a patient is a situation that every physician will have to face sooner or later. Preparing and training to manage this type of interview is thus essential for both patients and physicians. For patients, it has been shown that a delivery correctly made has a positive effect on their commitment to the therapeutic process (Libert and Reynaert, 2009) and on their propensity to adopt an active forward-looking attitude (Baile and Aaron, 2005; Butow, 2005; Fallowfield, 2008). For physicians, being trained in managing the delivery interview helps them approach these grueling and dispiriting situations with greater equanimity (Bettery et al., 2006).

We can distinguish two forms of difficult diagnosis delivery training: classical and interactive. The first form imparts information on legislation, defense mechanisms, what should be done during the interview (managing emotion, answering questions, etc.) or should not be done (interrupting or making a judgment on the patient, etc.). The second form focuses on acquiring the communication skills needed to smoothly conduct a delivery interview. The first form has a low implementation cost (one-way communication), unlike the second form, which generally involves courses lasting several days, and requires trainers versed in role-play management and collective discussion.

Countries such as Canada have integrated such training into their academic programs. In France, though not yet compulsory, this training is offered in more and more French universities. Even so, the training proposed remains classical; cost still makes interactive training less preferred. It is obviously important to be well-informed about the determinants of the diagnosis delivery, legislation, patient reaction, and what should and should not be done, but the acquisition of communication skills is also essential. Hence there is still an unmet need to devise and develop accessible, effective training provision for conducting diagnosis delivery interviews (Ferraton-Rollin et al., 2013).

Accordingly, with the support of the French Ligue Contre le Cancer, we developed a training website devoted to delivering a difficult diagnosis. It has the following features: (i) it is freely accessible, being web-based, (ii) it is a self-training package and so it needs no trainers, (iii) an online training session takes at most half an hour, and so it is not costly or time consuming for the trainees, and (iv) its content is based essentially on the results of analyzing physician–patient interviews obtained by role-play. This design aims to offer training that, though non-interactive, still enables the acquisition of communication skills. Our project was prompted by the work of Cuenot et al. (2005), who show that simply observing role play situations where a difficult diagnosis is delivered gives the observers the feeling they have acquired communication skills. Although the authors did not verify whether skills were effectively acquired, we take the view, classical in interactive training, that to acquire these skills, trainees do not have to be actually involved in the situations in which they have to act. It is sufficient to induce them to take a reflective stance on the practice to be acquired, and give them the resources to do so. Hence presenting interaction sequences extracted from interviews where a difficult diagnosis is delivered, commenting on them and explaining them, should favor the acquisition of skills. Our website was designed on this basis.

To test our hypothesis, we recruited participants representative of the targeted audience, i.e. young physicians and medical interns. Before and after use of the site, the participants were interviewed and were given two exercises to do. The interviews were carried out to identify their mental picture of the difficult diagnosis delivery consultation. The exercises were designed to appraise the acquisition of a communication skill involved in the recommendation “avoid an emotional shock”. The results obtained showed that our web-based package enabled trainees to acquire communication skills and to form a mental picture of the delivery interview compatible with those skills.

The first part of this paper sets out the existing provision of training for diagnosis delivery with the corresponding evaluation processes. The second part describes the design of the web-based package and its evaluation.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

There are two training formats: classical and interactive, described below.

This training takes the form of one-way communication based on books (Pouchain et al., 1996; Buckman, 2001; Tate, 2005; Iandolo, 2006). This training provides resources to build a mental picture of a diagnosis delivery interview. Generally, the content of the delivery curriculum is organized around four key themes: (i) legal framework, (ii) patients' and physicians' defense mechanisms, (iii) the complexity of the delivery task and (iv) recommendations in conducting this activity with regard to recommendations for behaviors to exhibit and to avoid.

The first theme presents relevant legislation in the public health code and the code of medical ethics and jurisprudence. The physician is legally required to obtain the patient's free informed consent before performing any medical act (Law of 8 November 1955). This condition of consent is paired with an obligation to provide information that is simple, basic, intelligible and sincere (Law of 21 February 1961). The physician must ensure that the recommendations are well understood so the patient can make well-informed decisions (article 37 of the Law of 28 June 1979) and must manage the patient's emotional response (recommendation of the French National Authority for Health (2008)).

The second theme presents the defense mechanisms in play during the diagnosis delivery, and makes reference to the studies carried out by Ruszniewski (2004), who distinguishes patients' defense mechanisms (denial, regression, isolation, transfer, and aggressive projection) from those of physicians (lies, false reassurance, forward flight, rationalization, dodging, trivialization, and projective identification).

The third theme stresses that in communication, we can give only recommendations for appropriate behaviors. No single formula is conceivable owing to the multiple factors involved in each delivery process: age, culture, personal factors, education, etc. (Schofield et al., 2003; Siminoff et al., 2006; Thorne et al., 2010). These factors influence not only patients' desires and needs, but also those of the professionals with whom the patients will interact (Feldman-Stewart et al., 2005). Given the diversity of patients and their points of view (Schofield et al., 2001; Edvardsson et al., 2006; Hoff et al., 2007) together with the complexity of interpersonal communication in general, it is not possible to devise a formula that can be applied to every specific case (Feldman-Stewart et al., 2005; Parker et al., 2005).

The fourth theme tackles recommendations for behaviors to exhibit and to avoid produced by the health sector professionals, based on their “opinion” (Thorne et al., 2010), e.g. listen to patients, answer their questions, avoid emotional shocks, manage emotions, say nothing that is untrue, do not evaluate, make judgment on or reprimand the patient, etc.

This type of training can also draw on information in the classical resources, but its specific feature is that it focuses on acquiring the communication skills necessary for properly conducting difficult diagnosis delivery interviews. This acquisition is based on intensive training programs that generally take up several half-days. Interactive teaching methods, and in particular role-play and the focus group (collective discussion around a delivery interview, usually filmed) are used. The role play method differs depending on the specific program.

In the Canadian program for delivery training, called “Better Physician–Patient Communication for Better Patient Outcomes” (supported by Health Canada, the British Columbia College of Family Physicians and the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada, whose toolbox can be accessed at http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2012/sc-hc/H39-509-1999-fra.pdf), each of the participants involved in the role-play acts in turn as a patient and as a physician meant to behave as appropriately as possible. Each role-play is commented on afterward. The aim is to determine whether the methods used are well-adapted or need to be revised.

In the Australian program named “Communication Skills Training” steered by Butow's group (Butow et al., 2008), all the participants take part in the role-play, where they act as the physician; in these role plays, the patient is systematically played by a professional actor. The role plays are filmed and constitute a resource for individualized training.

In the training implemented by the Swiss researchers (Cuenot et al., 2005), the role play is used as a support for collective discussion. More specifically, in this scheme only some of the participants are asked to role-play, while the others observe. The role-plays are then discussed collectively. These discussions include watching a video of interviews and commenting on each others' performance (Mollo and Falzon, 2004).

Diagnosis delivery training programs have been assessed when the training approach used appeared original or innovative.

This was the case for instance of the Australian team led by Butow, which developed training programs for the acquisition of communication skills in the field of oncology diagnosis delivery (Butow et al., 2008), and more recently in that of genetic counseling (Dunlop et al., 2011).

In the 2008 assessment approach, various criteria emerged:
                           
                              1.
                              Trainee satisfaction was measured using a Likert scale questionnaire.

The acquisition and transfer of the targeted communication skills was assessed through the implementation of role-plays (simulating situations conducive to the deployment of the skills sought). This approach was used to determine whether communication skills had been transferred. Language productions were transcribed and analyzed using a categorization system (categories such as creating an environment where emotion is likely to be expressed, establishing rapport, establishing a collaborative framework, not hindering emotional expression, active listening, etc.). The categorized behaviors were then quantified. The same approach (role-play) was used with a control group. Comparison of the results between the two groups gave a measure of how well the training enabled the acquisition of these skills.

Stress and burnout level was measured using an existing questionnaire based on the Maslach Burnout Inventory (Maslach et al., 1996). The overall assessment approach was implemented immediately after training (immediate effect), then 6 months later and finally a year later (effect after reflection).

This assessment approach seeks to determine whether (i) the training was considered to be a pleasant, effective experience, (ii) the training enabled the acquisition and transfer of communication skills and whether this transfer continued over time, (iii) the acquisition of these skills enabled trainees to approach these diagnosis delivery situations more calmly (with less stress) and whether this benefit will remain or develop further with experience and time.

Lastly, some studies have been carried out by the Swiss researchers cited previously (Cuenot et al., 2005), who analyzed a new learning approach for communication skills in a student population (4th year students in medicine). In their training scheme, all the participants took part in a collective discussion of filmed role-plays. Among these participants, some acted in role-plays while others were only observers. The researchers set out to study whether being an actor rather than an observer had any impact on the feeling that something had been learned and on resulting self-confidence. The acting and observing students were given questionnaires designed for the occasion; this made it possible to analyze the subjective dimension of learning and the feeling of self-confidence.

The results showed that both the actors and the observers felt they had learned communication skills. However, the active participants felt that they had benefited more than the observers with regard to self-confidence.

The web-based package was supplied by the French Ligue Contre le Cancer through the Centre Alexis Vautrin (Cancer Hospital, Nancy, France) and the multimedia service of the University of Nancy (Vidéoscope). The overall project sought to develop a website available to all, but targeting students in medicine and young physicians in particular. The site was designed to address the doctor–patient relationship. The site was already under construction when we joined the project. There were four sections. The first dealt with laws and regulations, the second to defense mechanisms that could emerge among patients and physicians, the third to media, patients' associations and health networks, and the fourth gave general information on the pathologies, and on patients' needs and expectations. The site was driven by resources extracted from legislation, written material and interviews with physicians and one psycho-oncologist; it was based on professional experience and/or the literature.

Our task as researchers specialized in the psychology of communication was to design a fifth section on interpersonal communication. We set out to design a product that (i) addressed students in medicine or young physicians, (ii) dealt with the delivery of a difficult diagnosis, (iii) was easy to use, (iv) was in multimedia format, (v) was useful, interesting and appealing for its beneficiaries.

To this end, the content of diagnosis delivery training programs was analyzed. By examining programs summarized in educational resources and training materials we identified what content not to replicate. Studies in linguistics and the psychology of linguistics on doctor–patient consultations (Lacoste, 1993; Cosnier, 1993; Heath, 1993) and our knowledge of ergonomics revealed dimensions of diagnosis delivery training that were absent from the literature, or had received scant attention, such as the structural dimension of the activity (operational structure of delivery), the relational dimension (the roles and status relationships in place) and the linguistic means by which recommendations for appropriate behaviors are accomplished.

This study is original as it lends diagnosis delivery new dimensions hitherto unexamined in the literature.

To design the training support, we mainly used findings from interview analyses. The analyzed interviews were gathered as part of patient information collection.

The delivery interviews were transcribed, validated and analyzed (for further details, see Saint-Dizier de Almeida, 2013).

The interview analyses addressed three different levels of activity: (i) the structural operating level, (ii) the operating/behavioral level and (iii) the relational level.
                           
                              –
                              The study of the structural operating level identified the successive phases of each interview (e.g. presenting the results of a medical examination, ensuring compliance with a diet, allaying a patient's fears, agreeing on subsequent therapy, setting the next appointment, etc.). The study of this level aimed to show that the difficult diagnosis delivery interviews did not reflect the strict application of the physician–patient consultation scenario as classically taught in medicine to manage ordinary interviews (Cosnier, 1993). The scenario for ordinary consultations takes the form of a sequence of phases conducted by the physician:
                                    
                                       ○
                                       Phase 1: opening,

Phase 2: identifying the problem (questioning),

Phase 3: examination,

Phase 4: diagnosis,

Phase 5: discussing the diagnosis, additional examinations,

Phase 6: recommendation,

Phase 7: closing (Cosnier, 1993).

We postulated that a strict application would be incompatible with medical recommendations for difficult diagnosis deliveries. Instead, we expected these phases to be repeated and some to be initiated by patients. For example, if a patient communicates a problem of comprehension on a point brought up in an earlier phase (“Oh, but that's not what I understood just now”), the physician will not hesitate to go back and clarify the information given earlier. In this example, it is the patient (and not the physician) who introduces a new phase for the purpose of clearing up a point presented in a preceding phase.
                           
                              –
                              The study of the operating/behavioral level identified the recommendations that the physician makes through his or her behaviors, e.g. when the physician declares, “Don't worry, we've got it in time”, we identify the accomplishment of the recommendation, i.e. attenuate an emotional shock. This study was essential to delimit the sequences that illustrate how communication skills can be materialized in discourse.

The study of the relational level identified the positions held in the course of the activity. Through this analysis, the aim was to show that the recommendations such as listening, being attentive to the patient, helping the patient to overcome fear, etc. will cause the physician to show the patient more care and consideration. These behaviors should thus induce a less asymmetrical social relation than that seen in classical interviews (Heath, 1993). We would expect the physicians, through their behaviors (they do not interrupt, they listen to, inform and reassure the patient), to hold a position in which they make no claim to power status.

The results of the interview analysis show that:
                           
                              –
                              The interviews conducted were unlike ordinary interviews reflecting the consultation scenario taught to students in medicine. There was a recurrence in the different phases of the interview. Following instructions when conducting delivery (listening to the patient, ensuring that he/she understands, paying attention to his/her psychological state, keeping emotions under control, etc.) led to interviews with structures that revealed scenario flexibility. Thus in Suchman (1987) words, in this type of consultation, the processing of social circumstances in the ‘here and now’ takes precedence over scenario monitoring.

As opposed to the studies carried out by Heath (1993) addressing ordinary doctor–patient interviews, our results show that the high status of dominance associated with physicians and the correspondingly low status associated with patients were significantly less pronounced or even almost reversed. Physicians are at the service of the patients, and listen to them. The patients are active. They show they are listening, show their understanding or their difficulty in understanding, and they share their knowledge and express their need for information, their malaise, their worries and fears, and the reasons behind their worry. Some of these behaviors may initiate phases and command the structure of discourse. Respecting the recommendations for behaviors to exhibit and to avoid in the literature (cf. 2.1.) helped to implement an empathic approach. A physician shows empathy by having a comprehensive, non-directive attitude (Rogers, 2008), which results in a modification of the roles and status relationships at the relational level.

In this type of interview, the physician put a lot of effort into the modal register reflecting his/her concern with regard to the patient's emotional state.

An original item not defined in the medical literature emerged from the analysis: in potentially stressful situations, before informing the patient, the physician inquired about his/her mental and emotional state in order to plan appropriate discourse.

In designing training to impart communication skills that can help to improve patients' experiences during a diagnosis delivery, the following elements are considered fundamental:
                           
                              –
                              The structure of the diagnosis delivery does not reflect the strict implementation of a scenario. The physician must be ready to backtrack. If the patient interrupts the physician to ask a question about a point brought up at the beginning of the interview (“Ah yes, excuse me, I wanted to ask you... just now when you said...”), the physician agrees to suspend the intervention. Once the response has been made, the physician comes back to the point in hand.

The patient is active in the process. The conventionally accepted hierarchical asymmetry (dominant/dominated) is mitigated. The fact that the physician displays attentiveness causes the patient to be more forthcoming and express fears or lack of understanding.

Being listened to requires identifying what the patient will understand; this requires inquiring about the patient's level of knowledge; to comfort and support the patient, and de-dramatize the situation, it is necessary to accurately identify the object of his/her fears.

Identifying the intentions of others in communication cannot be taken for granted. For example, during the first diagnosis delivery interview, just because a patient asks: “How long have I got?” does not mean that a straight answer to the question is what is actually wanted. It may be that the patient is seeking reassurance. These different aspects of content appear in the training.

The training covers four categories. Each category comprises sub-categories whose content is often illustrated – when relevant – by one or more sequences extracted from the interviews. The sequences that are essential in our scheme can be read or listened to. They are described and commented on: an illustration is given in Appendix A1.

The content of the sub-categories is appended in the appendix section (Appendix A2). To avoid misleading the user about the nature of the data used to develop this section, it is entitled “role-playing”. The formalization of the content is in line with ergonomic recommendations for electronic documents (Tricot, 1995). This section is accessible at: http://www.infos–patients.net/(section: “role-playing”). For additional information on the process underlying the development of this section, see Saint-Dizier de Almeida (2013).

The objectives were as follows:
                           
                              –
                              Enable the acquisition of knowledge and skills. Enable the acquisition of knowledge and skills that lead to changes in perspective and in practice.

Obtain trainee satisfaction,

Produce a feeling of having learned something (subjective learning),

Produce a package that meets the specifications: quick to consult, formalized on multimedia, addressing diagnosis delivery in an original way using dimensions underutilized in training,

Ensure sponsor satisfaction.

The 26 participants who tested the web-based package had undergone classical training for difficult diagnosis delivery. They were recruited on a voluntary basis. To test immediate and deferred reaction to the training, we split the participants into two groups: the immediate group, who evaluated the training just afterward, and the deferred group, who evaluated it two weeks later.

The self-training was individual. We told all the participants that they were going to access a website showing how to deliver a difficult diagnosis, that this session would last 20–30 min, and that we would interview them afterward and give them two small exercises to do. The participants in the deferred group were asked to come to an appointment two weeks later so we could interview them and give them the two exercises. The participants in the immediate group were told that after visiting the website they would be interviewed again and given the two exercises.

The purpose of the interviews before the website visit was to collect information about what mental picture each participant had of a difficult diagnosis delivery. The interviews after the website visit had the same purpose. We took advantage of the interviews to find out how satisfied they were with the website.

The exercises were meant to identify acquired communication skills. Their design was inspired by the Discourse-Completion Task (Blum-Kulka et al., 1989) and the vignette method (Agnoletti, 1999, 2003). Each exercise consisted of a brief presentation of a serious diagnosis delivery situation, followed by an interaction sequence in two speaking turns. The participant was asked to put him or herself in this situation, to act as if he/she was actually experiencing it, and to transcribe what he/she would say spontaneously in such a situation, following the patient's intervention.

Both situations related to a diagnosis of breast cancer; they referred to a potentially anxiety-inducing situation.
                           Exercise 1
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Physician: “We detected nodules”.

Patient: “But is it serious?” (rising tone).

Physician: …………………………


                              
                                 
                                    Physician: “(…) we detected nodules”.

Patient: “Er… it's cancer?” (rising tone).

Physician: ………………………….

Before the training, the participants would normally at the third speaking turn produce an answer with an assertion, e.g. “Yes, it does look like cancer”, because a question elicits an informative answer (“inform”).

After our training, we expected the participants to implement a new communication skill, which would be to ask a question (“question”) rather than give an answer (“inform”). More precisely, the acquisition of this skill should prompt them to question the patients about their knowledge, their concerns, their fears (questions like: “What do you mean by serious?”, “Why do you think it's cancer?”, “What are you worried about?”). In the training, we explain – supported by the sequence description – that when the patient asks a question the answer to which may cause an emotional shock, it is necessary to inquire first about the mental and emotional states of the patient before going on and providing information appropriate to the patient's level of thinking (cf. Appendix A1).

@&#RESULTS@&#

During the experimental sessions, the following data were collected: subjective feedback from trainees, qualitative content or themes addressed during the interviews, counts of whether the participants simply informed the patient or whether they questioned the patient about his or her current emotional state.

During the interviews, participants expressed their appreciation of the training and said they found information they already knew plus new elements that were useful for their practice. The commented sequences were particularly appreciated.

Findings from the interviews before training showed that participants had a rich mental picture of the doctor–patient interview and of the delivery of a serious diagnosis. They produced the recommendations given in classical training programs in deliveries such as “the physician must allow time for the delivery”, “the delivery takes place in phases” “it must take place in a quiet environment”, “each interview is unique”, “the physician must be honest”, “the physician must give the patient time to ask questions”, “the physician must explain things clearly”, “the physician must let the patient express his/her emotions”, “the physician adapts the interview to the patient”, etc.

In the interviews conducted after training, in addition to the previous content, new statements appeared: “the physician must let the patient explain what he/she knows”, “the physician must let the patient explain what the terms represent for him/her”, “the physician must question the patient on what he/she knows”, “the physician must inquire about the patient's psychological state”, “the physician questions the patient to find out what he/she thinks”, “a physician should never appear as a ‘know-it-all’ ”. In both groups, participants produced new specifications. Such content was more often present in the deferred group than in the immediate group. Each specification appeared on average in 50% of participants in the deferred group, against 25% in the immediate group. Thus the training enabled some participants to modify their mental picture of the delivery interview (the interview being perceived as a consultation during which the patient must release his/her mental and emotional states, and the physician must help him/her to do so). For the others, these elements may have been acquired, but at the time of the interview they had not yet been integrated into their mental picture.

The results of the exercises show the acquisition of a communication skill. This skill consists in inquiring about a patient's mental and emotional state when the patient asks a question the answer to which may cause an emotional shock.

The results obtained for each exercise and for each of the groups are given in Tables 1 and 2
                           
                            below.

One hypothesis was that the trainees would learn a new skill through the consultation. This acquisition would take the form of responses presented as questions. The significant differences in the results before and after the training show that consulting the training website had an impact on practice and that it enabled the trainees to acquire a communication skill. The nature of the responses given is in line with expectations. However, it must be noted that in the first exercise, participants differed depending on the group they belonged to. In the second one, there was no difference. The significant results obtained for the deferred group in the two exercises highlights an over-representation of “inform” (type responses before consulting the site) and an over-representation of “question” (type responses after consultation). Content analysis reveals that the recommendation that the physician should inquire about the mental and psychological states of the patient using questions had been successfully embraced. Similar results were observed with the immediate group, but only in the second exercise.

A further hypothesis was that this acquisition would be sustainable. This sustainability would be seen in responses presented as questions in the ‘after’ condition. The results obtained show that the acquired skill had not been forgotten after 15 days, supporting our hypothesis.

The package met the specifications negotiated with the sponsors. A training session lasts approximately half an hour. It uses multimedia (illustrated sequences can be read or listened to). Its content and formalization make it original. It does not summarize the content of ongoing training, but rather of completed training programs. Classical training programs provide information on what should be done (behavioral requirements of the French National Authority for Health) and why (legislation). Interactive training programs and accompanying focus on the “doing” in simulated (interactive training programs) or natural (accompanying) situations, rectifying and commenting where necessary. The package describes and comments on what has been done in a simulated situation from different viewpoints in compliance with legislation. It instates under-represented or unrepresented sectors of activity in diagnosis delivery training and provides numerous illustrations.

The multimedia model of the section was presented at a meeting with Professors of medicine at the Centre Alexis Vautrin and representatives from the French Ligue Contre le Cancer. The presentation was praised by the Ligue and the physicians validated its content. The sponsors therefore decided to incorporate it into the site as a fifth section termed “role-play” in order to avoid misleading users about the nature of the sequences used to illustrate the section's content.

It is also noteworthy that the global site is currently supported by the National Conference of the Deans of the Faculty of Medicine, the National Order of Physicians, the French Ligue Contre le Cancer, the UMVF (the Francophone Virtual Medical University), the Centre Alexis Vautrin, and the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Nancy. It was also certified on 5 January 2010 by the Health on the Net foundation in collaboration with the French National Authority for Health in accordance with law No. 2004–810 of 13 August 2004.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study was set up to assess an online training package, and specifically to measure its effectiveness in terms of acquisition of skills and knowledge. The results show that the training package does not alter the mental picture of diagnosis deliveries that participants have developed over the course of their academic training and their reading, but instead enriches it. As expected, the patient takes on new roles in his/her mental picture (communicating what he/she knows, his/her mental picture, what he/she fears); the physician must provide opportunities that will enable the patient to express him/herself. We note that in the deferred group, this new content emerged more systematically than in the immediate group. Thus the participants in the deferred group (tested after two weeks, as opposed to the immediate group, tested just after training) performed better. They generated many more statements to indicate that they learned from the training. We can explain this observation by referring to the work of Kraiger et al. (1993), who show that a time lapse is needed in order to integrate new content within the representational scheme. According to these authors, cognitive integration of the content to be acquired involves a dynamic, complex acquisition process. Also, the measurement of these forms of knowledge must take place at different times.

The exercises made it possible to highlight new practices that illustrate the acquisition and transfer of communication skills. After consulting the product, participants switched from an informative discourse (giving information on the disease, treatment, care, etc.), to an interrogative discourse (questioning the patient's mental and psychological state). They learned that in potentially anxiety-inducing situations, the physician must inquire about the patient's mental state in order to provide a suitable discourse. Obtaining information on the patient's state depends on the questions he/she is asked. In both exercises, students had to make use of an acquired skill (here, when the response to a patient's question might cause shock, the physician must not respond immediately; rather, he/she must question the patient in order to clearly identify his/her state of mind). However, the difference was not significant among the “immediate” group for Exercise 1 (after the training, most continued informing their patients). It is therefore possible that participants did not consider the first situation as a potentially anxiety-inducing one.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this study we developed an online self-training package, drawing on applied psychology and linguistics, designed to require the least possible intervention from participants and to allow the measurement of the knowledge and skills acquired. This measurement consisted in highlighting the representational modifications and the changes in practice by comparing results obtained before and after training. Interviews enabled us to gain access to participants' mental pictures of the doctor–patient delivery and to understand their evolution after the consultation. Acquired knowledge was indirectly identified through the analysis of representations. There is admittedly a limitation to this approach: if knowledge is acquired but is not incorporated into the representational scheme, it will not be reflected in the interviews.

To measure communication skills, we eschewed the role-playing technique, which is costly for the participants and the assessors, and used exercises inspired by the Discourse-Completion Task (Blum-Kulka et al., 1989) and the vignette method (Shaver, 1970; Agnoletti, 1999, 2003; Sinaceur and Tiedens, 2006). Our approach enabled us to analyze the behavior exhibited in a simulated situation. Its advantage compared with role-play is that it is possible to control the context and the social circumstances of the exchange (this terminology is that of Suchman, 1987), i.e. the participants know that it is an interview where a breast cancer diagnosis is delivered, and that we have chosen a precise moment with a precise utterance to launch the sequence, namely when the patient asks about the seriousness of the disease. The control is exercised by the choice of these social circumstances.

Thus these exercises make it possible to collect language exchanges under controlled conditions. They provide linguistic productions that come after a predefined initial speaking turn. The effect of the speaking turn on the following turn can then be studied and compared.

In role-plays, the productions of the actor who plays the patient are not controlled; they are merely guided minimally via the instructions the actor receives. Performance is addressed through the occurrences and/or the absence of behaviors to exhibit (Butow et al., 2008). We can very well suppose that a participant defined as a poor performer – owing to the fact that he/she has produced few prescribed behaviors – actually had few opportunities to accomplish these behaviors. It would be wrong to infer that he/she has acquired few communication skills. Similarly, behavior to exhibit could fail to be produced in a suitable situation. The classification of behavior originating from role-plays requires a pragmatic, sequential analysis of discourse, which is far from easy (Whalen et al., 1992). The exercises used avoid interpretation errors, and generate comparable results. Thanks to this method and to the analysis of performance before and after training, it is possible to identify changes in practice and the acquisition of new skills transferred to the situation. Herein lies a further limitation to this approach: absence of change in practice in the expected direction could mean that competence is not acquired or is acquired but has not been transferred.

Despite this limitation, our research demonstrates a viable, cost-effective alternative to role-playing to train physicians to deliver difficult diagnoses to patients, and it presents a scheme for evaluating skill acquisition that is also efficient and inexpensive to set up.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The web-based package was supported by the French Ligue Contre le Cancer. It was supplied by the French Ligue Contre le Cancer through the Centre Alexis Vautrin (Cancer Hospital, Nancy, France) and the multimedia service of the University of Nancy (Vidéoscope). F. Grass, C. Fombaron, C. Lavoivre, E. Kermann, students enrolled in the Master's degree in work psychology participated in this research as part of their university studies.

Translation of a sequence and its commentary as they appear on the website:
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Number
                                       Utterance/action
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       P62b
                                       “…. it's… cancer”(rising tone).
                                    
                                    
                                       D63a
                                       (D hesitates for 2–3 s, shrugs)
                                    
                                    
                                       D63b
                                       “What do you mean, cancer”
                                    
                                    
                                       P64
                                       “Er, as you've just said, it's…cells that…keep on growing relative to, well…er…everything…to me.”
                                    
                                    
                                       D65
                                       “That grow on their own, you mean.”
                                    
                                    
                                       P66
                                       “Right, and...”
                                    
                                    
                                       D67
                                       “...and that start growing, well, a bit independently.”
                                    
                                    
                                       P68
                                       “Er... so it's true that often when they talk about cancer they talk about cells that have a problem of degen..., what is it, degeneration.”
                                    
                                    
                                       D69
                                       “Mmm, you're frightened of this word.”
                                    
                                    
                                       P70
                                       “Well, yes, of course.”
                                    
                                    
                                       D71
                                       “What does it mean for you?”
                                    
                                    
                                       P72 (…)
                                       “Well, all of what happens next, er, treatment, er, I mean, well, cancer, they often talk about chemotherapy, er, all that, you lose your hair, er, I don't know, er (...)”
                                    
                                    
                                       D92
                                       (…) Er, well, chemotherapy not necessarily, it does depend on what we find in the extension work-up, there's radiotherapy, with radiation we use to sterilize the cells that are growing, and then there's surgery, we've got different possibilities (...).
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 Legend: P = patient, D = doctor.
                              
                           
                        
                     

In the first part of the interview, the physician does not use the word “cancer” but talks about cells that grow abnormally. But in P62b, the patient deduces from the physician's discourse that it is cancer: “It's cancer?” The term that has been studiously avoided has been pronounced. In response, the physician is not going to meet the patient's request, i.e. say “Yes it's cancer”, or “It might be”. No. The physician will start working on the mental picture the patient has of the word “cancer” in order to identify the ideas the term carries. This joint work will enable the physician to find out at what level to intervene and begin a process of de-dramatization that will be efficient, because it will be based on the patient's thought world. Looked at more closely, the physician's first attempt (D63b) is not satisfactory because the patient remains in the medical register (P64). The second attempt is efficacious, in particular because the physician invites le patient to shift from a medical register to an emotional one via D69. This invitation lets the patient formulate fears and the object of those fears. In this case, what the patient fears is not the relatively common association of cancer with death, but one of the treatments against cancer, namely chemotherapy and its consequences (hair loss). This work will then enable the physician to find an appropriate discourse reviewing the different treatments currently available and stating that chemotherapy is not inevitable. We must remember that this de-dramatization phase is essential. It should help the patient to be forward-looking and commit to the therapeutic process more calmly. Without this initiative, the physician would doubtlessly have emphasized that “cancer” does not always mean “death”, which would have led the patient to take a morbid view of the situation against an inner thought world that did not elicit such a view. And the patient's actual fears would have persisted and not been allayed by the physician.

The content of the different sub-categories.

This sub-category focuses on the multifunctional dimension of communication. Communication is not only about sharing information, it also makes it possible to complete a task jointly, share mental states, build relationships, and express and manage emotions. It focuses on the fact that the doctor–patient interview is not a monologue occasionally ratified by the patient, but a genuine interaction where the physician and the patient are active and play complementary roles in a situation. This interview also suggests a communication contract where the classically high asymmetrical social relationship is mitigated. It is notably through the designation of roles (identical formulations as highlighted below) that we sought to mitigate this asymmetry.


                           The patient's roles: Make inquiries (on the disease, checkups, treatment…), inform (talk about experiences, his/her family history…), express his/her fears, etc.


                           The physician's roles: Make inquiries (level of knowledge, entourage, experience…), inform (disease, evolution, checkups, treatment…), de-dramatize, reassure, advise, etc.


                           The selection of a process. This draws on studies that argue that it is not possible to provide ready-made formulas with regard to diagnosis deliveries owing to the multiple determinants specific to each consultation; this is to avoid suggesting that formulas in this field could be provided.


                           A progressive procedure. This involves recalling a recommendation with regard to the diagnosis delivery process: this must be progressive so as not to shock the patient, but also because an appropriate behavior requires the physician to inquire about the patients' knowledge, his/her desire for information, his/her fears and what they are based on.

One of the sequences used makes it possible to show how the physician will bring the patient, using different questions, to communicate what he/she understands by cancer, thereby enabling the physician to adjust his/her discourse.


                           The structure of the dialog. The third sub-category shows that the different phases of discourse do not correspond to the strict application of a scenario. The scenario as taught at university is only a guide for conducting interviews. The physician thus plans his/her interview minimally, and the structure of the interview largely depends on the interventions, and notably the emotional reactions of the patient.


                           Target. This entails showing that the patient's words are rich and can inform different registers and guide further action.


                           Specific features. The action taken will depend on the illness (curable or incurable, known or uncertain prognosis, etc.) and the degree of progress in the diagnosis delivery process (whether the checkups have already been carried out, whether the diagnosis is already established, whether the treatment has already been initiated, etc.).


                           Invariants. The physician must bear in mind that irrespective of the interview and the advancement of the process, whatever is thought to be accomplished at a given time may later be unaccomplished. From one interview to another, the patient may have obtained additional information with regard to his/her pathology, treatment, and so on; from one occasion to the next, his/her desire for information can have changed.

The selected sequences show how recommendations that are understandable, reassuring, de-dramatizing, etc. can be accomplished discursively.


                           Be understood. This sub-category informs on how to be accessible and clear. In this category, the sequence where the physician uses the medical term “PSA” is used, suggesting that disseminating information must not lead the physician to renounce the use of technical terms.


                           Be heard. This suggests that for the physician's words to be heard, the patient must be willing to hear them. It is the physician's role to inquire about what the patient hears in the “here and now”.


                           Manage emotions. This category shows, using interview excerpts, how emotions can be expressed (through verbal, paraverbal and nonverbal forms) and how these can be managed discursively. The sequences illustrate the accomplishment of operational actions (such as reassuring or de-dramatizing).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

