@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Route complexity and simulated physical ageing negatively influence wayfinding

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Route complexity negatively influences wayfinding performance in terms of route efficiency and walking speed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Simulated elderly participants have higher heart rates and respiratory rates during a wayfinding task.


                        
                        
                           
                           Simulated physical ageing and route complexity do not interact on wayfinding performance and physiological outcomes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Physical ageing was simulated in an age-simulation field experiment by using gerontologic suits.


                        
                        
                           
                           A portable heart rate monitor was used to assess physiological outcomes like heart rate and respiratory rate.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Hospital environment

Route complexity

Physical ageing

Simulation

Wayfinding

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The aim of this age-simulation field experiment was to assess the influence of route complexity and physical ageing on wayfinding. Seventy-five people (aged 18–28) performed a total of 108 wayfinding tasks (i.e., 42 participants performed two wayfinding tasks and 33 performed one wayfinding task), of which 59 tasks were performed wearing gerontologic ageing suits. Outcome variables were wayfinding performance (i.e., efficiency and walking speed) and physiological outcomes (i.e., heart and respiratory rates). Analysis of covariance showed that persons on more complex routes (i.e., more floor and building changes) walked less efficiently than persons on less complex routes. In addition, simulated elderly participants perform worse in wayfinding than young participants in terms of speed (p < 0.001). Moreover, a linear mixed model showed that simulated elderly persons had higher heart rates and respiratory rates compared to young people during a wayfinding task, suggesting that simulated elderly consumed more energy during this task.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Wayfinding – that is, “determining and following a path or route between an origin and a destination” (Golledge, 1999, p. 6) – in complex building settings can be a difficult and stressful task, particularly in anxious and uncertain situations like a hospital visit. Route complexity is a growing problem in hospitals because hospitals are expanding in size due to the increasing demand for health care, more specialized care, and more diagnostic techniques. Consequently, hospital environments comprise more floor levels and multiple buildings, which make routes towards destinations more complex. A wayfinding technique, such as signage, is used in buildings to compensate for complex settings (O'Neill, 1991). Furthermore, wayfinding strategies differ when persons find their way in a multi-level building or a multi-level multi-building setting which effects wayfinding performance in terms of wayfinding time and efficiency (Hölsher et al., 2006; Hölsher et al., 2009). Floor strategies (firstly moving to the correct floor) have found to be more effective in multi-level settings while in multi-level multi-building settings people find their way more efficient when they firstly move to the correct building during a route. In addition, the majority of wayfinders choose to turn left when they arrive at a T-intersection (Tang et al., 2009). Strategies that people use to find their way efficiently depends mostly on route complexity, that is depending on whether building or floor changes were required during a route (Hölsher et al., 2009).

Wayfinding in complex building settings might be particularly difficult and challenging for elderly people. The memory of elderly is not as good as that of younger people (Belsky, 2013) and their physical capacity is reduced. Therefore, especially elderly people may experience problems with dual-task-performance, which requires cognitive and sensorimotor skills (Li et al., 2001). Wayfinding can be seen as a divided-attention-task: people need to memorize the address of their destination while they are actually moving through the environment in order to reach the destination. A navigational study showed that elderly people perform worse than young people in cognitive navigational skills like route learning, route drawing, and especially in photo and video location (i.e., locate a photo or video on a map after a tour through a hospital) (Cushman et al., 2008). Knowledge about the impact of physical impairments on wayfinding, however, is lacking. Several studies have shown that few elderly people take the shortest route during virtual wayfinding tasks (Harris and Wolbers, 2014) and real-world wayfinding tasks (Borst et al., 2009), which suggests that most elderly people find their way less efficiently than young people do, but it remains unclear whether this is due to physical or cognitive impairments. We believe this justifies the stance of the study in understanding exclusively potential physical effects through simulated ageing.

Elderly people experience several physical challenges, for example, visual impairments, hearing loss, and limitations in motor skills, and therefore, elderly people fear losing their independence and experience even basic movements, such as walking, as challenging (Davis, 2012). Consequently, walking speed decreases 7% per decade of age (Bendall et al., 1989). However, the energy expenditure of elderly people is not significantly different during walking compared to young people, because elderly people walk slower and their stride length is shorter (Abadi et al., 2010). It is known that high color contrasts can help and complex pictograms in signage can hinder wayfinding in participants wearing glasses that simulate visual impairments (Rousek and Hallbeck, 2011) and in blind and partially sighted people (Chandler and Worsfold, 2013). Elderly people spent more time following signs due to poor visual searching ability, decreased motor skills and longer information processing times (Liu and Ho, 2012; Hashim et al., 2014). Therefore, wayfinding involves both sensory and motor skills such as following signs, searching for the destination, and walking to reach the destination. If the wayfinding process cannot be completed successfully, persons may become distressed and disoriented in the building and, consequently, they may get lost. Therefore, support from the environment is important for elderly persons to be able to function at their best (Belsky, 2013). Consequently, involving patients can be considered of major importance in studying and designing a built environment (Hignett and Lu, 2009).

The aim of this study is to assess the influence of route complexity and physical ageing on wayfinding (i.e., efficiency and walking speed) in a hospital setting. It is unknown whether the effect of route complexity (i.e., number of building and floor changes) on wayfinding differs for elderly people with ageing-related physical impairments in both sensory and motor skills. To assess exclusively physical ageing, participants for this study were young people wearing gerontologic suits that simulate the physical limitations of elderly people.

@&#METHODS@&#

Seventy-five bachelor students, studying Facility Management at the Hanze University of Applied Sciences in Groningen The Netherlands, were recruited for this study. In total, 42 of these participants fulfilled one wayfinding task and 33 of these participants fulfilled two wayfinding tasks in order to have at least 10 participants walking each of the nine wayfinding routes (Table 1
                        ). Participants were randomly assigned to a bundle of three wayfinding tasks in order to start each route from a different origin towards a different destination and, consequently, maximize systematic variation. Data from four participants (i.e., six wayfinding tasks) were excluded because these participants suffered from heart disorders, asthma, or a chronic fatigue syndrome. Participants were aged between 18 and 28 years (M = 20, SD = 1.8). More than half of the sample was female (67%). The mean body mass index (BMI) of the participants was calculated before wearing the gerontologic suits and was 23.3 (SD = 3.4).

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The University Medical Center Groningen contains multiple buildings and floor levels. The design of the main building is composed of multiple blocks where the destinations are numbered, and all sub-buildings have a different name. Nine routes were selected for this study with different levels of complexity (Table 1). A route was defined as the most efficient pedestrian route of a person from origin to destination.


                        Fig. 1
                         shows the map of the study site including origins and destinations. Participants were free to decide on their route, only origin (parking lot or bus stop) and destination (outpatient clinic) were given. The different routes were potentially challenging based on the practical experiences and expectations of the department Facilities & Estates about people getting lost in the building. Moreover, routes were practically selected based on the willingness of the destination clinic to participate in this study.

Participants walked in randomly selected pairs. One participant was the wayfinder and walked the route (randomly selected with or without a gerontologic suit) and the other participant was assigned the role of observer and made assessments, specifically measuring the walking distance and wayfinding time (Fig. 2
                        ). The data was collected during six days and the pairs were evenly distributed over these dates. A random sample of the wayfinding tasks (54.6%) per route was selected to be completed by participants wearing a gerontologic suit (Table 1). Prior to the start of the study, the medical ethical committee of UMCG decided that ethical approval was not required. In order to prevent accidents such as stumbling and falling, e.g. on stairways, the observer was also instructed to keep an eye on the wayfinder by walking behind him/her.

The pairs were asked to walk three separate routes per pair during one day with each route starting from a different origin. When the first route was completed the participants were required to walk to the next origin outside the building and take a 15-min break at this origin in order to start the wayfinding task with a heart rate at rest. The wayfinder that started the first route was randomly selected and also walked the third route. These routes were assigned in such a way that all routes were walked approximately the same number of times. Per pair there was a time difference between starts of about 45–60 min because there was limited measuring equipment and in order to avoid pairs crossing each other. During wayfinding tasks, the wayfinder and observers were not allowed to speak to each other to ensure that wayfinders perform their task independently. The wayfinder was able to ask for wayfinding information at service points (Fig. 1) in order to improve their wayfinding performance and make use of existing wayfinding signage (Fig. 3
                        ).


                           Route complexity – Route complexity was defined as the number of building or floor changes that were required during the route. Building changes were counted each time a route required the person to leave one building in order to enter another building. In addition, floor changes were counted each time when the use of stairs or elevators was required during the route.


                           Simulated physical ageing (SPA) – The gerontologic suits allowed young people to experience the typical physical limitations of elderly people. Physical ageing was simulated by different components. The references in the description of the different components validate the relevance of the different components of the gerontologic suit that simulate physical ageing. Participants wore special polycarbonate glasses (weight: 0.14 kg). Such glasses were worn to cause changes in color perception, blurred sight, glare sensitivity and a restricted visual field (Bouwhuis, 1992; Füsgen and Summa, 1984). Hearing protectors (weight: 0.26 kg) were worn to reduce hearing of high frequency tones and hearing loss increases with increased noise (Saup, 1993). Elderly people experience limited mobility of the whole body through difficulties when stooping, bending, and stretching (Saup, 1993). A neck collar and bandages (weight in total: 0.30 kg) around elbows and knees were used to simulate these mobility limitations. Weight cuffs around the wrists (weight: 2 × 1.50 kg) and ankles (weight: 2 × 2.30 kg) were used to simulate the decrease in muscle strength and changed coordination (Platt, 1991). The weight cuffs around the ankle also simulated an insecure shuffling walk. Another component of the gerontologic suit was a weight vest (weight: 10.10 kg) which was worn around the torso. This vest simulated a curvature of the spine, tilting of the pelvis, bad posture, declined power, increased energy expenditure, and a decreased equilibrium sense (Lang and Arnold, 1991). Special gloves (weight: 0.12 kg) and shoes (weight: 2 × 0.25 kg) were also worn. The gloves simulated limited hand mobility, limited grip, and a slowed tactile feeling (Saup, 1993). The additional softer sole of the shoes gave a spongy feeling and reduced the sensation of floor contact. This simulated the insecure feeling elderly people often feel when they are walking.

In conjunction, these components simulated the typical physical limitations of elderly people. Exact years of ageing of the simulation suits are yet unknown and preliminary findings are non-conclusive.


                           Wayfinding performance – Wayfinding performance was distinguished in two outcomes: (1) route efficiency and (2) walking speed. A stopwatch was used in order to measure wayfinding time. Wayfinding time was the time interval between origin of walking (T0) till the time arrived at the end destination (T1). In addition, a measuring wheel was used to measure the actual walked distance in meters. The route efficiency ratio was calculated by dividing the distance of the route (actual walked route) by the route distance (most efficient pedestrian route). A route efficiency ratio larger than 1 indicates that participants walked more meters than strictly necessary. Walking speed was calculated by dividing route distance by wayfinding time and was displayed in kilometers per hour (km/h).


                           Physiological outcomes – Heart rate and respiratory rate were repeatedly measured every second with the Zephyr Bioharness chest belt in order to measure differences in energy expenditure between young and SPA during a wayfinding task. The latter has been validated in measuring respiratory rate per minute (Hailstone and Kilding, 2011) and heart rate per minute (Kim et al., 2013).

Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used to estimate the main as well as interaction effects of route complexity (i.e., 0 or 1 building changes; 0, 1, or 2 floor changes) and SPA (gerontologic suit versus no suit) on wayfinding performance (i.e., route efficiency and walking speed) during wayfinding tasks (separate analyses for each dependent variable). Sex, BMI, service points, route distance, and number of routes a participant walked were included as covariates as these variables might be related to wayfinding performance and physiological outcomes. As mentioned earlier, some participants walked two routes. This covariate was included to control for familiarity with the hospital and possible fatigue.

The main and interaction effects of route complexity and SPA on the physiological outcomes, that is heart rate and respiratory rate, measured during a wayfinding task were examined in a linear-mixed model (separate analyses for each dependent variable). A linear-mixed-model was chosen to account for possible random effects of individual participants. The mixed-model included the participants as random effects, and number of building changes, number of floor changes, ageing, sex, BMI, number of service points, route distance, and number of walked routes as fixed effects. Standard errors were calculated using a restricted maximum likelihood approach.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In total 108 wayfinding tasks were studied. Descriptive statistics for the study variables are shown in Table 2
                        . The results of the ANCOVA presented in Table 3
                         show significant effects of the number of building changes during the route on wayfinding performance. Table 3 shows that routes that required a building change were significantly less efficient (+0.72, p < 0.001). No significant effects were shown in speed.

In addition, the results in Table 3 showed that participants wearing a gerontologic suit perform worse in wayfinding compared to participants not wearing a suit with respect to speed (p < 0.001). Participants who wore the gerontologic suit walked significantly slower (−0.69 km/h). No significant effects were shown in route efficiency, which means that participants wearing a gerontologic suit did not walk significantly less efficiently than participants not wearing a gerontologic suit. No significant interaction effects were shown between route complexity and SPA on wayfinding outcomes (not shown in table).


                        Table 3 also shows the results of the linear-mixed-model predicting the physiological outcomes. Results of the mixed model showed no significant effects of the complexity of the route on heart rate and respiratory rate. Moreover, no significant interaction effects were found between route complexity and SPA on physiological outcomes.

Results of this study showed significant effects of SPA on heart rate (p < 0.001) and respiratory rate (p < 0.001). Participants who found their way in a gerontologic suit had higher heart rates (+14.31 BPM) and higher respiratory rates (+3.89 BPM).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The results of this study showed that participants on more complex routes showed lower wayfinding performance when compared to participants on less complex routes. Moreover, the findings indicate that participants wearing a gerontologic suit walked slower, and had higher heart rates and respiratory rates, and therefore consumed more energy during a wayfinding task compared to participants not wearing a gerontologic suit.

This study showed that a required building change during a route negatively influenced wayfinding performance. The more building changes were required during a wayfinding task, the less efficient routes were walked. This might imply that participants have an incomplete representation of the spatial setting, and therefore rely on the central point wayfinding strategy, meaning that they first walk towards a central point like the main entry hall or main corridors (Hölsher et al., 2009). A complete representation of the multiple building setting should immediately be made clear to visitors when entering the building using wayfinding design, like well-located service points or wayfinding signage. Unexpectedly, the present study shows no significant effects of floor changes on wayfinding performance in this hospital setting.

The results showed that the number of service points had no significant effect on wayfinding performance. Route efficiency was not optimal for the complex routes which implies that participants did not effectively use service points. However, the primary task of the service points is to support patients with wayfinding information, to enroll new patients for the hospital, and to offer other supporting services like a taxi. This ineffective use may be due to incorrectly located service points. According to O'Neill (1991) and Golledge (1999), wayfinding signage needs to be located at decision points. Some service points in the current hospital setting were not located at decision points. However, it also might be due to the fear not hearing the service employees as a result of the simulated hearing loss, or the desired independence of the participants. Further research is necessary to assess under which wayfinding conditions, like the number of building changes and location of wayfinding signage per route, service points can be effective. For instance, by moving service points to decision points and measuring the effects on wayfinding performance.

Young participants wore gerontologic suits to experience the physical limitations of elderly people. This study did show that simulated elderly participants walked slower than their controls. According to Davis (2012), elderly people become slower in body and mind, and the results of this study confirm that simulated elderly participants walk slower and therefore take more time to complete the route. In contradiction to other studies with actual elderly people (Harris and Wolbers, 2014; Borst et al., 2009), this study showed that SPA had no influence on route efficiency. Besides, this study also showed no significant interaction effects between SPA and route complexity on wayfinding. This implies that route efficiency is not influenced by SPA but in all likelihood is the result of the level of cognitive impairments in elderly people.

However, this study showed that the aspects related to SPA had an effect on all physiological outcomes during wayfinding tasks. In contrast to another study (Abadi et al., 2010) about age differences during walking, this study showed that simulated elderly participants had higher heart rates and respiratory rates, and therefore consumed more energy in comparison to participants not wearing a suit during a wayfinding task. Consequently, simulated elderly people experience a wayfinding task physiological more challenging just as elderly people (Davis, 2012) which also might explain the decreased walking speed in simulated elderly participants. Therefore, hospitals should consider moving clinics that are often visited by elderly people nearby origin, like parking lots, bus stops or taxi pick-up areas, in order to make clinics more accessible by foot for elderly people.

The aim of this study was to understand the role of route complexity and physical ageing (by means of simulation) on wayfinding. The influence of physical ageing on wayfinding performance and physiological outcomes was examined by using gerontologic suits worn by young participants that simulated the physical limitations of elderly people in order to exclude cognitive limitations. This study showed no effects of ageing on route efficiency. Because other studies showed effects of ageing on route efficiency, it is more likely that cognitive limitations may play an important role in wayfinding performance. A replication of this study to compare real elderly people without impairments, real elderly with only physical or cognitive impairments, and real elderly with both physical and cognitive impairments is necessary to find evidence for the implication that cognitive limitations play a greater role in affecting wayfinding performance. Moreover, further research is necessary in order to understand the difference in wayfinding time and speed between young and simulated elderly people. For example whether elderly people make more errors or chose certain directions during the wayfinding task compared to young people. Gaining a greater understanding of the physical limitations of elderly people in hospital buildings in a wayfinding task is a valuable contribution to the science of built environments and the autonomy of elderly people.

Furthermore, participants had no hospital appointment and therefore no time-pressure for an appointment. It is expected that patients with real hospital appointments are more likely to feel stressed because of the risk of being late, to feel nervous for interaction with care providers, or to feel anxious and uncertain for bad news. Further research is necessary to examine whether the level of stress of patients with real hospital appointments actually influences wayfinding performance (i.e., getting lost and walking inefficiency and speed).

Finally, the findings showed that route complexity negatively influenced wayfinding performance in this particular hospital built environment. This study was conducted in the built environment of one hospital, which potentially had consequences on the results. In addition, each route was walked on average 12 times by various participants, which is a limited number. Nevertheless, we believe this study contributes to a better understanding of the influence of route complexity and physical ageing on wayfinding performance. Further studies are needed to determine whether results are generalizable to other hospital buildings. Understanding the influence of building complexity on wayfinding performance will facilitate the development of effective interventions in complex built environments.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We are grateful to the full cooperation of first year students, students of the honors program, and lecturers of the School of Facility Management at the Hanze University of Applied Sciences at Groningen, which all participated in this study. We are also grateful to the research group of Facility Management of the Hanze University of Applied Sciences, the research group Healthy Ageing, Allied Health Care and Nursing of the Hanze University of Applied Sciences, and the research group Health Pyschology of the University of Groningen for support and funding of the materials. We thank the Managing Director Facilities and Estates, Jan Bouwhuis, and the involved outpatient clinics of the University Medical Center of Groningen as well for their cooperation. This study was funded by the University Medical Center of Groningen, The Netherlands.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

