@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Work for sustainability: Case studies of Brazilian companies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Companies considered sustainable includes work-related aspects in the TBL framework.


                        
                        
                           
                           Deployment of the strategy does not lead to the full dissemination of sustainability.


                        
                        
                           
                           In the work design phase tasks are defined independently of the sustainability discussion.


                        
                        
                           
                           Changes in work are not explicitly considered during the introduction of sustainability policies.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Work design

Corporate sustainability

Ergonomics

Production engineering

Strategy

Operations

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The introduction of strategic corporate sustainability policies is expected to result in the improvement of several issues in companies. One of these issues is work, which should involve greater well-being for workers. Within the context of production engineering, this research connects sustainability and work-related issues, the latter seen in light of the discipline of ergonomics. Based on case studies conducted at four companies considered sustainability benchmarks, we examined how the introduction of the theme of sustainability has influenced work-related issues. The elements analyzed here were the corporate sustainability strategy, organizational practices for deploying the strategy, and the work design phase. The last element is the moment in which work is prescribed in the organization. The results show that, despite the announcement of the inclusion of changes in work, there is not any explicit evidence confirming that such changes are considered as a requirement for corporate sustainability projects.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The last few years have been characterized by the widespread inclusion of the theme of corporate sustainability. When a company declares its commitment to sustainability to the external community, the expectation is that it will introduce strategies and actions of a more systemic nature through improvements incorporated into its operation. In this context, the concerns of corporate social sustainability would include worker well-being, whose strategic priority would be on the same level as that of other economic, social and environmental aspects. However, evidence suggests that when sustainability strategies are deployed at the tactical and operational level, the systemic objective of the initial intention may end up being left behind. This paper, based on a PhD thesis, seeks to address three main research questions:
                        
                           –
                           What concepts related to sustainability are announced and introduced by organizations, and how are work-related issues (like work design, professional development and issues related to health and safety) included in the policies of corporate sustainability?

Are the organizational mechanisms used to deploy corporate sustainability able to fully disseminate sustainability policies within corporations?

In relation to work design, are tasks designed in compliance with explicit strategic sustainability policies?

These questions are essential for the confirmation of the thesis of this research, i.e., that albeit reportedly included, there is no explicit evidence that changes in work are taken into consideration as one of the key issues during the conception of sustainability policies, as one of the key issues. Work, defined by how different subjects are engaged in performing tasks deploying different actions, should be considered also during the implementation process of these policies, reinforcing the need to integrate work and production. For ergonomics, adapting tasks to human characteristics is the main issue.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

The theme of sustainability originates from the international discussion about the solution of humanity's major problems and is related to the concept of sustainable development. Concerns about the future of humanity are perceived not only by public opinion but also by large corporations, which have included corporate sustainability (CS) policies in their operations. Based on the Triple Bottom Line (TBL) concept proposed by Elkington (1997), a sustainable company is one that is concerned about dealing simultaneously with social, economic and environmental aspects. This view is the one adopted by the largest global initiatives that promote the inclusion of sustainability issues within organizations, such as the United Nations Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) or Global Compact (GC). In this context, work is one of the aspects highlighted in the introduction of corporate sustainability policies, specifically discussing actions of social sustainability within the organization. Work-related issues currently considered in Corporate Sustainability (CS) or Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) policies are: human rights linked to labor; employment and employment relationships; work conditions and social protection; social dialog between or among representatives of governments, employers; health and safety at work; and human development and training in the workplace (GRI, 2014; ISO, 2010). Work-related issues are introduced in CS policies because of an effective interest in workers, in increasing the organization's performance and improving the corporate image; hence, for the company to become sustainable means there is work (Bolis et al., 2014a) and, according to the sweet spot concept (Savitz and Weber, 2007), there are reciprocal benefits with the other dimensions of sustainability. Companies that are committed include corporate sustainability in their strategic policies, deploying it across the organization in order to modify its production and service processes. Based on knowledge of production engineering, the following subsections describe the steps that lead to a generic strategy (which may pertain to sustainability, as well as to other types of strategies such as quality, pricing, safety, etc.) to be introduced and concretized in production processes.

Corporate strategies denote how companies plan all their resources, particularly those of marketing, finance and production (but also those of other areas) to gain competitive advantages in the marketplace. Establishing a corporate strategy involves developing and implementing an action plan that will result in a long-term competitive advantage for the company's business operations (Henderson, 1989). In this context, companies should include some competitive priorities in their strategic choices so that they can continue competing in the market. Four of these priorities were identified in the 80s (Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984), i.e., low cost, high quality, fast delivery and flexibility (large product mix). Services were added as a new competitive priority, starting in the 90s (Vandermerwe, 1993). In the first decade of the new millennium, other new competitive advantages were identified. Jiménez and Céspedes (2001) and Davis et al. (2001), for example, identified the need for companies to offer environmentally friendly products or services focusing on environmental sustainability. Collier and Evans (2011) consider that sustainability which encompasses economic, environmental and social issues, is an organizational strategy, and that its broader scope may be a competitive priority (because it subsumes changes in organizational culture).

The corporate strategy gives rise to other functional strategies, which are created by each functional area of the organization to support the business strategy. According to Porter (1996), the success of a corporate strategy depends to a large extent on the alignment of efforts in the development of numerous activities in the functional sphere. The corporate strategy can be deployed to the operational level in all the functional areas of the organization through certain organizational mechanisms. Four main mechanisms for deployment were identified in the literature: acting through the organizational structure, through the organizational culture, through performance management, and through projects (Fig. 1
                        ).

Organizational structure is understood as the formalization of responsibilities, authorities, communications and decisions of the organizational units, designing, ordering, standardizing and coordinating the activities and the relationships of their hierarchical levels and their decisions (Rezende, 2008). Pursuant to the definition of the organizational structure, the responsibilities of each area and the interrelationships among them are established to achieve the business strategies. In the case of the theme of sustainability, for example, a department can be created specifically to handle this issue.

Organizational culture can be defined as the pattern of basic assumptions that a given group has invented, discovered or developed to learn to deal with its problems of external adaptation and internal integration (Schein, 1984). This culture can be influenced by different mechanisms, such as basic assumptions, shared values, beliefs, and norms of behavior. The corporate culture may depend on the external environment in which the company operates (Hofstede, 1980), or it can be created, cultivated and developed in-house, as in some cases described by Morgan (1986). Some authors, such as Johnson and Scholes (1999), identify close links between culture and strategy, while others (Bate, 1995) identify culture and strategy as similar concepts. Hofstede (1997) proposes that organizational culture and organizational practices are mutually dependent. Moreover, Schönborn (2010) shows that organizational culture can lead to corporate success, by addressing specific corporate responsibility conditions, namely, participative leadership, consideration of external stakeholders and employees.

Within the strategic process, performance management is responsible for planning, monitoring and evaluating performance in the organization, in order to align the work of all its employees with the organizational goals, so that these may be achieved. Performance management can be carried out using different approaches. The balanced scorecard (BSC) model developed by Kaplan and Norton (1992) is one of the models that seek to help managers achieve strategic alignment and develop achievable goals, objectives and organizational requirements. In addition to focusing on economic and financial aspects, the BSC also considers intangible assets (customers, learning and growth, and internal processes) that create value and competitive advantage for organizations, but are not economically measurable. To boost the effectiveness of the tool, the BSC is linked to the individual goals of each employee and to those of the work team, and hence, also to the reward system. Stretch targets can be an instrument for driving organizational changes effectively (Kaplan and Norton, 1992). Other performance management tools, such as action plans (Collis and Luecke, 2005), use a different approach.

The fourth organizational mechanism to deploy corporate strategy down to the operational level is through projects. Projects can be divided into two types: radical improvement projects and continuous improvement projects. The former are decided upon predominantly at the strategic level of the organization and consist in temporary activities carried out by a group of people aiming at a single outcome, usually involving large investments of financial and human resources, in order to bring about significant changes in the productive process (Carvalho and Rabechini, 2011; PMI, 2013). The second type of project is developed primarily at the operational level of the organization. Deriving from the philosophy of “Lean thinking,” the philosophy of continuous improvement, or “Kaizen,” it uses common sense, tools, checklists and efforts characterized by their low cost, in order to rapidly introduce incremental improvements in business processes (Imai, 1996). The key to the success of this type of project is teamwork and worker “proactiveness” in dealing with an emerging problem (Imai, 1996). Carvalho and Rabechini (2011) propose that sustainability should be considered an essential part of all the stages of the project, in terms of the resulting outputs (minimizing the future occurrence of negative economic, social and environmental impacts).

Once the strategy has been deployed in the operation through the aforementioned organizational mechanisms, changes in the operation are introduced in the work design phase (Fig. 1). A set of specifications of work activities that must be performed and that are related to the work assigned to each individual or each working group is defined in this phase (Davis et al., 2001). Elements such as times, methods and tasks are defined. As proposed mainly by activity-centered ergonomics, this phase is highly relevant in terms of its high impact on worker well-being and on organizational performance (Abrahão et al., 2009). In the work design phase, the real variability of work (i.e., activities) should be considered in the definition of tasks (Falzon, 2007; Guérin et al., 2001), and actions should be regulated according to the workers' competencies (Abrahão et al., 2009). In the context of corporate social sustainability, the work design phase could represent a key point for achieving corporate sustainability goals.

A case study approach was used to allow for the analysis of empirical projects (Yin, 1994) in which research and theory are part of the early or intermediate stages of development (Edmondson and McManus, 2007; Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007). Case studies enable one to explore situations in which the intervention that is being evaluated does not present a simple and clear set of outcomes (Yin, 1994) and to transform rich qualitative evidence into deductive research (Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007). The purpose of using this methodology is to gain an understanding of the processes and social interactions that develop in organizations, situated within a given historical context (Hartley, 1995).

Case studies were carried out in two main phases. The first phase enabled us to identify the perceptions of professionals in the areas of sustainability, engineering and human resources at ten multinational companies operating in Brazil, characterized for their active engagement in the UN initiative “Global Compact”. Because these were only the perceptions of professionals, which were not complemented by other evidence, the data collected generated only exploratory results. Starting from this information, the second phase focused on the development of a more in-depth case study. Based on the research needs and the opportunities encountered by the researchers, four companies were chosen that are references in the market for their corporate sustainability policies. The criteria for selecting these companies were as follows: (1) explicit disclosure of the inclusion of sustainability concepts into their practices (corporate sustainability reports and/or corporate websites), (2) use of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) guidelines, and (3) direct employment of more than 5000 people. The objective of the case study was to extract information about: (1) corporate sustainability strategies and their relationship with work-related issues; (2) organizational mechanisms used by the companies to deploy sustainability strategies in the organization; and (3) the inclusion of concerns regarding work-related issues in the work design phase. This information was garnered by means of at least three of the following four research activities: corporate websites and sustainability reports investigation; interviews with people responsible for the corporate areas of sustainability, engineering and HR; interviews with workers in the areas of sustainability, engineering and HR (or other areas that could provide information useful for this research) with low impact on the definition of the business strategy; and the study of specific and clearly defined cases of changes resulting from the introduction of sustainability projects. The four companies chosen for the study were:

CHE: A multinational company operating in the chemical industry. Its particularity is that it operates in continuous processes, requiring continuous control by highly trained internal teams. Apart from the work of managing and supporting these continuous processes, most of the other operating activities are outsourced to external companies that operate inside the company's physical installations.

CEL: A Brazilian company operating in the paper pulp (cellulose) sector and in sales of certified timber. Its characteristic is that it operates in the Amazon region, which makes its introduction of the theme of sustainability in its business practically mandatory. Its activities are outsourced mainly in the area of forest management and operational jobs.

CGS: A multinational company operating in the consumer goods sector. The particularity of this company is that its business strategy focuses on sustainability, so that its products incorporate concerns with this theme. Given this focus, the company seeks supply solutions that can accommodate this concern. For example, some of its raw materials come from the Amazon region, so the company seeks to include cooperatives and local producers in its business chain.

TRA: A multinational company operating in the transportation sector. Its characteristic is the predominance of technology and organization, which are vital factors for the company to continue operating in the market and facing its competitors. The company operates in an extensive supply chain, and uses parts from all over the world. For reasons of reliability, none of its production processes involve outsourced work.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The document analysis, interviews and visits to production sites provided information compiled and structured into three sections (strategy, mechanisms of deployment of the strategy down to operation, and work design). Next section offers individual descriptions of the specific cases of sustainability-related changes in processes.

All studied companies stated that the concept of sustainability is relevant to their strategies, although each one places a different priority on this issue. The company CHE stands out for making sustainability the theme that underpins its long-term growth. It states that its three strategic pillars of sustainability are focused on its operation, its product portfolio and its solutions for a more sustainable life for society. The company CEL does not allocate much space to its publicity about the subject, but the interviewees in top management positions are aware of the importance of sustainability, both to the company's role in society and to its long-term growth. The company CGS publicizes sustainability as one of the fundamental pillars and the essence of its business. CGS states that it is aware of the transformative power its products, concepts, and philosophy may have in the world, and that it always aims for the impact that will maximize benefits for society as a whole. The company TRA states that the challenge of sustainability is a reality that has been progressively incorporated into its business strategies, along with the recognition of the importance of the values – tangible and intangible – involved in sustainability. Analyzed companies are familiar with the concept of Triple Bottom Line (TBL), which is the preferred approach to endorse their commitment to the issue of sustainability in their annual reports. However, outside of the management environments, at the companies CEL and TRA, the term sustainability is used with a decidedly environmental bias. Also, those companies encourage the introduction of sustainability based on the sweet spot concept. Their expectation is that, in the future, sustainability will be an indispensable factor to continue operating in the market and that, today, it is an important ally to improve the company's performance (above all economic and financial) in the market and to gain greater visibility to attract market investments.

The inclusion of work-related issues in their corporate sustainability policies is confirmed. Work is described as a matter of priority, particularly in their sustainability reports. They share the belief that human value is the key to the company's success and growth. For example, CHE has developed a worker-related corporate social technology to establish a strategic differentiator in the market. The aspects the companies consider the most relevant are: development and career (particularly by means of education through work), improvement of working conditions (health and safety), construction of a motivating, transparent and participatory work environment, and the introduction of volunteering programs. Although work-related issues are formally considered a strategic priority (especially the recognition of the win–win relationship with other aspects of sustainability), when discussing social sustainability, the first issue the interviewees mentioned pertained to the company's actions aimed at improving the conditions of the communities in which they operate. The companies explicitly reported that caring for their workers is something that has been recognized by the market, irrespective of the theme of sustainability. According to the interviewees, upon introducing the theme of sustainability, no significant impact was perceived with respect to this aspect, and that the companies continue using their previous policies (considered excellent).

Each organizational environment described in the academic framework was analyzed separately:
                           
                              –
                              Departments involved in the theme of sustainability. In their internal organization, all the companies analyzed in the case studies had a department dedicated specifically to sustainability-related issues. These departments engage in the following four main activities: management of institutional relations by providing legal and political support to the company vis-à-vis the external community (participation in global initiatives such as GRI can be included in this activity); introduction and management of certifications and permits, particularly environmental ones; corporate environmental management; and strategic support of specific areas of the organization to ensure that sustainability-related issues are considered and improved. In general, these departments focus primarily on the introduction of environmental concerns and on managing institutional relationships with the environment external to the organization. The social aspect of sustainability is delegated to institutions or foundations, and these aspects pertain to actions directed toward the external community in which the company operates. With regard to work-related issues, the department of sustainability plays a merely supportive role to ensure these issues are improved by the proper departments (HR, H&S, etc.). The involvement of the latter departments in the discourse on sustainability is limited, and their activities are independent of the sustainability department, since they do not introduce actions other than the traditional ones.

Organizational culture. This is another organizational mechanism all the analyzed companies employ to disseminate the theme of sustainability within the organization. In general, all the companies seek to introduce a widespread philosophy in the organization through formal top-down mechanisms, which consist mainly of the organization's codes of conduct and strategic vision. Through their organizational culture, the companies endeavor to “align,” “guide” and “match” the workers' values with those of the company, as well as to increase their employees' accountability towards the organization's goals. The theme of sustainability is associated mainly with the introduction of environmental concerns aligned with the achievement of economic and financial benefits.

Performance Management. This organizational mechanism is used in a structured way by three of the four companies, and only one company has introduced the BSC. Attempts have been made to adapt performance management to the three pillars of sustainability. However, a predominance of aspects pertaining to environmental concerns was observed in the planning of sustainability initiatives. In performance management, apart from health and safety objectives, work-related issues are only addressed in organizational climate indicators.

Projects: Linked to performance management, the last relevant organizational mechanism for the introduction of sustainability issues within the company is represented by projects. At all the companies, but especially at CHE and TRA, change projects are introduced into the organization through two main types. The first is related to large projects involving significant economic investments. These projects are managed by top management and are usually subjected to a process of prioritization. The issue of sustainability is introduced in the evaluation of each project, considering not only economic and financial assessments but also a good number of environmental issues (e.g., renewable raw material, energy efficiency, water efficiency, greenhouse gases) and some people-related issues (mainly for improving safety and performance). If the improvement is associated specifically to the theme of sustainability, its focus is predominantly on the improvement of environmental aspects. The second type of project involves continuous improvements. Associated with lean production programs, these projects are characterized by low or zero economic investment, in addition to being proposed by any employee of the organization (with the largest number of implementations in the operational area). The organization considers it very positive to transfer to workers the responsibility for generating ideas and becoming owners of these ideas, because it encourages them to become more engaged. Improvement projects can have different targets (physical organization, continuous improvement, production reliability, etc.). In general, if the purpose of the introduction of improvements is associated with sustainability, the improvement pertains to environmental aspects. In both types of projects, sustainability is not seen from an environmental standpoint, but rather as necessary to meet aspects of compliance and process improvements. Sustainability helps companies comply with national and international regulations, enabling them to operate according to the market rules (e.g., by not using internationally prohibited materials), and to achieve a better financial performance.

Based mainly on our interviews in the areas of engineering and processes, we found that concern for the worker is a constant in every company, and that this aspect is under continuous improvement. This is the result of a process of improvement of company procedures introduced by departments such as Human Resources, Health and Safety (H&S), Medical, etc. Despite this perception, however, the case study revealed that sustainability policies did not lead to explicit changes in concern for workers in the work design phase. In other words, the theme of sustainability does not seem to have introduced additional elements that could engender improvements beyond the one that is already being developed in the organization. Work-related issues are still considered exclusively by the departments responsible for them (HR and H&S), in the specific work design procedures of each company. Two of the four companies have a specific area in charge of ergonomics within the H&S department, but the relationship of this area with the theme of sustainability is inconsequential.

Cases of process changes were found at all the companies, which, according to the interviewees, were aimed at improving corporate sustainability. Most of these cases involved improvements in economic sustainability. However, this research sought to focus on cases of changes that were also initially related significantly to environmental and/or work-related issues. This demarcation made it very difficult for the researchers to identify cases, and the eight cases described below (and in Table 1
                        ) were the most significant ones found in the four companies. The object of study of these cases was the analysis of the following:
                           
                              (1)
                              Installation of a new control room for continuous processes.

Technological upgrading of the reactors of a chemical process (to increase its efficiency through automation).

Treatment of inorganic wastewater with a mercury content exceeding the legal limit.

Introduction of the forest management process in an area of the Amazon rainforest (with logging performed according to international certifications and national legislation).

Update and change in the processes of an entire factory (pursuant to a change in the company's product strategy).

Inclusion of cooperatives in the supply chain (presented by the company as an action of sustainability for the development of the Amazon region and its communities).

Introduction of the “design for environment” program (introducing environmental concerns, which will be added to the 20 other variables already considered in the design of its products).

Introduction of a continuous improvement program in the area of packaging; including a waste reduction and process optimization.


                        Table 1 summarizes some information about each case. The company in which the change was introduced is reported in each case in the column “Company”. The types of project are indicated in the third column of Table 1. The case in which the type of project is “outsourcing” indicates a case developed in an outsourced company. The lasts columns of Table 1 describe the initial reason for each project, as stated by the company. In this column, the reasons are listed as economic (ECO), environmental (ENV), social work-related (SOC-wk) and other social reasons (SOC-oth), and the degree of importance of each reason in the decision phase of project implementation is indicated by the abbreviations “Main” (main reason), “Sign.” (significant reason), “Part.” (partially considered reason) and “No” (no influence).


                        Table 2
                         summarizes the main work-related issues related to the cases. The column “Motivators” describes the reasons for the inclusion of work-related issues in the context of sustainability, classifying them according to the findings reported by Bolis et al. (2014a). The main motivators are “Increase the organization's performance (IOP),” “Improve the corporate image (ICI)” and “Work for sustainability (WS).” The last motivator indicates how new work tasks are introduced in the organization to meet sustainability requirements, particularly environmental ones. The third column of Table 2 “Worker involvement” describes the role of workers in areas/processes to be changed pursuant to decisions about improvements in new areas/processes. In two cases worker involvement was nil (because the processes were new or outsourced). In two other cases worker involvement was passive (the workers were simply sources of valuable information). In addition, there were two cases of active involvement (i.e., the workers were included in decision-making about new changes, although in the case marked with an asterisk (*), worker involvement occurred in response to their explicit request to be involved). Lastly, there were two cases of participative involvement (in which workers took the initiative to bring about the changes). The fourth column of Table 2 “Work design” indicates if the standard process of work design in the company underwent changes in order to give worker well-being greater priority. No significant changes in work design were made in any of the cases (none). The process changes resulted in modifications in the work of employees. The lasts columns of Table 2 list outcomes of each case. Some of the outcomes were positive: (A) less physical effort (mainly as the result of updating processes that used outdated technology), (B) less stress and better management of contingencies (automation of many work phases and overall optimization of processes), (C) benefits in communication, (D) better use of physical spaces, and (F) increased worker income. However, there are also consequences that require further investigation: (G) greater psycho-cognitive effort (e.g., because of the ongoing concern of workers to introduce more sustainable solutions and because of the increasing number of processes to be controlled), and (H) new work activities (e.g., introduction of many forest management activities in company CEL, which did not exist in the traditional logging system).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The first question in this study sought to determine which sustainability concepts are announced and introduced in organizations and how work-related issues are inserted into the context of corporate sustainability. Corporations have been dedicating a lot of space to publicize the theme of sustainability (Bolis et al., 2014b) through their communication channels (corporate websites, sustainability reports, etc.) and through their participation in local and global events and initiatives (GRI, 2014; UNGC, 2013). This is visible in the involvement of senior management and, in many cases; the main sponsors are company presidents. Terms such as corporate sustainability, corporate social responsibility, sustainable development, and the generic term “sustainability” appear frequently in the analyzed companies, although they not seem to have specific meanings and, in many cases, are used interchangeably. Although this terminology is not aligned with the literature, according to Lozano (2012), organizations are aware of their role in the introduction of issues related to sustainable development within their sphere of operation. The concept of TBL announced by the organizations always includes worker-related information. It is believed that concern for the worker can greatly benefit companies and society, which is consistent with the concept of sweet spot (Savitz and Weber, 2007). Our proposed answer to the first research question is: Companies that are considered benchmarks in sustainability (according to criteria from international sustainability initiatives such as GRI or GC) have an explicit endorsement of the TBL - which includes work-related aspects - in their corporate sustainability strategies.
                  

The second research question was if the organizational mechanisms employed to disseminate sustainability within the company are able to fully disseminate sustainability policies throughout the organization. The companies analyzed in the case studies created departments to act as the focal point of sustainability within the organization. The evidence collected in the analysis related to the activities of sustainability departments indicate that the environmental aspect predominates. These departments have the authority to establish environmental objectives and to manage them to ensure compliance. As for the other non-environmental sustainability objectives, the role of these departments is solely to support these objectives and raise awareness. This limited role of the sustainability department may be detrimental to the introduction of all the dimensions of sustainability with the same level of priority within the organization. In addition, as also discussed by Gibson (2006), by dividing the responsibility for the economical, social and environmental pillars among different areas, there is a risk that the interdependence between the pillars of sustainability will be disregarded. This should be considered as one of the main results of this research and reflects the fact that the departments address its correspondent sustainability issue, without integrating with each other in a systemic effort. The analyzed companies all use the organizational culture as a mechanism to promote sustainability concepts internally. However, due to lack of information, it was not possible to confirm if all the dimensions of sustainability are disseminated in their entirety through this mechanism. Focusing on work-related issues, what can be questioned is the purpose of the organizational culture within the context of sustainability. This organizational mechanism can be an excellent means to disseminate the theme of sustainability in a systematic and integrated way. However, when a top-down way is used to announce explicitly that there are ethical and moral foundations that guide the practice of the members, that the corporate culture is introduced so that workers can align their interests with those of the company, or that the corporate culture trains individuals to be agents of change, doubts may arise about the actual alignment between what is released in the company and the real purpose of the organizational culture. As Holmqvist (2009) and Béthoux et al. (2007) argued, the company's objective may be more directed towards achieving social control in the organization and protecting the company's assets than to benefiting its workers. In the process of performance management, the analyzed companies have made attempts to include sustainability considering all its dimensions, based on the TBL concept. However, we perceived a considerable gap between the detailing of environmental objectives and the breakdown of social goals (summarized in health and safety indicators and in the organizational climate indicator). In addition, based on the interviews, we noted the difficulties the companies encountered in integrating the dimensions of sustainability in their performance management. For example, eco-efficiency goals do not seem to be connected in any way to social goals such as the organizational climate. Upon discussing the projects, the evidence collected from the interviews indicates that the prevailing (and virtually only) motivation for the projects is the economic and financial aspect. When the improvement is associated with the term “sustainability,” it is geared predominantly to environmental improvements. The evaluation and prioritization of the implementation of these projects is the result of the analysis of some aspects, the main ones being economic, environmental (with various indicators) and workplace safety. Other than this last aspect, work-related issues in the context of sustainability are not discussed when proposing and evaluating a project. According to Young and Thyil (2009), when sustainability initiatives are introduced, the emphasis seems to be on the environmental and financial domains, with less importance given to employee relations. Even Lozano (2012), who analyzed different tools, approaches and sustainability volunteering initiatives, noted concerns focused predominantly on the environmental domain. The answer to the second research question can thus be summarized as follows: Deployment of the strategy does not lead to the full dissemination of all the issues associated with sustainability (such as work) throughout the organization, specially those related to work.

With respect to the third research question, we must begin by discussing two important points: sustainability policies gave rise to changes in workers' tasks and corporate sustainability cannot exist without work. The existence of sustainability is a human construct that shapes our way of reasoning about how we do business. This is why it should be considered not only as a wish, but also as a result of the work of different people. The first point can be considered an obvious consequence, since changes in tasks may result from any new business strategy (quality improvements, cost reductions, etc.). In some cases of more sustainable process changes, a transition was found from tasks involving physical effort to tasks involving a greater psycho-cognitive effort, while others were characterized by the introduction of additional tasks in routine work, another (the case of members of cooperatives) caused a change in the routine of daily life, and in general, all the companies introduced new professional positions, or adapted existing ones, specifically to manage the theme. This first point is extremely important, because companies must understand that any change in sustainability, whether economic or environmental, also has effects on work tasks. This effect should be properly considered so that, when planning changes, economic or environmental improvements are integrated with social improvements, and more specifically, with work-related issues. The second point may also could be obvious: sustainability would not exist without the work of people. There are many types of work that create sustainability: the work of people in business leadership, who must be committed and engaged in order to make the strategic decision to introduce the theme of sustainability in the organization; the work of the people in the sustainability departments, who coordinate the efforts of all the units; the work of people who manage projects and products, enabling the strategic policies to be transformed into actions; and the operational work of the people who perform the daily actions of sustainability and who can also be a valuable source of suggestions for sustainability improvements. This point is also extremely important, because the worker's role in the introduction of sustainability within the company can be encouraged by giving him the importance he deserves. A more engaged worker can promote new actions of sustainability even more strongly for the company and for society. As Wehrmeyer (1996) stated, a business can move toward sustainable industrial development only through the efforts, performance and personal commitment of every employee within the organization.

Although these two assumptions were found in the companies, no additional improvements or analyses related to work were found relating sustainability projects and other projects, and also in projects before and after concerns about sustainability in the companies intensified. This concern is partial and linked to the traditional business procedures. This finding was confirmed by the eight cases of process changes in which worker participation was proactive only in the case of continuous improvement projects, where workers' proactive suggestions are naturally included and considered valuable in the design of new processes (Imai, 1996). The empowerment of any person involved in the process of redefining work design turns out to be the primary means for including improvements in work-related issues aimed at greater sustainability. Although there is literature confirming that employees are the key to long-term sustainable operations, since they are one of the primary and vital stakeholders in corporate profits (Young and Thyil, 2009), in practice companies do not give them a voice to operationalize this contribution. The answer to the third research question can be summarized as follows: In the work design phase, tasks are defined independently of the discussion about sustainability, and concern for worker well-being is not introduced explicitly.
                  

The answers to the research questions suggest that sustainability strategies were not introduced explicitly to change the task itself, but to shift production more broadly toward an overall policy of sustainability (above all linked to economic, financial and environmental improvements). These process changes may have led to improvements in workers' activities. However, these improvements were not considered during planning, but were simply a consequence. The concept of sustainability should be introduced in an integrated and interdependent way (Gibson, 2006), unlike what was observed here. These considerations confirm the initial thesis of this research: Although changes in work are reportedly included, there is no explicit evidence that they are considered during the introduction of sustainability policies.
                  


                     Norman and Macdonald (2004) and Tullberg (2012) argue that the theme of sustainability linked to work should not be restricted to indicators of global initiatives. The issue of sustainability brings new challenges. The discussion must be extended to include a deeper reflection about the role of work in this theme. It is believed that the premises of sustainability originate from a value-oriented rationality (Bolis et al., 2014c), which go beyond the functional use of resources to increase the economic and financial performance of organizations. In this context, there are academic contributions that link ergonomics to sustainability (Haslam and Waterson, 2013) and that individuate the presence of values that can be shared between the two disciplines (Lange-Morales et al., 2014). To enable this relationship, ergonomics needs to break away from the current positivist, empiricist philosophy (Dekker et al., 2013), enabling a more systemic approach to the design of sustainable work systems (Docherty et al., 2009; Zink, 2014). In particular, based on the findings of this research, the boundaries of ergonomics must be extended in order to augment its influence in organizations. Ergonomists should participate in the process of defining strategic policies of corporate sustainability, or at least question their results within the organization. The work design phase plays a key role in building worker well-being within organizations (Abrahão et al., 2009; Falzon, 2007; Guérin et al., 2001). Helping organizations to consider this phase starting from corporate sustainability policies could lead to immense benefits and positive impulses towards the action and role of ergonomics within organizations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The purpose of this study was to investigate companies engaged in sustainability in order to understand how work-related issues like work design, professional development and questions related to health and safety are considered in the context of corporate sustainability policies. This research revealed some weaknesses that will hopefully be overcome in the future so that organizations can align their stated intentions with their practices. Another contribution of this research is the instigation to understand work's central role in order to achieve production goals and to actually implement sustainability policies.

It is people and their work that create services and products, and their performance is crucial to the performance of organizations. To refrain from considering people in the effective introduction of sustainability can pose a risk. We believe that the engagement of people is the best way for organizations to continue to be sustainable over time, in terms of their implemented solutions and economic success in the market. But how to guarantee engagement is an important question and must be analyzed specially in relationship to empowerment policies as well as organizational changes in order to provide conditions enrich professional paths and development and to favor emancipation of people (Dejours, 2009).

One of the limitations of research in the field of sustainability based on perceptions is the possible bias of respondents in seeking politically correct answers that do not necessarily portray the reality of the company. To try to reduce this effect, the data were collected so as to triangulate perspectives of different points of view, as well as published data and data on concrete and specific projects. Another limitation was the great difficulty the researchers encountered in obtaining access to information and to the people in the organizations. This difficulty limited the number of analyzed companies, the access to interview more departments within the organizations, accessibility to workers in the operational area, and accessibility to workers of outsourced companies.

Future studies are needed in this field. For instance, researchers are invited to explore further what motivates firms to implement sustainability initiatives and how companies can effectively introduce all work-related issues in their daily practices. It would be particularly relevant to study the role of ergonomics in greater depth. Today this discipline is predominantly active at the local level of organizations, far removed from the sphere of action of sustainability. It would be interesting to create possibilities for the introduction of activity-centered ergonomics, psychodynamic of work and macroergonomics' actions at the strategic level of organizations in order to fully include work-related issues in the company's sustainability practices.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors gratefully acknowledge the Brazilian research funding agencies FAPESP (Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo – Proj. 2011/13909-1) and CAPES (Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior) for its financial support of this work.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

