@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Investigations into the skills of modern and traditional train driving

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Modern train driving has redefined the dynamic in the driver-train co-agency.


                        
                        
                           
                           Target tracking activities differ in modern and traditional train driving.


                        
                        
                           
                           Modern train driving skill equates to how well enhanced displays are pursued.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Train driver performance

Cognitive engineering

Models of human performance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Rail operations are housed inside a complex and extremely dynamic system where work is distributed in time and space. The train driver has traditionally relied on their own decisions, plans, and actions to navigate the rail environment, but the use of modern driver systems that force how these activities are regulated has altered this dynamic. This paper reports the findings of a study that set out to investigate the skills of modern (enhanced display-based) and traditional (real world) train driving. Data were collected from a variety of UK domain experts (n = 45) using an innovative methodology that converged multiple techniques for knowledge elicitation and analysis. The findings are represented in a model of dynamic train control and discussed according to the specific features and nature of tracking skill in the rail domain. The utility of the model is demonstrated through work of its application to the design of a train simulator and research tool for systematic study of rail human factor issues.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The natural train-driving environment is complex, unpredictable, and highly dynamic. Collision avoidance in this type of environment is influenced by a range of human factors issues and information processing limitations associated with sustaining attention for extended periods (Wickens and Carswell, 2007). Traditional train navigation requires the driver to process information sources held outside the cab (e.g., signals, speeds, landmarks) and apply a detailed body of route knowledge (acquired from experience). This allows the driver to connect their location with the upcoming destinations and optimise speed-error. In the traditional driver-cab, basic indicators such as a speedometer and braking gauges are used to fathom train state and carry out decision-making. Although train drivers only control the speed and acceleration of the train, train driving cognition is strategic, purposive (i.e., goal-directed), and quasi-mathematical (i.e., underpinned by mental time-distance estimations) (Branton, 1979). Whilst rail industries the world over still employ legacy systems dating back to the mid-20th century (including those in ‘developed’ countries), the last two decades have bore witness to a rapid growth in railway technology, and whilst train driving fundamentally remains unidirectional, emerging technologies are beginning to alter how train drivers correct speed-error, derive information, and correspond with their environment.

Today, train technologies are designed around signal awareness (e.g., Automatic Warning System; McLeod et al., 2005), train protection (e.g., Train Protection Warning System; Fenner, 2002) and ‘supervisory’ control (e.g., Automatic Train Protection; Simpson, 1994). These systems and approaches have introduced increasing layers of autonomous control in the train. For example, the Automatic Train Protection system calculates braking distances and applies automatic brake applications if the train is likely to violate movement authority (i.e., line speeds and stop signals). In the more advanced rail networks, drivers use enhanced information displays to operate. These displays, held in the driver–cab interface, advise train operation by previewing the route and speed trajectories (e.g., Einhorn et al., 2005; Howlett and Pudney, 2000; Kitto and Groves, 2011). Some of these technologies, such as Energymeiser (pictured Fig. 1
                     a) aim to inform decision-making. In this system, a speed trajectory is calculated based on upcoming speeds, changes to the terrain, expected fuel use, and estimated arrival times. However, control is not forced or overridden by the system, and the driver is effectively left to operate using traditional driving principles, but under the guidance of a display that presents “what-if” scenarios. Thus, the driver may elect to follow the optimal trajectory (depicted horizontally) and influence how conservatively it is calculated (using soft-keys to increase or decrease estimated arrival times), and whilst some movement authority is shown (i.e., line speeds), signals are still located outside the cab.

Other systems migrate the signalling and movement authorities into the cab, and adopt a driver-train dynamic that relegates more control to the machine. For example, the European Train Control System (ETCS, pictured in Fig. 1b) previews the route but also parameterises (i.e., enforces) how train movement is to be regulated by the human. Upcoming route features are displayed in a planning area along with a feature that instructs the time to brake, and the system applies automatic throttle/braking if speed deviates from these prescribed limits (CENELEC, 2005). In ETCS, the speed trajectory is also displayed around the outside (i.e., perimeter) of the speedometer. These are all important distinctions as the resulting driver-train dynamic operates within an observable margin that has an upper (max) and lower (min) boundary, which the needle of the speedometer should be kept within at all times. Thus, train driving is underpinned by a system that monitors what the train driver does and if system parameters are violated, driver control is overridden to return speed within the predefined boundaries. This type of system does not aim to cater for “what-if” type decision-making, but rather, aims to instruct and enforce a scripted type of control. This driver-train dynamic is defined here as the ‘modern’ train-driving task, where an in-cab authority enforces how train movement and speed is regulated. In the case of the ETCS system, these are displayed to the driver with an enhanced information interface displaying a dynamic speed trajectory. Note that both the Energymeiser and ETCS systems are used in commercial intercity passenger and freight operations at the time of writing this paper.

Clearly, there are immediate and observable differences between Fig. 1a and b. For example, Energymeiser is horizontally oriented, whereas the ETCS system adopts a vertical orientation (i.e., towards direction of travel). However, irrespective of the similarities and differences, both of these displays show that rail technology is fundamentally evolving along the lines of augmented reality. This is where specific domain features from the natural rail environment are being abstracted into the cab. One direction leading on from this is to better support the traditional driving task (à la Energymeiser), and the other, to hand one or more components of the task over to a machine authority (à la ETCS). Suffice it to say, the growth in technology has adjusted the task- and skill-based needs of the modern train driver, and engendered new models of task representation aiming to extend the knowledge base. These models can be divided broadly into situation- and skill-based categories. Situational models typically extend Endsley's (1995) general model of situation awareness to depict the factors and processes converging around the driver, and provide a holistic snapshot of the system at any one time (e.g., Luther et al., 2007; McLeod et al., 2005; Roth and Multer, 2009). Skill-based models describe the train driving process by emphasising the human capabilities of the operator, and use cyclical feed-back/feed-forward processing loops with roots in control engineering (e.g., Hamilton and Clarke, 2005). Both types of model are extremely useful for conceptualising the process, illustrating the nature of the task, and showing performance constraints. However, there are a number of gaps in the current corpus of train driving performance literature that warrant further research.

First, whilst studies have explored the human-train dynamics of situation awareness and driving skill in the traditional task, few have profiled how relatively complex, dynamic, and opaque the task actually is. These features form the theoretical underpinning for simulation design for operational task environments, and identifying them would better specify the development of full-task ecological research tools such as rail simulators, or part-task simulations of the train driving task, such as scaled worlds, and microworlds (Brehmer and Dörner, 1993; Cañas and Waern, 2005). Second, even fewer studies have extended their research of the human-train dynamic to the modern driving context. While some work has speculated over the potential impact of the modern task, explicit investigation of the skill- or situation-based aspects of train driving when speed is enforced and parameterised by enhanced information displays (e.g., like ETCS) has yet to be undertaken. Hamilton and Clarke (2005) described a short study that used behaviour modelling to explore this type of driving, but it was based on very early data. The main focus in this work was also on explanatory concepts (e.g., memory stores), not on examining the similarities or difference between driving in the traditional and modern contexts. Lastly, train driving performance models have been applied in a variety of settings, for example to predict the time and workload implications of different operating conditions (Hamilton and Clarke, 2005), or to evaluate performance in specific cultural contexts (Sani and Dawal, 2010). However, few have modelled performance to aid with the design and development of intelligent technologies based on specific skill (e.g., enhanced information displays). Taken together, these aims illustrate a general need to explore modern driving, and to develop a substantive train performance model that captures the different driving tasks, to meet the needs of wider communities of interest and practice (e.g., simulation development, display design).

The main objective of this research was to explore how traditional train driving skill and dynamic was affected by technological advancements in the rail system. The study had three main aims:
                           
                              1)
                              To establish the complex, dynamic, and opaque features in train driving;

To distinguish train driving when it is undertaken traditionally from when it is performed with systems/displays that parameterise (i.e., enforce) how control is regulated; and

To develop a model of train driving performance that broadly captures traditional and modern performance, for further thinking and research.

@&#METHOD@&#

Train driving expertise is tacit and intuitive (Branton, 1979). Thus, the study required a design that could unfurl and extract knowledge from humans in environments where the changing conditions, event densities, and performance pressures informed very specific motor skills and problem solving strategies (Cooke, 1994; Klein et al., 1989). In this study, data were collected using a novel method that converged observations and interviews from three frameworks for knowledge elicitation. These were Cognitive Work Analysis (CWA, Rasmussen et al., 1994; Vicente, 1999), Applied Cognitive Task Analysis (ACTA, Militello and Hutton, 1998), and Ground Theory (Glaser and Strauss, 1967). The CWA technique was used to explore the domain, its tasks, strategies, and socio-organisational structure, whilst ACTA was used to decompose work activities and provide information about task cognition. Grounded Theory was used to analyse the collected data, and draw on deductive categories from the simulation design field (i.e., complexity, dynamism, opacity) (Brehmer and Dörner, 1993). This explored the interactions between different rail elements, and examined the constraints, features, goals, and properties of the various functions, so that challenging aspects of the task could be generated thematically. Whilst the individual utility of these methods is widely available in the literature, the utility and precedence for converging these type of methods has also been demonstrated (e.g., Chalmers et al., 2002; Neerincx and Griffioen, 1996).

Another methodological aim was for the data to be harnessed in a way that would be easily understood and used by substantive communities (of interest and practice). This is a key tenet of effective knowledge elicitation frameworks (Crandall et al., 2006), thus a number of data visualisation techniques were used over the course of the analysis. These were: the (1) task diagram (from ACTA); (2) the abstraction-decomposition space (from CWA); and (3) the concept mapping approach (Cañas et al., 2003). The task diagram represented 3-to-6 discrete steps in the train-driving task, as defined by participants during interviews. The abstraction-decomposition space was a two-dimensional matrix that separated the strands of train driving into subtasks. It then identified the means-ends relationships of these subtasks (i.e., why – what – how) against the decomposed work domain (i.e., system – function – task – activity – tool/information). The concept mapping approach was used to identify the inter- and intra-relationships between the tasks and subtasks in the abstraction hierarchy. Lastly, a train performance model was developed iteratively by triangulating all of the data collected in the study design. Fig. 2
                         illustrates the overall methodology that was used in the study, and how the various frameworks, data collection, analysis, and visualisation methods were converged and linked together.

Early interviews with domain experts, signallers,
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           Those who interact with the train driver during driving, set signals, and/or control train movements are also referred to as dispatchers and controllers in different states and in different countries.
                         dispatchers (i.e., platform attendants), and guards (i.e., on-board passenger service attendants) were used to understand the task and select probes for train driver interviews. Interview sessions with train drivers typically lasted 90 min, and were coordinated in a dynamic two-part process: (1) participants were asked to describe their routine driving task and break it into 3 to 6 steps; (2) participants were then presented with a number of driving scenarios and audited for their actions, assessments, and knowledge of demands. The routine driving task was used to establish a hand-drawn task diagram and basic probes were used to direct the scenarios and extract knowledge in the rest of the interview (e.g., Big Picture, Noticing, Improvising, Self-Monitoring, Knowledge, Goals, Aiding).

Train driving was also observed via cab rides in the live environment and in train simulators. Safety passes were required to gain cab entry and granted following a mandatory briefing of safe in-cab conduct. During the cab ride, participants were asked to: (1) comment on the features of their environment; (2) reason their actions; (3) describe the functions and controls on their interface; and (4) provide a real-time driving commentary. Lastly, digital footage (obtained during phase I) showing the driver POV were observed in addition to the footage recorded during the cab rides. Domain experts were consulted at the end of the process as a means of qualitatively validating the data, and to ensure the reliability of the coding and analytical process (e.g., Sauer et al., 2000). Data were captured using digital photography, audio recording equipment and hand written notes. Data in the form of industry documentation were also obtained and included training media, driving rosters, and route diagrams.

All of the collected data types were examined and organised according to the qualitative taxonomies shown in Fig. 2. Task diagrams were reviewed and consolidated into a single diagram, and a demands table was assembled and populated. This was used to tag and identify the basic human factors relevant to each scenario type. For example, a signal anomaly scenario included: sustaining attention (for signal aspect); monitoring (for current train speed); recalling track knowledge (for signal bearing); recalling track knowledge (for navigation); decision-making (for route verification); recognition (of failure mode); reaction time (for brake application); and so on. Driving scenarios were refined with concept maps and coded with the inter- and intra-relationships between the tasks and subtasks. For example a signal reversion concept map included detect, identify, understand, develop plan, implement plan, and so on. Data were populated, examined and visualised into an abstraction-decomposition space to show consecutive why-what-how relationships against the system, function, task, and activities. This process separated the strands of train driving into subtasks, allowing very large and complex data to be organised, represented, and analysed more easily. Study data were also tagged and categorised in a deductive thematic framework with coding units organised under three predefined categories (dynamism, complexity, and opacity). The data reported in this study were systematically collected and analysed by a single individual (the author). The findings from each of the taxonomies were triangulated and crosschecked to derive a basic train-driving model of skilled performance.

The study was advertised in rail organisations across the UK. Data were collected from participants recruited from five passenger and freight organisations, and at the European Rail Traffic Management System training centre in Wales. This train centre was trialling modern train driving operations using the ETCS display, and undertaking train driver conversion training with simulators. Signalling data were collected on location from 5 signal boxes (2 Panel-box, 3 Lever Arch). In total, forty-five participants were interviewed. The age of the sample ranged from 26 to 60 years (M = 39.5, SD = 7.9) and 2% were female (n = 1). The train driver demographic (19 participants) was most relevant to the study, and had over 5 years driving experience (M = 9.3, SD = 6.1). A total of 13 cab rides exceeding 35 h were performed. These were undertaken in 5 passenger trains (urban, regional) and 3 freight locomotives (intermodal), and included 8 full-cab simulator sessions.

The human ethics and research committee at the University of Sheffield approved the research in this study. Participation was voluntary, study briefings were provided, and written consent was obtained. For live fieldwork, requests for dialogue were granted before work activities began, and cleared through attending authorities. A Driver Safety Manager accompanied the researcher and driver in all cab rides. Personal details (e.g., job histories) were sought but participants were not (intentionally) pressured to provide them. Participants were informed that they were not required to answer questions that they felt uncomfortable discussing, and sensitive or upsetting topics (e.g., fatalities) were avoided.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results section will initially summarise the outcomes of the task analysis and work domain analysis, using the task diagram and sample data from the abstraction-decomposition space. It will then draw on the thematic analysis and repack these data into a cohesive conceptual model of explanation, developed iteratively over the course of analysis. This will be followed by a discussion of three key themes that emerged out of the findings. The paper will conclude with directions for future work, including a description of work that has utilised the model.

Findings from the task diagram revealed five steps in the driving process. Fig. 3
                         consolidates these in a single diagram using ACTA conventions. The first two were to establish the current location and train state, the third to monitor the external environment, the fourth to anticipate future requirement, and fifth, to control the speed and/or acceleration of the train. Although these steps were depicted in a linear pathway, the first three were found to occur as a dynamic bi-directional process. This enabled anticipation and prediction of future states, and informed subsequent train control. These five steps were common to the traditional and modern driving tasks. However, in modern driving, participants downgraded the need to monitor the environment and anticipate future requirement, the former from a loss of external signalling, and the latter, from the way that the movement was parameterised and instructed. This has been conceptualised into Fig. 3 as a shrinking of requirement in steps 3 and 4.

The results of the analyses in the abstraction-decomposition space extend the differences between modern and traditional driving shown in the task diagram. At the system and function levels, the purpose of train driving fell into two main categories: to (1) provide efficient passenger and freight services, which was safety and performance-driven, and to (2) maintain the network, which was performance driven only. At the task level, train driving occupied several categories associated with management (e.g., train movement, train and infrastructure failures, delays and disruptions). The functions were abstract (e.g., traction operation, anticipate future requirement), generalised (e.g., monitor infrastructure condition, determine visibility, monitor AWS), and physical (e.g., speed error correction, running brake test, reset AWS alarm). The work activities in these tasks were also functional (e.g., maintain driving policies), abstract (e.g., apply defensive driving policy, implement safety measures), generalised (e.g., verify route offering, monitor train progress), and physical (e.g., check time, log event). Similarly, each of these functions relied on tools or information to inform task management (e.g., code of practice, speedometer, trackside signals). Fig. 4
                         exemplifies two of the pathways in the abstraction-decomposition space generated for (a) traditional driving and (b) modern driving in the managing train movement task category.

In the traditional task (Fig. 4a), traction operation was defined an abstract function of managing train movement. Whilst this was generalised to monitoring movement authority and determining railhead conditions, it manifested as speed error correction. The process was dependent on train speed and signal aspect checking activities, facilitated by the speedometer and trackside signals. A second abstract function of managing train movements was anticipating future requirement, facilitated by route verification activities reliant on route knowledge. The purpose at the system and function levels was to provide efficient services and safe operations, maintained by driving policies through a code of practice and safe working. In the modern task (Fig. 4b) movement authority was monitored and speed-error was corrected, but this occurred via abstract tracking activities in the speed trajectory of the enhanced display. A second abstract function was to verify upcoming features against the information in the display (held in the planning area) and check route expectations, again from display-based information (held in the text message area). Unsurprisingly, the differences in the two pathways shown in Fig. 4 emphasised more in-cab monitoring activities in the modern task, against the external monitoring and searching activities in the traditional task. They also extended the findings from the task diagram, and showed a focus on activities oriented to verifying upcoming features over anticipating changes. Thus, consultation with the display system and tools in the display, featured very heavily as a generalised and physical function in modern train driving.

The findings of the task analyses, work analyses, and deductive thematic analyses, were used to develop a multi-task model of dynamic train control (pictured in Fig. 5
                        ). As depicted in the model, the data elicited were conceptualised in the tradition of closed-loop feedback (i.e. cyclical processes), much like in other train performance models (e.g., Hamilton and Clarke, 2005; McLeod et al., 2005; Roth and Multer, 2009). However, the model was also framed using principles from the joint cognitive systems approach (Woods and Hollnagel, 2006), to illustrate how components of human action in the two tasks were continuous and tied together.

In the traditional task, the driver-train dynamic relied exclusively on ‘out-the-window’ perception to regulate movement. Information cues were gathered as a part of driver route knowledge (e.g., route profile, movement authority), and then applied to the conditions as part of train handling expertise (e.g., railhead conditions). These processes were informed by perceptual and haptic response. Thus, the visibility, auditory feedback, drag and coupling forces around the train, allowed the driver to gauge movement authority and regulate control. The overall driver-train dynamic in the traditional task conformed to real-world target tracking. In this dynamic, the driver-train system relied on specific knowledge of the cargo (e.g., freight type, passenger volumes), temporary notices (i.e., changes to lines speeds or the route), and the rulebook (i.e., safe working), in order to aggregate and inform their driving strategies. Taken together, this knowledge enabled the driver to optimally manage the dynamic train control process depicted in the task diagram (Fig. 3). This aspect of dynamic control was reiterated and extended into the model (Fig. 5) as a fluid, bi-directional process. Thus, in the traditional driver-train dynamic, the entire process was regulated based on transparent train state indication, but informed largely by elements that were very opaque to the observer.

In the modern task, signal and speed based instruction was shown inside the cab. Upcoming route features were also previewed inside the train, rendering ‘out-the-window’ perception more a requirement for threat or error detection. The speed trajectory accounted for changes in the environment, and was typically pre-programmed with aggregates of driving strategy. Thus any speed deviations were corrected by an automated brake application. In the modern driver-train dynamic, the task relied almost entirely on display-based ‘pursuit’ tracking to regulate movement. Thus, while the driver effectively tracked the changing authorities on the display, train control was maintained or optimised based on the verisimilitude of the tracking with the anticipated feedback. The way driving was optimised and maintained was pre-planned through heuristics, so if feedback was anticipated, dynamic train control would be maintained, but if not, speed would be manipulated to optimise the task. The multi-task model illustrates the differences in the way the driver corresponded with the train and the external environment in the two tasks.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The principles of dynamic train control found in the study were generally consistent with situation awareness (Endsley, 1995). The multi-task model of dynamic train control that emerged from the findings was a front-end form for the underlying complexity in the traditional and modern driving tasks. It was also a pragmatic representation of the underlying theory relevant to the task, and the model conveyed the relative dynamism, complexity, and opacity in the feed-forward and feedback processes of the domain. As with all qualitatively derived models in the substantive literature, it is important to note that the lack of physical form and structure limited its power as a complete model of train driving, though the purpose of modelling the tasks in this study was to illustrate functionality and performance, not structure or internal processes. The next section will extend the results by discussing three key themes that emerged from the findings. These will draw on the model (Fig. 5) to identify the nature of traditional and modern train driving from the perspectives of (1) the specific features in the task, and the (2) way that the processes are engineered cognitively. They will also draw on the findings to (3) speculate how skill may be evolving as a consequence of the ‘modern’ driver-train dynamic.

Train-driving complexity was defined by goals of time-accuracy, comfort and effective speed regulation. These goals were common to the modern and traditional tasks. They were coupled together very closely and required trade-offs if punctuality, energy efficiency, ride quality and overall safety were to be optimised. The task was also extremely dynamic and trains could move too fast or too slow very easily. Thus, the task incorporated an autonomously driven process on two dimensions: first, the driver only controlled the throttle (i.e., acceleration-braking of the train), not the speed itself; and second, there was a performance requirement for service delivery imposed at a system level (usually time-based). Whilst the skills in modern and traditional train driving were both opaque, the nature of this opacity was found to differ between the two tasks.

In traditional driving, movement authority was sought in the external environment but not always readily observable (i.e., hidden from immediate view). The prevalence of rail curvature and viewing obstacles (e.g., overhead bridges, trackside vegetation) in UK rail was frequently used to characterise the task. As shown in Branton's research (1979), this lack of transparency engendered a skill for throttle regulation (inferred from train handling experience) and quasi-mathematic computation (inferred from route knowledge), based on the anticipation of future requirements. In comparison, modern train driving increased the transparency of movement authority, but replaced the anticipation of future requirements with processes more abstractly aligned with confirmation and expectation of upcoming events. Whilst drivers indicated they were performing anticipatory behaviours, this was related to changes in the display, suggesting that the opacity in the external environment was actually transferred to the cab. Thus, in the modern mode, drivers were verifying their expectation of upcoming events but essentially, driving to the display.

The findings in this study indicated that dynamic train control was conducted in a continuous stream of two time spheres based on where the driver was (establish current state; location) and where they needed to be (monitor environment; anticipate future requirement). This was encapsulated in a process of dynamic train control. These findings were interpreted into the model using principles of target tracking in human performance engineering psychology. Traditional train driving operated in the analogy of real-world target tracking, and essentially required the driver to keep train speed within prescribed limits by manipulating its acceleration. As shown in the model (see Fig. 5), this was achieved using standard train state features (e.g., speedometer, brake pressure gauges) and overt speed-error correction against movement authority perceived externally (signals, speeds). Thus, the driver ‘tracked’ the speeds in the external environment, accounted for the driving conditions, anticipated future events, and adjusted the throttle/brake to correct the speed of the train.

In modern train driving, the driver followed a dynamic in-cab authority that parameterised throttle changes independently of the train itself, and within the confines of an explicitly defined speed envelope. Thus, it operated under a mode consistent with ‘pursuit tracking’ (Wickens and Hollands, 2000), defined as the requirement to maintain the tracking tool (i.e., speedometer needle) within the threshold of a movement zone that had an upper (max) and lower (min) boundary. As shown in the model, modern train driving relegated all observable movement authority into the enhanced display, and whilst this movement was transparent, the underlying calculations were not. This may explain why the work activities in this mode were more abstractly aligned with expectation and verification over anticipation (see Fig. 4). In modern driving, the in-cab authority was ultimate, and the information that traditionally informed driving behaviour (e.g., driving conditions, anticipation of future events, stopping pattern) was absorbed into its algorithms. Much of these findings implicated that train-driving skill as traditionally recognised was “handed over” to the system, but they also suggested that in modern driving, train-driving skill equated to how well displays could be pursued, and the decision-making expertise informing this.

There is a general perception that modern train driving may “deskill” train drivers in the rail domain, which needs to be addressed. In this study, these perceptions were commonly held in drivers from a strong tradition of momentum-based driving, together with assertions that the modern task emphasised the time-keeping requirement. Whilst the change in the nature of the driver-train dynamic may have tightened the cybernetic agency of the driver and train system, the automatic speed correction and ‘supervision’ of a machine system were popular points of contention. The findings in this study implicated radical differences in traditional and modern train driving in the way drivers corresponded with the train, and there was little doubt that the migration of movement authority from the trackside to the cab, and its enforcement through pursuit tracking, changed the nature of the skill. However, it is important to note that the physical function of the task remained the same (see Fig. 4), and whilst participants essentially indicated that they drove to the display, the task of maintaining and optimising speed-error was found to actually require some careful planning and tentative adjustments if train speed were not to be exceeded.

In the modern task, train acceleration was regulated within the speed trajectory based on trial and error. This suggested that drivers had adapted to the loss of control (as defined by traditional train driving) and the changeover by exerting control into a fine and more discrete layer of decision-making (i.e., within the confines of a displayed speed trajectory). Thus, the increased transparency of the movement authority may have given way to a subset of tracking activities that fundamentally lacked in transparency. Participants also indicated that in the modern task, train driving was not always parameterised by the systems. Some sections of track (e.g., areas with no system coverage) had to be engaged in the traditional manner (i.e., using external signalling & signage). While this may give rise to new human factors concerns (i.e., from mode switching and maintaining competencies) it may be more accurate to posit that instead of deskilling drivers, the modern task has assimilated a key element of the original quasi-mathematical skill, but replaced it with a new one. It may also be reasonable to argue that whilst this modern ‘skill’ may have a different perceptual-attentional profile, it may be as equally quasi-mathematical, though this is an empirical question and would need to be tested.

A final thought here is that as the algorithms in modern train systems continue to improve and cater for the many input vectors in the task, the role of train driving skill may need to be redefined. Similarly, if train displays are essentially being driven to, the concept of acquiring and maintaining a priori route knowledge may be redundant. Whilst there is a current requirement for maintaining route knowledge in modern train driving (i.e., in degraded running or areas without systems coverage), one may speculate that with increased fidelity, the dynamic with route knowledge will also change. From an engineering systems perspective, the profile of the modern task also diminishes the requirement for human input. If systems in the modern task have the authority to override train control, the notion of train driving skill and the traditional role of the train driver has arguably already been redefined.

Whilst the findings in this study were derived from systematic scientific research processes, they were based on speculative data. Thus, they incorporated the opinions, prejudices, and nuances of the participants and the hypotheses captured in the model need to be tested. At the start of the discussion, it was noted that the purpose of modelling the tasks in this study was to illustrate functionality and performance. Given the findings, the immediate next step was to test the model to explore how modern train driving shaped the train-driving decisions alluded to in Section 4.3. This would help determine the extent of the perceptual-attentional load encapsulated in the modern task. Since this study, the multi-task model of dynamic train control (Fig. 5) and the specific features of the domain have been applied to the design and development of a microworld (a generic part-task simulation) of train driving called ATREIDES (Naweed et al., 2013). ATREIDES analogises the way speed is controlled in the traditional and modern train driving using graphical-relational forms (much like those shown in Fig. 1). This paradigm was subsequently used to investigate perceptual-attentional load in the modern task, and the nature of the changing driving skill, thus the qualitative validation work in this paper is backed by empirical data. However, the next step should be to develop the model further, and quantify it, much like other models in the area (e.g., Hamilton and Clarke, 2005). This would strengthen the utility of the multi-task model and help research how the modern task would be affected by changing modalities (e.g., switching back and forth from traditional to modern driving on the same journey), and different error producing conditions.

Although in-cab signalling and display-based speed trajectories have increased the transparency of train movement, the outside environment still needs to be searched for threat and error. Clearly, this creates concern over the potential for excess ‘heads down’ activity. Research has begun examining the feasibility of heads up displays in rail (e.g., Thomas and Davies, 2008), but these are early and grounded in the traditional task. Whilst the research reported in this paper has helped to better understand the impact of the modern train driving, the next step would be to extend these tasks to the heads-up space, and investigate how the driver-train system in the traditional and modern task responds to the change in dynamic.

Finally, whilst this work may be generalisable to other rail industries, it comprised a UK-based focus on traditional train driving. Though the modern driving parameters were adopted from a ‘European’ perspective, the data informing the modern task may also be skewed towards a UK-based representation of the ETCS system. Whilst the ETCS is supported by design standards, the display is typically customised to the particular needs of the rail network. Although the nature of the driver-train dynamic does not change, more research of train driving skill is advocated to investigate other iterations of the modern task from the wider European and international perspectives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In conclusion, the main objective of this study was to explore how traditional train driving skill and dynamic was affected by technological advancements in the rail system. It aimed to distinguish train operation in traditional and modern driving, establish its complex, dynamic, and opaque features, and develop a model that captured performance in the traditional and modern tasks. The study applied an innovative data collection methodology incorporating several analytical and visualisation techniques to elicit knowledge and investigate train driving skill from a multi-task perspective. Both the modern and traditional train-driving tasks were found to possess features that straddled complexity, dynamism and opacity on several levels. The findings showed that though the requirement for speed-error correction essentially remained the same, the driver-train dynamic in the traditional and modern driving tasks was very different. It also revealed that bringing the signals and movement authority into the cab, did not necessary increase the transparency of the task. These findings were conceptualised in a general multi-task model of dynamic control. The model contributes to other situation and skill-based train driving models through its unique illustration of skill and focus on multiple tasks.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The study reported in this paper was carried out as part of a suite of work for Rail Research UK (RRUK). The author acknowledges and thanks the Association of Train Operating Companies, English Welsh Scottish Railways, First Engineering, Great North Eastern Railway, Network Rail, Northern Rail, Virgin Trains, and the Rail Safety & Standards Board. The author would also like to thank Bob Hockey, Richard Bye, and Irfaan Rashid for their valuable input. Finally the author thanks the two anonymous reviewers for their excellent feedback.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

