@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Establishing usability heuristics for heuristics evaluation in a specific domain: Is there a consensus?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Analytical review of 70 studies of domain specific heuristics for usability evaluation.


                        
                        
                           
                           There is a deficiency of validation effort following heuristics proposition.


                        
                        
                           
                           It is inconclusive whether domain specific heuristics is better than general ones.


                        
                        
                           
                           Less than 10% of the studies showed acceptable robustness and rigorousness.


                        
                        
                           
                           More than 80% of the studies used similar heuristics as Nielsen's.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Heuristics evaluation

Specific domain

Usability

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Heuristics evaluation is frequently employed to evaluate usability. While general heuristics are suitable to evaluate most user interfaces, there is still a need to establish heuristics for specific domains to ensure that their specific usability issues are identified. This paper presents a comprehensive review of 70 studies related to usability heuristics for specific domains. The aim of this paper is to review the processes that were applied to establish heuristics in specific domains and identify gaps in order to provide recommendations for future research and area of improvements. The most urgent issue found is the deficiency of validation effort following heuristics proposition and the lack of robustness and rigour of validation method adopted. Whether domain specific heuristics perform better or worse than general ones is inconclusive due to lack of validation quality and clarity on how to assess the effectiveness of heuristics for specific domains. The lack of validation quality also affects effort in improving existing heuristics for specific domain as their weaknesses are not addressed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Usability is a key to ensure the success of a system (Markus and Keil, 1994). ISO-9241-11 defined usability as “the extent to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use”. To identify usability issues and/or measure the degree of usability metrics compliance, usability evaluation is usually performed at different stages of system development (Nielsen, 1994a). While the most robust approach for usability evaluation involves users, usability inspections are also commonly applied, especially at the early stages of a system's development. Heuristics evaluation, due to its simplicity and low cost (Jeffries et al., 1991; Tang et al., 2006; Hwang and Salvendy, 2010), has gained popularity and is frequently employed in usability studies. This method, originally proposed by Nielsen and Molich (1990), requires a number of experts to inspect usability based on a set of “heuristics” which are essentially broad and non-specific rules of thumb.


                     Nielsen's (1994b) ten heuristics are normally used as the heuristics that guide usability evaluation. These heuristics consist of: 1) visibility of system status, 2) match between system and the real world, 3) user control and freedom, 4) consistency and standards, 5) error prevention, 6) recognition rather than recall, 7) flexibility and efficiency of use, 8) aesthetic and minimalist design, 9) help users recognise, diagnose, and recover from error, and 10) help and documentation. While these heuristics could be used to evaluate user interfaces for various domains, heuristics adjustment are needed to ensure that specific usability issues of certain domains' user interfaces are not overlooked (Nielsen, 2015). As a result, a considerable number of studies have attempted to establish domain specific heuristics.

The establishment of heuristics for specific domains could take three forms (Ling and Salvendy, 2005): 1) expansion of the heuristics set, 2) alteration of the evaluation procedure, and 3) alteration of the conformance rating scale. This paper focuses on the first form which generally involves two stages i.e. generation of the heuristics sets and their validation. To the extent of the authors' knowledge, there are only two studies that somewhat review how heuristics for specific domains are established i.e. Ling and Salvendy (2005) and van Greunen et al. (2011). However, both studies are limited with respect to the number of studies included in the review and the scope of the review. Only 20 and five studies were included in Ling and Salvendy's (2005) and van Greunen et al. (2011), respectively. Both studies focused on the process related to the generation of heuristics set and overlooked the validation. Furthermore, both studies aimed for a descriptive rather than a critical review.

The main objective of this paper is to review and analyse existing heuristics for specific domains in three aspects: 1) the process that were applied to generate and express the heuristics sets, 2) the methods or approach that were applied to validate them, and 3) their effectiveness. This paper also aims to identify gaps with respect to establishing heuristics for specific domains and provides recommendations for future research and area of improvements. This paper is the first paper that performs a thorough review on the three aspects above. It begins by describing how studies that were included in the review were identified and how they were analysed. Next, the results of the review and analysis are explained in detail. The last section of the paper discusses recurrent issues or phenomena from the reviewed studies and identifies emerging issues and future research questions that need to be addressed to advance the contribution of heuristics in specific domains. This paper's main contribution lies on the identification of gaps and how to address these gaps through recommendation for future research.

@&#METHOD@&#

The studies included in this review were identified primarily from six databases which were considered to be relevant to usability evaluation: 1) ZETOC, 2) IEEE-IET Electronics Library, 3) Scopus, 4) Science Direct, 5) ACM Digital Library, and 6) Abstracts in New Technology and Engineering. The term ‘usability and heuristic’ was used to perform the search. The broad search term ensured that no pertinent studies were overlooked. Only studies in English that were published beyond the year 2000 and allowed a full-text access from the University of Nottingham were considered. It should also be noted that only studies that contained propositions for usability heuristics in a specific domain were included. Studies that reported heuristics for other aspects (e.g. aesthetics, inclusiveness) were excluded. Studies that reported usability heuristics but were intended as guidelines during design activities were also excluded.

For each study that was included in the review, we identified the five themes as follows:
                        
                           (1)
                           The domain of the proposed usability heuristics.

How the heuristics were created (based on either explicit or implicit description provided in a study).

Whether or not the proposed heuristics were validated and if the proposed heuristics were validated, the type of approaches that were used to validate the proposed usability heuristics.

How the proposed usability heuristics were described (e.g. as a checklist, adopting a formal format) and how different they were from Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics which was the most frequently used in heuristics evaluation.

The effectiveness of the proposed usability heuristics in a heuristics evaluation.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Fig. 1
                      provides a flow chart documenting the results of the study selection process, which shows the inclusion of 70 studies (based on 90 articles) in this review. Appendix 1 and 2 provide an overview of the reviewed studies. In appendix 1, domains in which specific domain heuristics were proposed and how they were created and validated are listed. In appendix 2, an overview of the proposed heuristics and their effectiveness are detailed.

Based on the 70 studies, the proposed domain specific heuristics could generally be divided into three categories (see Fig. 2
                     ): 1) usability for application or software – 83%, 2) usability for devices – 14%, and 3) usability for buildings – 3%. In the first category, it was shown that 34.5% of studies were aimed for web-based applications albeit for different type of purposes e.g. e-learning (Reeves et al., 2002; Ardito et al., 2004, 2005; Dringus and Cohen, 2005), social networking (AlRoobaea et al., 2013), and intercultural (Diaz et al., 2013). In addition to this, quite a few studies in this category were also aimed for mobile-based applications (e.g. Neto and Pimentel, 2013; Joyce and Lilley, 2014) as well as groupware applications (e.g. Herrmann, 2009; Karousos et al., 2010). On the contrary, in the second category, there was no obvious trend or pattern. A number of studies were aimed for medical devices (Katre et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2003), Human Robot Interaction systems (Clarkson and Arkin, 2007; Tsui et al., 2009), specific displays (Mankoff et al., 2003; Somervell et al., 2003) and input devices (Inostroza et al., 2012a; Maike et al., 2014). In the third category, interestingly, usability heuristics were also applied to support buildings evaluation, either in a physical form (Fink et al., 2010) or in a conceptual form (Afacan and Erbug, 2009). The diversity of domains revealed in this study suggested the versatility of heuristics evaluation for usability evaluation. While the heuristics method was initially developed to evaluate user interface for application or software, it seemed that it could also be adopted for other things.

Based on the review of the studies, the creation of usability heuristics was shown to consist of two steps: 1) extraction of information, and 2) transformation of the extracted information into heuristics. Four different methods were observed for the extraction of information (see Fig. 3
                        ). These were: 1) adopting one or more theories as a basis to identify aspects that were relevant for users' interactions; 2) studying the context of use and identifying aspects that were relevant for users, 3) studying and synthesising reported pertinent usability issues and/or existing heuristics/guidelines, and 4) developing a corpus of usability issues and identifying pertinent issues. It was also found that these studies chose to either apply one method (83%) or combine them (17%). However, while all of the observed studies performed a literature review to establish the state of the art of usability heuristics in their domain of interest, most of the studies did not provide specific reasoning on why one or more of these methods were adopted over the other. For instance, the third method would be suitable for an established domain in which a wealth of information was readily available while other methods would be more appropriate for a less established domain. Ideally, all methods should be considered and given the same weight as focussing on certain methods and disregarding the remaining might affect the final outcome of heuristic. For instance, Greenberg et al. (2000) and Baker et al. (2001, 2002) limited themselves to utilising the first method while Somervell et al. (2003) focused on utilising the second and fourth method. As a result, both studies' heuristics became too specific and were limited in scope.

While there was a pattern on how information to establish heuristics was initially extracted, how extracted information transformed into heuristics was less clear-cut. In fact, most studies did not provide clear information on how this process was achieved. For those that provided detailed descriptions, generally there were three approaches (see Fig. 4
                        ). The first approach (e.g. Federoff, 2002; Zhang et al., 2003; Desurvire et al., 2004) involved listing extracted information (be it guidelines, usability issues, and existing heuristics), omitting any redundancies and irrelevancies, and then using the outcome as final set of heuristics. In the second approach (e.g. Yeratziotis et al., 2011a, 2011b; AlRoobaea et al., 2013), extracted information, which had gone through omission of redundancies and irrelevancies, was categorised to identify themes and then translated into heuristics. A variety of methods was used to aid the categorisation of extracted information, ranging from requesting experts' opinions to card sorting technique. The last approach (e.g. Rusu et al., 2010; Paz et al., 2014; Inostroza et al., 2012a; Muñoz et al., 2011) involved comparison of the listed extracted information with a general set of heuristics such as Nielsen (1994b) to identify required modification of existing and/or addition of new heuristics.

In terms of validation, 34% of studies did not report any type of validation. The majority of remaining studies opted to perform validation at the end of the study which was aimed to investigate the heuristics' effectiveness. However, there were also a few of the studies that integrated validation as part of heuristics establishment in the sense that validation was used as a means to assess and improve the effectiveness of heuristics (e.g. Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila and Wäljas, 2009; Reeves et al., 2002; Kuparinen et al., 2013). Either way, the methods varied from one study to another. Table 1
                         summarises the validation methods adopted from the most to the least common. Please note that some studies combined more than one method as part of their validation.

As shown in Table 1, the application of usability heuristics by experts is the most popular validation method. Unfortunately, while it was highly practical, this type of validation method did not provide in-depth information on the effectiveness of the usability heuristics. Although, in order to minimise this limitation, a small number of studies (e.g. Katre et al., 2010; Baker et al., 2002) theoretically compared the type and number of usability issues to other studies that adopted different set of usability heuristics. However, theoretical comparison presented many flaws e.g. no similarities between application/devices being evaluated, lack of control on minimising the effect of evaluators. On the contrary, the second and third method, despite being more time consuming and resource demanding, offered a complete picture on the effectiveness of usability heuristics. Interestingly, while the data obtained was more or less the same from one study to another, the types of analysis that were performed on the second method varied. Only a small number of studies (i.e. Jaferian et al., 2011; AlRoobaea et al., 2013; Somervell and McCrickard, 2005) opted to adopt pre-defined measurements (Hartson et al., 2001) which allowed easy comparison among usability evaluation methods.

A majority of studies performed a wide range of data analysis on identified usability issues and used them as a basis to compare or assess the performance of heuristics in specific domain (see Table 2
                        ). While the variety of type of data analysis offered different perspectives, they presented difficulties for comparison of the effectiveness of usability heuristics, especially for studies that were aimed to improve existing specific domain heuristics.

About 48.5% of studies proposed ≤10 usability heuristics. The maximum number of usability heuristics was 38, proposed by Carvalho's et al. (2009) study. 18.5% of the studies adopted a modular approach in which heuristics were assigned into different modules. Each module represented a specific aspect that was seen as being crucial within the context of use of an application or device. When a module approach was adopted, there also seemed to be a tendency to introduce a rating or weighting system to judge the compliance level towards heuristics (e.g. Komarkova et al., 2007; Omar et al., 2010; Lynch, 2011). The rating system allowed identification of a module with the biggest weaknesses and quantitatively compared heuristics compliance among applications or devices (e.g. Alsumait and Al-Osaimi, 2010; Katre et al., 2010; Liao and Shen, 2012). A modular approach also allowed flexibility in the sense that certain module that were not relevant could be left out if necessary. Most of the heuristics were expressed as short, succinct and clear sentences with additional description provided. The amount of additional description varied from short (similar to Nielsen's (1994a,b)) to long. Some studies that provided long descriptions also adopted a more formal approach in which a certain format was followed (e.g. Rusu et al., 2010; Muñoz et al., 2011; Inostroza et al., 2012a; Diaz et al., 2013; Solano et al., 2013). In other studies, instead of providing a lengthy description for each heuristic, checklists were introduced (e.g. Dringus and Cohen, 2005; Kemp et al., 2008; Alsumait and Al-Osaimi, 2010; Yeratziotis et al., 2011a, Al-Razgan et al., 2014).

About 83% of studies contained heuristics that were similar to some or all of Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics. In some cases, the exact terminology of Nielsen's heuristics was used and only the description of an adapted heuristic was modified such that it fitted with the context of a domain (e.g. Inostroza et al., 2012a; Zhang et al., 2003; Pang et al., 2005; Moraes and Silverira, 2006, Collazos et al., 2009). While this approach was practical, it was also shown to cause misconception by experts and resulted in misidentification of heuristics violations (Joyce and Lilley, 2014). In other cases, the terminologies and descriptions were modified to reflect the context of domain (e.g. Korhonen and Koivisto, 2006; Aitta et al., 2008; Tsui et al., 2009). Only a small number of studies (13%) proposed heuristics that did not show any obvious links with Nielsen's (1994a,b). The heuristics proposed in these cases were typically expressed in a lower abstraction level and intended to evaluate features that were inherent to domain's applications or devices. In addition to this, these heuristics were proposed solely based on either a theory that was deemed to be fundamental to domain's applications/devices (e.g. Greenberg et al., 2000; Baker et al., 2002; Zuk and Carpendale, 2006, Fink et al., 2010) or the results of studies with much emphasis on the end-user point of view (e.g. Somervell and McCrickard, 2005; Herrmann, 2009, Katre et al., 2010).

Out of 70 studies, only 19 studies could be used to provide indication on the effectiveness of domain specific heuristics. This was because most studies fell into one of the following categories: 1) did not perform validation, 2) did not conduct validation in which effectiveness of domain specific heuristics was compared to another heuristics set or usability evaluation method, or 3) did not analyse the comparison result quantitatively and focused solely on detailed textual descriptions of identified usability issues.

The findings from the 19 studies suggested that usability heuristics for specific domains found more usability issues than heuristics that were more general in nature (Berry, 2003; Mankoff et al., 2003; Desurvire et al., 2004; Zhou et al., 2004; Somervell and McCrickard, 2005; Bertini et al., 2006; Conte et al., 2009; Pinelle et al., 2009; Singh and Wesson, 2009; Tsui et al., 2010; Rusu et al., 2011; Jaferian et al., 2014; Muñoz and Chalegre, 2012; Inostroza et al., 2012b; AlRoobaea et al., 2013; Diaz et al., 2013; Kuparinen et al., 2013; Neto and Pimentel, 2013; Solano et al., 2013). However, following a further investigation, the results were shown to be inconclusive. Only 6 studies (out of the 19 studies) performed any statistical comparison and of those that did, four studies reported significant differences (i.e. Zhou et al., 2004; Conte et al., 2009; AlRoobaea et al., 2013; Jaferian et al., 2014) and the remaining two studies reported no significant differences (i.e. Berry, 2003; Inostroza et al., 2012b).

Eleven studies (out of 19 studies) also investigated the effectiveness of heuristics in specific domains with respect to the severity of usability issues. Two approaches were adopted: 1) calculating the average severity values for each and all of heuristics, 2) calculating the number of issues for each severity level. The results of the first approach were inconclusive with some studies suggesting that the heuristics set for specific domains identified more severe issues than general heuristics (e.g. Diaz et al., 2013) and vice versa (e.g. Muñoz and Chalegre, 2012). In the second approach, all studies adopted the severity rating scale proposed by Nielsen (1995 – http://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-to-rate-the-severity-of-usability-problems/) which differentiated severity issue into 5 categories: no issue, cosmetic, minor, major and catastrophe. Similar to the first approach, the results were also inconclusive. Some studies reported that heuristics set for specific domain performed better in identifying major & catastrophe issues than general heuristics (Mankoff et al., 2003; Bertini et al., 2006; Jaferian et al., 2014; Tsui et al., 2010) while others reported mixed results (Kuparinen et al., 2013; AlRoobaea et al., 2013).

Only three studies (i.e. Jaferian et al., 2014; AlRoobaea et al., 2013; Somervell and McCrickard, 2005) adopted metrics proposed by Hartson et al. (2001) i.e. thoroughness, reliability, validity and effectiveness while comparing the effectiveness of heuristics for specific domain and general heuristics. From this small sample, comparison of the results was found to be quite straightforward as the same definition of metrics was applied. Based on the three studies, it was found that heuristics for specific domain performed better with respect to thoroughness (proportion of real usability issues identified), reliability (agreement between evaluators), validity (proportion of identified usability issues that are real issues), and effectiveness (thoroughness multiplied by validity). Unfortunately, these three studies adopted different definitions of what regarded as “real issues”. In Jaferian et al. (2014), usability issues identified by the two evaluators groups (who used Nielsen's heuristics and domain heuristics) were aggregated. This was then followed by identification of major usability issues as “real issues” by four independent researchers. However, during the process, the independent researchers dismissed a considerable number of reported problems as “unknown” and “false positives” without consulting evaluators and thus raised further questions on the quality of their “real issues”. In AlRoobaea et al. (2013), usability issues were aggregated from three different groups (real end-users who performed usability evaluation and two evaluators groups that used Nielsen's heuristics and domain heuristics) and then the researchers determined severity ratings with major and severe usability issues used as “real issues”. In Somervell and McCrickard (2005), pre-identified problem sets were used as the ‘real’ problem sets with no explanation given on how and who determined these problems. Thus, considering the findings above, it was difficult to establish whether domain specific heuristics actually performed better than conventional ones.

A further observation also revealed the variability when it came to what being considered “experts” as heuristics evaluators. All but three studies (Conte et al., 2009; Singh and Wesson, 2009; Jaferian et al., 2014) failed to provide sufficient information on how HCI or usability experts were determined i.e. whether it was based on formal educational training/qualification, professions. Unfortunately, this information also showed that evaluators involved in an evaluation were not necessarily having the same level of expertise. For instance, in Jaferian et al., 2014, evaluators were a mixed of usability practitioners and undergraduate students. Furthermore, only few studies provided quantitative demographical information related to evaluators' expertise (Mankoff et al., 2003, Singh and Wesson, 2009; Jaferian et al., 2014). Some studies even did not supply any information on the level of experience of these experts with respect to the specific domains being evaluated (Berry, 2003; Tsui et al., 2010; Diaz et al., 2013; Kuparinen et al., 2013; Inostroza et al., 2012b). Heuristic evaluation is heavily dependent on the performance of experts involved in the study (Hertzum and Jacobsen, 2001). Thus, the lack of information related to the experts involved in the reviewed studies introduced bias and complicated further the assessment on the effectiveness of heuristics in specific domain.

An aspect that was found to be similar nearly across all of the studies was that domain specific heuristics missed some of usability issues that were identified by general heuristics. It was found that this was likely caused by evaluators' tendency to ignore them as they were seen to be less problematic in comparison to other issues (Muñoz and Chalegre, 2012; Inostroza et al., 2012a,b, Neto and Pimentel, 2013; Solano et al., 2013). There was only three studies reported comparison related to the time taken to perform usability evaluation. Two of the studies reported that domain specific heuristics took a much longer time to complete than general heuristics (Bertini et al., 2006; Conte et al., 2009) while only one reported otherwise (Somervell and McCrickard, 2005).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Usability heuristics was originally proposed to ensure that user interface of a system is easy to use. However, as shown by the review related to application domain of usability heuristics, there appears to be the possibility that its use could be widened beyond user interface of a system. While the current alternative example on the review is limited to usability evaluation of bathroom and building plans, it can easily be extended to other areas. For instance during design and development of a public transportation system, usability evaluation can be used to evaluate the ease of changing mode of transportations, accessibility, etc.

The systematic review shows that, while there is an underlying pattern on how to establish usability heuristics for specific domains, the rigour and robustness of the reviewed studies vary from one to another. What is more surprising is the fact that, while some studies was built upon previous works, there also seems to be frequent occasions where studies simply created a new set of heuristics without taking into account the finding from previous relevant works in the domain. It is highly likely that this is caused by the lack of validation of proposed heuristics. As reported in the results section, out of 70 studies, only 19 studies (≈27%) performed validation whereby the effectiveness of heuristics for specific domains was compared to general or existing heuristics. Through validation, the weaknesses of the proposed heuristics could be identified which in turn provide a starting point for other studies. In addition to this, only a few studies actually compare the effectiveness of the proposed heuristics to existing heuristics in the same domain (e.g. Somervell and McCrickard, 2005; Zuk et al., 2006). Fortunately, most of the 19 studies performed effectiveness comparison with respect to well-known usability heuristics such as Nielsen and Molich (1990) which offers opportunities for comparison across heuristics sets in the same domain. However, as revealed in the review results, the methods employed for comparison and the outcome measures were not necessarily comparable. Thus, comparison of heuristics that are in the same domain becomes difficult or implausible.

As previously mentioned, it is evident from the review that robust and rigorous validation for heuristics in specific domain is lacking. Most studies terminated either as soon as proposition of heuristics for specific domains were made or once the proposed heuristics was employed to evaluate one or two applications. This, in turn results in abundance of the proposition of a considerable number of heuristics in the same domain without any indication of their actual effectiveness. For studies that went beyond these points, a wide variety of analysis of varying degree of rigour was employed. Unfortunately, only a few of studies show sufficient robustness and rigour and adopted a similar approach in the data analysis. Therefore, it is important that, not only validation method is robust and rigorous, but there should also be a certain consensus on what to report as part of a validation exercise. For instance, Hartson et al. (2001) proposed metrics that could be used as one option. In addition to this, severity distribution of usability issues could also be added. Furthermore, where it is appropriate, statistical comparison could also be performed.

There also appears a tendency to integrate general heuristics as part of heuristics for specific domain. The current approach is to sort and judge the relevancy of existing heuristics and then either adopt the existing wording/terminologies and modify the description or alter the wording/terminologies such that they are relevant to a specific domain. This approach seems to be successful as demonstrated by the overlap of identified usability issues using domain specific heuristics and general heuristics. However, as indicated by the findings of the review, some usability issues were only found by using general heuristics. While it was claimed that these issues were either mostly minor or issues that otherwise could be identified through heuristics for specific domains but chosen to be ignored by evaluators, this suggest that there is still room for improvement. Some studies suggest combining using both heuristics for specific domains and general heuristics. Unfortunately, this suggestion would likely demand more resources. Furthermore, simply using both heuristics also means that some time would be wasted on identifying the same usability issues. A possible remedy is to adopt a modular approach for the heuristics whereby one module is dedicated to identify usability issues that are likely found through general heuristics and another module is dedicated to identify usability issues that are specific to the domain.

When it comes to expressing heuristics, some studies utilised checklists as an alternative form to provide detailed description for each heuristic. This is mostly motivated by the opportunities to obtain scores for each statement in the checklist which can then be accumulated to provide the overall usability of a system. However, the problem with a checklist is that it could be time consuming, especially when there are a considerable number of statements in the checklist. Furthermore, they do not necessarily allow the capture of usability issues in detail and there is a possibility that some issues would be referred more than once while responding to the given statements. Therefore, if the aim of establishing heuristics for specific domains is to identify usability issues, perhaps a high level of general statement would be more appropriate. In this case, the number of heuristics should be not so many such that evaluators can remember all of the proposed heuristics. In addition to this, heuristics statements should be made clear, especially if they are modified from existing heuristics, such that any misunderstanding could be minimised.

Based on the review of existing studies, the following recommendations are made for future studies:
                        
                           1.
                           
                              Robust and rigorous validation and adoption of standard measures as indicators of heuristics' effectiveness. Establishing heuristics for specific domains should not stop once the heuristics are proposed. It needs to be followed by performing a robust and rigorous validation in which the effectiveness of heuristics for specific domains is compared to other heuristics (general heuristics and/or other existing heuristics for specific domain). In addition to this, standard measures should be adopted to indicate the heuristics' effectiveness. For instance, a combination of Hartson et al. (2001) metrics and severity distribution of identified issues could be adopted as minimum standard measures.


                              Building on heuristics that already exist in a domain. Currently, this has mostly been incorporated during the creation of heuristics for specific domain. However, due to lack of robust and rigorous validation, the efforts to build on existing heuristics were limited to simply reviewing the heuristics without having knowledge on their effectiveness. As a result, only a few studies show the continuation of domain specific heuristics development from one study to another, even if they are in the same domain. Therefore, some effort should also be aimed to validate existing heuristics and not simply focused on proposing new heuristics.


                              Better definition of what constitutes as experts with respect to usability and specific domain. It is of importance to provide sufficient and detailed definition related to experts that are involved as part of establishing the heuristics for specific domain. Currently, this information is found to be inconsistent, even scarce, across different studies. In addition to this, as heuristics for specific domain require knowledge in usability and specific domain, a fair representation of expertise from both is imperative and should be adhered throughout the process i.e. not only limited to the creation of usability heuristics stage.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The review of 70 studies related to usability heuristics for specific domains showed that the need for heuristics in specific domains is widely acknowledged across various domains. There is generally a consensus on how to create usability heuristics for specific domains (i.e. extraction of information, and transforming the extracted information into heuristics). However, adopted approaches for each step vary across different studies and there is yet guidance on the best approaches for each step. Guidance is clearly needed as it ensures that proposed heuristics is created based on thorough and rigorous process that could be replicated. The review also showed that there is yet established proof across the different domains with respect to the effectiveness these heuristics. While some studies showed usability heuristics for specific domains found more usability issue, the usability issues identified were not necessary “real” usability issues (i.e. encounter by real end users) as usability studies were really seldom used as the standard to compare the performance between specific and general heuristics. Furthermore, as most of the heuristics for specific domain proposed heuristics that showed obvious links with Nielsen's heuristics, this poses a further question on the real contribution of heuristics for specific domains. In other words, due to lack of validation quality, it is not yet clear to what extent the advantages of heuristics for specific domains are. The lack of validation quality also affects effort in improving existing heuristics for specific domain as their weaknesses are not addressed.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was supported through the funding from “CloudFlow” research project under grant agreement no. 609100, which is funded by the European Commission's 7th Framework programme (FP7-2013-NMP-ICT-FoF).


                     
                        
                           Appendix 1
                           
                              Detail of the 70 studies included in the review.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    No
                                    Study
                                    Domain
                                    How heuristics were created
                                    How heuristics were validated
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    1
                                    
                                       van der Geest and Spyridakis (2000)
                                    
                                    Web site
                                    Employed four steps: 1) Inventory & review of existing literature, 2) Formulating draft heuristics, 3) Reviewing draft heuristics – each heuristic reviewed by a student group & overall overview by web professionals after use, 4) Revise and finalise.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    2
                                    
                                       Greenberg et al. (2000)
                                    
                                    Groupware
                                    Derived heuristics from the locales framework (Fitzpatrick, 1998) i.e. principles related to the nature of team work and how a locale (or place) can support it.
                                    Authors evaluated a team work application. The strengths of the application & major and minor interface issues were identified. However, this was not extended to severity identification.
                                 
                                 
                                    3
                                    
                                       Baker et al. (2001, 2002)
                                    
                                    Groupware with shared visual workspace
                                    Derived the heuristics from the mechanics of collaboration (Gutwin and Greenberg, 2000) which was developed specifically for shared workspace.
                                    Novice & expert evaluated two groupware applications. The followings were observed: 1) unique, out of scope & false positive usability issues; 2) average & consistency performance of individual evaluator, 3) aggregate performance, identification of each issue & identification of major vs minor issues.
                                 
                                 
                                    4
                                    
                                       Federoff (2002)
                                    
                                    Video games
                                    Used literature review to collate existing game heuristics. These were then compared to Nielsen 10 heuristics and the results of observation & interview with a game development team.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    5
                                    
                                       Kantner et al. (2002)
                                    
                                    Online documentation
                                    Used the following to create heuristics: 1) Nielsen's 10 heuristics, 2) Existing guidelines for online documentation, 3) Learnability, and 4) Context of use (book metaphor and searching)
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    6
                                    
                                       Reeves et al. (2002)
                                    
                                    E-learning
                                    Employed two steps: 1) Modified and expanded Nielsen's 10 through critical analysis & “brainstorming” sessions. 2) Applying the heuristics to evaluate an e-learning application.
                                    Applying the heuristics to evaluate an e-learning application.
                                 
                                 
                                    7
                                    
                                       Berry (2003)
                                    
                                    Notification system
                                    Employed steps: 1) Collectively thinking usability issues related to notification system, 2) Categorise the issues into heuristics.
                                    Experts evaluated three notification systems' usability using Nielsen‘s and author's heuristics were compared. The number of usability issues identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    8
                                    
                                       Mankoff et al. (2003)
                                    
                                    Ambient display
                                    Employed these steps: 1) Eliminated & modified Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics and added new heuristics to suit ambient displays. 2) Running a pilot survey with ambient display designers, 3) Experts survey.
                                    16 experts evaluated two ambient displays in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's and author's heuristics. It was unclear whether it was in between or within subject comparison. The followings were observed: 1) number of issues found, 2) severity of issues found.
                                 
                                 
                                    9
                                    
                                       Somervell et al. (2003) and Somervell and McCrickard (2005)
                                    
                                    Large screen Information exhibits
                                    Employed critical parameters through the use scenarios-based (to explore the possible design of five large screen information exhibits), producing claims which were then synthesised to generate heuristics.
                                    The followings were carried out: 1) The authors' heuristics were compared with Nielsen (1994a,b) and Berry (2003) and measurements (based on Hartson et al., 2001) was obtained. 21 experts, divided in three groups, were presented with usability issues of three large screen and was asked to rate the applicability of each heuristic to each issue found. 2) The heuristics were used by students & education experts (non-usability expert) to evaluate usability issues.
                                 
                                 
                                    10
                                    
                                       Zhang et al. (2003)
                                    
                                    Medical device
                                    Combined usability heuristics from Shneiderman (1998) and Nielsen (1994a,b).
                                    Four evaluators evaluated two medical devices. Usability issues and their severity were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    11
                                    
                                       Ardito et al. (2004) and Costabile et al. (2005)
                                    
                                    E-learning (module & platform)
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Pilot study on e-learning to identify usability problems experienced by end-users, 2) Establishing four dimension based on the pilot study and literature study, taking into the context of use of e-learning, 3) Identification of criteria that characterise the effectiveness and efficiency of each dimension.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    12
                                    
                                       Desurvire et al. (2004)
                                    
                                    Computer game
                                    The heuristics were based on literature and review by playability experts and game designers.
                                    The results of usability evaluation using the heuristics and user study were compared. Comparison on type of usability issues, number of issues & severity for both approaches were made.
                                 
                                 
                                    13
                                    
                                       Sutcliffe and Gault (2004)
                                    
                                    Virtual reality
                                    Derived from Nielsen (1994a,b), taking into the context of VR, and their previous work on VR design principles (Sutcliffe and Kaur, 2000).
                                    Experts used the heuristics to evaluate two systems in three studies. Usability issues and severity ratings were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    14
                                    
                                       Zhou et al. (2004)
                                    
                                    Intrusion detection system (IDS)
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Identified the primary goal of IDS and usability issues by conducted surveys on users i.e. network security administrators, 2) Modified and compared Nielsen (1994a,b) heuristics to the corpus of usability issues.
                                    The authors' and Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics were used simultaneously by 12 experts to evaluate two applications. The usability issues were identified and compared with a master list of usability issues (with severity ratings) which were separately identified by the authors.
                                 
                                 
                                    15
                                    
                                       Dringus and Cohen (2005)
                                    
                                    E-learning
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Collecting a corpus of usability issues based on evaluation from end-users and independent inspection of authors, 2) Combined the corpus of usability issues and identified heuristics categories and their specifics.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    16
                                    
                                       Pang et al. (2005)
                                    
                                    Media asset management platform
                                    Combined Nielsen's (1994a,b) 10 heuristics and cultural guideline for usability (Komlodi et al., 2005).
                                    Three experts used the authors' heuristics to evaluate a system and the results were compared to the results of scenario-based design and claim analysis by experts. Usability issues were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    17
                                    
                                       Bertini et al. (2006)
                                    
                                    Mobile computing
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Collecting previous studies that documented usability issues related to mobile computing, 2) Individual and team analysis (by three experts) of usability issues & their categorisation to an abstraction level that were appropriate for developing/generating heuristics, 3) Harmonising the categorisation and their terminologies, 4) Individual and team further synthesis with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics and mobile computing context of use to produce heuristics; 5) Obtaining feedback from other experts on the adequacy of the heuristics proposed to refine the heuristics.
                                    8 experts evaluated two applications in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's and author's heuristics (between subjects comparison). The followings were observed: 1) number of issues found, 2) severity of issues found, 3) time needed for evaluation.
                                 
                                 
                                    18
                                    
                                       Korhonen and Koivisto (2006)
                                    
                                    Mobile games
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Apply modular approach (which includes usability as one of the modules), 2) For usability module, results of the mobile game context analysis, a review of Nielsen's heuristics and game design guidelines were used to create heuristics, 3) comparison of proposed heuristics to usability problems identified in a mobile game, 4) refinement of modular approach and their heuristics.
                                    Between 2 and 4 evaluators evaluated five games using the authors' heuristics. Usability issues were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    19
                                    
                                       Moraes and Silveira (2006)
                                    
                                    Animated Agents
                                    Nielsen heuristics were used as a basis. For each heuristics, the context of Artificial Intelligence was used to extend it by providing specific guidelines.
                                    The authors' heuristics were used by two evaluators to evaluate four interface agents.
                                 
                                 
                                    20
                                    
                                       Röcker and Haar (2006)
                                    
                                    Pervasive game in smart home environment
                                    The HEP (Desurvire et al., 2004) was analysed to identify elements, that are independent from the platform (and thus could be transferred for the specific domain) and those which are not (and thus be omitted or modified).
                                    The heuristics were compared (mapped) to the result of focus groups with potential end-users who were involved as part of requirements elicitation. The heuristics were not revealed to end-users during the focus groups.
                                 
                                 
                                    21
                                    
                                       Zuk and Carpendale (2006) and Zuk et al. (2006)
                                    
                                    Information visualisation
                                    Employed an analysis of a variety of theories and framework of information visualisation (Bertin, 1983; Tufte, 2001; Ware, 2004) to abstract the heuristics.
                                    Four experts evaluated a system and each used one of the three different sets of heuristics i.e. Shneidermans's (1996), Amar and Stasko's (2004), and Zuk and Carpendale (2006). Usability issues were identified and used to investigate interpretation, redundancy, and conflict in heuristics between the sets.
                                 
                                 
                                    22
                                    
                                       Clarkson and Arkin (2007)
                                    
                                    Human-robot interaction (HRI) system
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Creating an initial list of HRI heuristics via brainstorming and synthesizing existing lists of potentially applicable heuristics (Nielsen, 1994a,b; Scholtz, 2002; Sheridan, 1997; Baker et al., 2002; Mankoff et al., 2003), 2) Modifying the initial list based on pilot studies, consultation with other domain experts, and other informal techniques, 3) Refining the heuristics based on the findings from its application by experts.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    23
                                    
                                       Conte et al. (2007, 2009)
                                    
                                    Website
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Using web design perspective to expand on existing heuristics (Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics), 2) Refining the heuristics by using it as part of an evaluation of a system and obtaining qualitative & quantitative feedback from experts.
                                    Experts were divided into three groups (control group, group using the author's heuristics, and group using Nielsen's heuristics) to evaluate a system with a limited time. Usability issues found, qualitative feedback on heuristics, and time needed to evaluate were collected. Comparison was made on the performance of the groups.
                                 
                                 
                                    24
                                    
                                       Komarkova et al. (2007)
                                    
                                    Web-based GIS
                                    No description was provided.
                                    The heuristics were used to evaluate 14 geo-websites. Scores of usability were obtained.
                                 
                                 
                                    25
                                    
                                       Aitta et al. (2008)
                                    
                                    Library web service
                                    Previous studies which focused on factors affecting the usability of library web sites, studies concerning usability in general (e.g. Nielsen, 1994a,b) and experiences gained in authors' empirical studies were used to create heuristics.
                                    The heuristics were informally used by experts to evaluate up to 15 library web sites. Usability issues were identified and overlapped with the results of user studies for one websites were also identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    26
                                    
                                       Kemp et al. (2008)
                                    
                                    E-learning
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Expanded Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics to include aspects of commercial web-sites (Nielsen, 2000) and issues particularly relevant to the learning appliance ubiquitous computing (attention/focus, adoption/flexibility, trust/privacy, etc.), 2) creating a review checklist for each heuristics containing specific questions to inspect the system compliance with each heuristics., 3) refinement of the heuristics and checklists by using it (one evaluator) to inspect an E-learning application.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    27
                                    
                                       Pinelle et al. (2008, 2009)
                                    
                                    Single and Networked multiplayer games
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Collecting PC game reviews from a popular gaming website from various genres, 2) Identifying common usability issues and categorised the problems, 3) create heuristics from the categories of usability issues (by inversing the problem categories).
                                    Experts used the heuristics to evaluate a game and usability issues and theirs severity issues were obtained (Pinelle et al., 2008). In Pinelle et al. (2009), 10 experts evaluated two games in a between subjects study design which compared Baker et al.’s heuristics and author's heuristics.
                                 
                                 
                                    28
                                    
                                       Sim et al. (2008, 2009)
                                    
                                    Computer-based assessment application
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Identification of frequently encountered or severe issues from a corpus of usability problems (obtained from authors' previous studies) and literature studies, 2) Mapping the issues related to themes, 3) Extracting the heuristics and its description from the themes.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    29
                                    
                                       Afacan and Erbug (2009)
                                    
                                    Building
                                    Adopting universal design principles (The centre for Universal Design, 1997) as heuristics.
                                    The heuristics were validated using three scenarios at a shopping mall and involved five experts who were asked to analyse the construction drawings.
                                 
                                 
                                    30
                                    
                                       Carvalho et al. (2009)
                                    
                                    Health information system (HIS)
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) A systematic review of research articles to identify published research that outlines any potential harms from using HIS, 2) Thee HIS experts discussed the finding of the first phase and generate the heuristics, 3) Group the heuristics under categories.
                                    An expert used the heuristics to evaluate a HIS application. Usability issues (violation of heuristics) were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    31
                                    
                                       Collazos et al. (2009)
                                    
                                    Interactive television (iTV)
                                    Heuristics were proposed based on guidelines to design iTV application (no description was provided on how to create heuristics from the guidelines). The guidelines were taken from existing literature and the context of use of iTV.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    32
                                    
                                       Desurvire and Wiberg (2009)
                                    
                                    Computer games
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Used the work of Desurvire et al. (2004) and discussion with game developers to generate 166 principles; 2) Conducted a survey, in which participants were required to experience both good and bad computer games, to assess the validity of the proposed principles.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    33
                                    
                                       Hermann (2009)
                                    
                                    Creativity groupware
                                    The heuristics were created based on interviews with 12 people of various background and roles. The heuristics were created using a theme-based type analysis from the interview results.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    34
                                    
                                       Jo et al. (2009)
                                    
                                    Massive multiplayer online game (MMOG)
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Reviewed existing heuristics for game user interface, fun and flow factors, 2) Identified modules and key issues
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    35
                                    
                                       Papaloukas et al. (2009)
                                    
                                    Computer games
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) identification and classification of usability issues found in game reviews and existing studies, 2) Observation of end-users, 3) Categorisation of usability issues from step 1 and 2, 4) Creating heuristics that addresses the usability issues.
                                    The heuristics were used by three experts to evaluate the user interface of a game and the recording of users (logging combined with thinking aloud protocol) while playing the game.
                                 
                                 
                                    36
                                    
                                       Singh and Wesson (2009)
                                    
                                    Enterprise resource planning (ERP) application
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) identified usability issues from previous studies and publications, 2) Identified common usability criteria from previous studies and categorise them, 3) Mapping usability issues to the categories and prioritising the categories as heuristics, 4) Expands each heuristics to include details to inspect.
                                    The heuristics was evaluated by comparing its effectiveness with general usability heuristics (Nielsen). Three experts were involved and asked to review the application against each heuristics. They were also asked to identify usability problems.
                                 
                                 
                                    37
                                    
                                       Tsui et al. (2009, 2010)
                                    
                                    Assistive robotic
                                    The heuristics were created based on literature review related to existing guidelines/heuristics for people with disabilities, social robotics and framework based on model-human processor.
                                    The heuristics was validated against Nielsen (1994a,b) heuristics for a specific task. A total of four evaluators were involved, with two evaluators for the authors' and Nielsen's heuristics. Number of total non-duplicative errors and errors identified were compared.
                                 
                                 
                                    38
                                    
                                       Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila and Wäljas (2009)
                                    
                                    Mobile web site
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Creating the heuristics based on a synthesis of a literature review and on informal analysis of existing three services, 2) Using heuristics to evaluate three applications (three experts per application), 3) Identifying main theme of usability problems and used this to update the heuristics.
                                    Using heuristics to evaluate three applications (three experts per application).
                                 
                                 
                                    39
                                    
                                       Alsumait and Al-Osaimi (2010)
                                    
                                    E-learning (for children)
                                    Context was used as a means to create three categories of heuristics (usability, child usability, e-learning usability). For each category, existing guidelines, heuristics and checklist were adapted and consolidated.
                                    The validation was performed by comparing the application of heuristics in evaluation to user testing on two E-learning systems
                                 
                                 
                                    40
                                    
                                       Fink et al. (2010)
                                    
                                    Building
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) reviewing of existing material, 2) interview with six nurses to gather perception of current patient room bathroom and problems they had experienced, 3) focus groups of nine nurses (role-play with a mock-up patient bathroom performing five tasks followed by a group discussion), 4) creation of heuristics and their description & details.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    41
                                    
                                       Forsell and Johansson (2010)
                                    
                                    Information visualisation
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Identified existing heuristics and guidelines for information visualisations, including those from general usability (Shneiderman, 1996; Nielsen 1994a,b), 2) Listed the heuristics, 3) Gathered usability issues in the form of text and screen shots, 4) Six experts sifted through the usability issues, compared them with the heuristics list and judged how well each heuristic explained each problem (scale 0–5), 5) identified heuristics that were capable of identifying the highest percentage of usability problem.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    42
                                    
                                       Hub and Čapková (2010)
                                    
                                    Public administration portal
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) identification of basic set of heuristics, 2) analysis of environment – familiarising with the concrete type of user interface and its specificity, 3) identifying individuals and team that would be assigned for creating heuristics, two teams should be created, the first team does step 4 and both teams do step 5, 4) heuristics creation, 5) evaluation of heuristics (aggregation of importance rating, rate of correspondence between the teams), and 6) refinement for final set of heuristic.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    43
                                    
                                       Karousos et al. (2010)
                                    
                                    Groupware
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) analysis of existing studies related to usability issues, principles and system particularities, 2) identification of further usability issues through user observations, 3) description of how usability issues can be resolved through the heuristics, 4) categorisation of heuristics.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    44
                                    
                                       Katre et al. (2010)
                                    
                                    Touch screen-based ventilator system
                                    The heuristics were proposed based on the results of interview with experts and also direct observation of how the ventilator was used etc.
                                    The heuristics was used as part of evaluation with four evaluators and reliability of usability heuristics was established (comparing the four evaluators).
                                 
                                 
                                    45
                                    
                                       Omar et al. (2010)
                                    
                                    E-learning
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Initial study, 2) Propose heuristics by modifying existing heuristics (Nielsen 1994a,b; Nokelainen, 2006; Albion, 1999), 3) Expert reviews on heuristics usefulness by means of questionnaires, 4) Refinement of heuristics and weight assignment.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    46
                                    
                                       Omar and Jafar (2010a,b, 2011)
                                    
                                    Educational computer game
                                    Existing heuristics that were related to computer games and issues related to pedagogical elements in e-learning were reviewed. This was then used to create five categories and assign heuristics in each category.
                                    Five experts used the heuristics to identify usability issues and their severity.
                                 
                                 
                                    47
                                    
                                       Rusu et al. (2010, 2011), and Jiménez et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    Grid computing
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Collect bibliography related to application domain, its characteristics and general or specific usability heuristics, 2) Identify important information from step 1, 3) Identify characteristics of usability heuristics the domain should have – use Nielsen (1994a,b) if no heuristics existing, 4) Formally specify the heuristics & apply a standard template, 5) Validate the heuristics, 6) Refine the heuristics
                                    Two studies were performed: 1) An expert inspected an application and usability issues identified were then mapped to Nielsen's and the authors' heuristics, 2) The same expert inspected an application using the authors' heuristics to see if the heuristics helped identified issues which were not found in study 1. Severities of usability issues were also obtained.
                                 
                                 
                                    48
                                    
                                       Salvador and Moura (2010)
                                    
                                    Radiology transcription system
                                    The heuristics were based on reinterpretation of Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics, non-functional requirements of applications in the domain, and good practices in the domain.
                                    The heuristics were used by one evaluator to evaluate an application.
                                 
                                 
                                    49
                                    
                                       Zaibon and Shiratuddin (2010)
                                    
                                    Educational computer game
                                    The heuristics were adapted from Korhonen and Koivisto (2006) and Koivisto and Korhonen (2006) by adding a new component related to learning.
                                    The heuristics were used by end-users to evaluate an application. Scores for each component was obtained.
                                 
                                 
                                    50
                                    
                                       Jaferian et al. (2011, 2014)
                                    
                                    IT security management (ISTM) application
                                    Existing guidelines were compiled and existing studies were analysed based on activity theory (Kaptelinin and Nardi, 2006). The theory allowed interpretation of the rationale behind each guideline and abstraction of guidelines into heuristics.
                                    28 experts evaluated an application in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's (1994a,b) and author's heuristics. Usability issues and severity were identified. Throughness, reliability, and validity (Hartson et al., 2001) and performance of evaluators were compared.
                                 
                                 
                                    51
                                    
                                       Lynch (2011)
                                    
                                    Website (for elderly)
                                    The heuristics were created based on a literature review of guidelines for website that were aimed for general website and older end-users. Based on survey from end-users, scoring system for heuristics were then developed.
                                    Task performance (time and error) of end-users on three website (good, medium and low usability) were compared with heuristics scores obtained by two experts evaluation.
                                 
                                 
                                    52
                                    
                                       Muñoz et al. (2011) and Muñoz and Chalegre (2012)
                                    
                                    Virtual world
                                    See study no. 47
                                    6 experts evaluated two applications in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's (1994a,b) and author's heuristics. Usability issues and severity were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    53
                                    
                                       Sivaji et al. (2011)
                                    
                                    E-government website
                                    Nielsen's heuristics were used as basis for heuristics expansion. No detail explanation was given.
                                    The heuristics was used by experts to evaluate e-Government website at different stages (three) with two to three experts being involved in each stage.
                                 
                                 
                                    54
                                    
                                       Yeratziotis et al. (2011a, 2011b)
                                    
                                    Security in online Health Social Networks
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) reviewing existing literature and identify emerging themes, 2) naming high level heuristics from identified themes, 3) modifying existing heuristics to create checklist items, 4) grouping checklist items under the heuristic, 5) reviewing and refining by presenting the heuristics and checklist to experts.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    55
                                    
                                       Bowie (2012)
                                    
                                    Podcast (sound)
                                    The heuristics were developed based on inference of usability definition, existing heuristics and podcasts context of use. The heuristics were then expanded to include guidelines by evaluating 11 parts of a podcasts.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    56
                                    
                                       Inostroza et al. (2012a,b, 2013) and Inostroza and Rusu (2014)
                                    
                                    Touch screen-based mobile device
                                    See study no. 47
                                    Validation of heuristics performed in two stages resulted in refinement of heuristics at each stage. In the first stage, four experts inspected an application in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's (1994a,b) and author's heuristics. Number of issues, severity and type of issues were compare. The heuristics were also evaluated w.r.t. easiness to understand by 27 experts in an online survey. In the second stage, design principles which were extracted from the websites of four operating system developers were mapped to heuristics.
                                 
                                 
                                    57
                                    
                                       Somro et al. (2012)
                                    
                                    Mobile games
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Identify major issues and compared heuristics for computer and mobile games, 2) Categorised issues into categories by Korhonen and Koivisto (2006), 3) Questionnaire and issues to explore the issues from game users perspective, 4) Creation of heuristics
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    58
                                    
                                       Liao and Shen (2012)
                                    
                                    Educational computer game
                                    Heuristics were proposed based on existing guidelines (Ang et al., 2008) and modified based on feedback from experts. No detailed description was provided.
                                    The heuristics were used by experts to evaluate a game. Usability issue and compliance rating was obtained.
                                 
                                 
                                    59
                                    
                                       Alotaibi (2013)
                                    
                                    Website
                                    No detail information was given on how the heuristics list was generated (except mentioning that these were based on existing literature).
                                    The heuristics were used to evaluate 12 universities websites and involved 30 evaluators for each set of heuristics. The fulfillment of websites for each heuristic was rated against the following four-point scale (0–4): not applicable, not fulfilled, partially fulfilled and fully fulfilled.
                                 
                                 
                                    60
                                    
                                       Al-Azawi et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    Computer game
                                    No clear description was provided.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    61
                                    
                                       AlRoobaea et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    Social networking website
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) reviewed past literatures related to heuristics evaluation in the target domain, 2) Mini usability studies with end-users to identify users' perspective, requirements and expectations, 3) Focus group with experts' especially related to findings in step 1 and 2 to establish usability issues, 4) Development of heuristics by analysing outcome from the previous three steps.
                                    Two studies were performed, involving experts and end-users. In experts study (eight expert divided into two groups) which compared the use of Nielsen's and authors' heuristics, the following were compared: usability issues & their severity, time and cost required, and measures from Hartson et al. (2001), ease of use using SUS. One group used Nielsen's on the first two websites and authors' heuristics on the last website, while the other group used author's heuristics for the first 2 websites and Nielsen's heuristics on the last website. For the user study, usability issues were identified and would be compared with the result of experts study.
                                 
                                 
                                    62
                                    
                                       Diaz et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    Intercultural website
                                    See study no. 47
                                    6 experts evaluated two applications in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's (1994a,b) and author's heuristics. Usability issues and severity were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    63
                                    
                                       Grice et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    Website
                                    Existing heuristics (Nielsen, 1995; Hargis et al., 1998) were expanded iteratively until they fully described the usability and user experience in five broad use cases. For each case study, experience and usability issues that were not covered by heuristics were identified, and then additional heuristics were proposed and agreed.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    64
                                    
                                       Kuparinen et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    Mobile map application
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) performed literature review on general heuristics (e.g. Nielsen 1994a,b), existing heuristics (Pinelle et al., 2008, Alsumait and Al-Osaimi, 2009, Jaferian et al., 2011) & methods used to generate them for the domain, 2) Applied context of used (cartography) to existing heuristics to generate heuristics, 3) Four experts evaluated an application in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's (1994a,b) and author's heuristics. Applicability and intelligibility of heuristics were collected and used to refine the heuristics.
                                    Four experts evaluated an application in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's (1994a,b) and author's heuristics.
                                 
                                 
                                    65
                                    
                                       Neto and Pimentel (2013)
                                    
                                    Mobile-based application
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Collected usability issues by inspections of four existing applications by experts, 2) grouped the identified issues into categories and associated/approximated them with Nielsen's (1994a,b) where possible, 3) Enriched the heuristics by adding more details
                                    10 experts evaluated an application in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's (1994a,b) and author's heuristics. Usability issues were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    66
                                    
                                       Solano et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    Interactive television
                                    See study no. 47
                                    10 experts evaluated an application in a between subjects study design which compared Nielsen's (1994a,b) and author's heuristics. Usability issues were identified. Usability test with 5 users were conducted to investigate the severity of issues that were found specifically using Nielsen's and authors' heuristics.
                                 
                                 
                                    67
                                    
                                       Al-Razgan et al. (2014)
                                    
                                    Mobile-based application (for elderly)
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Converting existing guidelines into usability issues, 2) Group similar issues into categories, 3) Translated usability issues into heuristics which were inspired by existing relevant heuristics, 4) Elaborate heuristics into questions as checklists
                                    The heuristics were used by four experts to inspect six applications with two persona assigned as end-users. Usability issues and feedback on heuristics were obtained.
                                 
                                 
                                    68
                                    
                                       Joyce and Lilley (2014)
                                    
                                    Smartphone mobile application
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Performed a literature review to establish the baseline of what heuristics should be like, 2) Proposing the heuristics and performed survey on experts to gauge each heuristics usefulness and relevance, 3) Modification of heuristics
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    69
                                    
                                       Maike et al. (2014)
                                    
                                    Natural User Interface (touch-less, body-based interface)
                                    Employed the following steps: 1) Performed a systematic literature review and identified possible heuristics which was then entered into a predefined format, 2) identified patterns of heuristics and categorised them
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    70
                                    
                                       Paz et al. (2014) and Quiñones et al. (2014)
                                    
                                    Transactional website
                                    See study no. 47
                                    Six groups of 2–4 evaluators were involved to evaluate independently a transactional website. The followings were observed: correct and incorrect association of usability problems to heuristics, distribution of usability problems across heuristics, common problems identified among groups.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Appendix 2
                           
                              Detail of the proposed heuristics and their effectiveness.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    No
                                    Study
                                    The proposed heuristics
                                    Effectiveness
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    1
                                    
                                       van der Geest and Spyridakis (2000)
                                    
                                    Expressed in two forms, a long form (contained explanation, support and examples) and a quick list. Details of heuristics were not provided.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    2
                                    
                                       Greenberg et al. (2000)
                                    
                                    Short description was given for the five proposed heuristics. As the focus of heuristics was on teamwork, no overlap with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics was found.
                                    No comparison was made with other method.
                                 
                                 
                                    3
                                    
                                       Baker et al. (2001, 2002)
                                    
                                    Explanation of each heuristics (a total of 8) & how it is typically realised & supported in groupware was provided. As the focus of heuristics was on teamwork, no overlap with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics was found.
                                    The results of validation were theoretically compared to Nielsen's heuristics evaluation published outcome. The same level of performance was shown.
                                 
                                 
                                    4
                                    
                                       Federoff (2002)
                                    
                                    Heuristics (a total of 40) were divided into three categories (Interface, Mechanics and Play) and for each category heuristics were stated without additional explanation. Nearly all of Usability heuristics (of a total of 14) were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    5
                                    
                                       Kantner et al. (2002)
                                    
                                    For each heuristic (a total of 10), the definition is expanded by adding details under four different dimensions (structure, presentation, dynamics, content) as appropriate. 7 of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    6
                                    
                                       Reeves et al. (2002)
                                    
                                    For each heuristic (a total of 15), short definition and sample questions to be asked by evaluators were given. 8 of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    7
                                    
                                       Berry (2003)
                                    
                                    Detailed description was given for each heuristic (a total of 8). 4 of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    There was no significant difference in effectiveness between both sets of heuristics. However, none of author's heuristic was seen as inapplicable by evaluators.
                                 
                                 
                                    8
                                    
                                       Mankoff et al. (2003)
                                    
                                    Short description was given for each of the eight heuristics. 5 of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen (1994a,b).
                                    In average, an evaluator using domain specific heuristics found more usability problems than that using Nielsen. However, this was not significant. To cover all usability issues, half of Nielsen's and all but one author's heuristics were needed. None of authors' heuristic was seen as inapplicable by evaluators.
                                 
                                 
                                    9
                                    
                                       Somervell et al. (2003) and Somervell and McCrickard (2005)
                                    
                                    For each heuristic (a total of 8) details of what should or should not be done were given. No overlap with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics was found as the author's heuristics were at much lower level.
                                    The authors' heuristic showed higher thoroughness, validity, effectiveness and reliability than Nielsen's. Both novice and education experts could identify usability issues by using the heuristics even although the education experts initially found it difficult.
                                 
                                 
                                    10
                                    
                                       Zhang et al. (2003)
                                    
                                    Semantic tags, names, general description and specific information (i.e. things to look out for) were provided for each of the 14 heuristics. 10 and 4 of heuristics mapped accordingly to Nielsen's (1994a,b) and Shneiderman (1998).
                                    Violations of usability heuristics were identified using the proposed heuristics.
                                 
                                 
                                    11
                                    
                                       Ardito et al. (2004)
                                    
                                    Four dimensions (presentation, hypermediality, application proactivity, user's activity) with 16 and 8 criteria for e-learning platform and module, respectively. For each criterion, detail information (guideline) was given. Only a significantly small number of criteria & guideline were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    12
                                    
                                       Desurvire et al. (2004)
                                    
                                    There were a total of four dimensions (Game Play, Game Story, Mechanics and Usability). Majority of the heuristics for Usability dimension (from a total of 12) were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics albeit specifically phrased to suit the context of computer game.
                                    The heuristics identified more usability issues than user testing with some overlapped observed between the two. The heuristics identified general interface design issues while the user testing identified specific problems.
                                 
                                 
                                    13
                                    
                                       Sutcliffe and Gault (2004)
                                    
                                    A total of 12 heuristics with a short description for each. Seven of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    Increasing number of evaluators did not discover many more error. Difficulties in interpreting the heuristics and unsuitability of some of heuristics were reported.
                                 
                                 
                                    14
                                    
                                       Zhou et al. (2004)
                                    
                                    Six heuristics were proposed. Only the name of heuristics was provided. Four of them were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    The authors' heuristics identified more usability issues than Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics, especially for moderate to highly severe issues.
                                 
                                 
                                    15
                                    
                                       Dringus and Cohen (2005)
                                    
                                    A total of 13 heuristics were created with each heuristic was expanded into a set of further checklist. Eight of them were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    16
                                    
                                       Pang et al. (2005)
                                    
                                    A total of 14 heuristics were created, no description was provided for each heuristic. Ten of them were taken from Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics and three of them taken from Komlodi et al. (2005).
                                    Scenario based design and claims analysis identified causal relationships between system features and the usability of a user's interaction but was more time consuming.
                                 
                                 
                                    17
                                    
                                       Bertini et al. (2006)
                                    
                                    A total of 8 heuristics were created with description provided for each heuristics. Eight of Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics were adopted, expanded and modified to match mobility computing.
                                    The authors' heuristics detected more issues than Nielsen's heuristics but also more time consuming. Nielsen's heuristics was better at identifying severe issues whereas authors' heuristics identified more minor and major issues.
                                 
                                 
                                    18
                                    
                                       Korhonen and Koivisto (2006)
                                    
                                    Heuristics were contained within three modules (mobility, gameplay and game usability). Game usability consisted of 12 heuristics with 8 of heuristics reflected Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics. Detailed description of each heuristic was not provided.
                                    The results indicated that these heuristics are useful in identifying playability (including usability) issues in mobile games.
                                 
                                 
                                    19
                                    
                                       Moraes and Silveira (2006)
                                    
                                    A total of ten heuristics (exactly the same terminologies as Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics) were proposed with each heuristic contained detailed information in the form of specific guidelines.
                                    The usability heuristics allowed identification of which agents were better than others.
                                 
                                 
                                    20
                                    
                                       Röcker and Haar (2006)
                                    
                                    Only some of heuristics were provided in the study, of those provided, a clear description was given. Majority of the heuristics for Usability dimension (from a total of 12) were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics albeit specifically phrased to suit the context of game.
                                    The results show that some of the focus groups results could be mapped with the heuristics while some were not.
                                 
                                 
                                    21
                                    
                                       Zuk and Carpendale (2006) and Zuk et al. (2006)
                                    
                                    A total of 13 heuristics were proposed, no detailed description was provided. As the focus of heuristics was on information visualisations, no overlap with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics was found.
                                    The comparison showed that the evaluation process and results have a high dependency on the heuristics and the types of evaluators chosen.
                                 
                                 
                                    22
                                    
                                       Clarkson and Arkin (2007)
                                    
                                    Eight heuristics were created and description for each heuristic was provided. Six of the heuristics were modification of existing heuristics (Nielsen, 1994a,b; Scholtz, 2002; Mankoff et al., 2003).
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    23
                                    
                                       Conte et al. (2007, 2009)
                                    
                                    A total of 10 heuristics which were adopted and modified from Nielsen's (1994a,b) were proposed. Description of each heuristics and relevant design perspectives and their hints were provided.
                                    The authors' heuristics were as nearly twice as effective as Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics and as efficient as Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                 
                                 
                                    24
                                    
                                       Komarkova et al. (2007)
                                    
                                    There were a total of 9 high level heuristics with each heuristics expanded further into a set of checklist (in the form of specific questions) totalling into 138 checklists. 5 of the high level heuristics were modification of Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics. A range of scores were assigned for each checklist.
                                    Total points were used to compare the usability of GIS applications. Applications with most usability issues reached the same position in the usability testing and in heuristic evaluation.
                                 
                                 
                                    25
                                    
                                       Aitta et al. (2008)
                                    
                                    Nine heuristics were created and really detailed description was provided for each heuristic. Five of the heuristics were adapted from Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    There was 37% overlapped of usability issues identification with user studies.
                                 
                                 
                                    26
                                    
                                       Kemp et al. (2008)
                                    
                                    A total of 18 heuristics were proposed with 10 heuristics were adopted from Nielsen's (1994a,b). Specific questions were not provided.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    27
                                    
                                       Pinelle et al. (2008, 2009)
                                    
                                    10 heuristics were created in Pinelle et al. (2008) with description provided for each heuristic. Five of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b). 10 heuristics were also created in Pinelle et al. (2009) with description provided for each heuristics. None of the heuristics corresponded with Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    
                                       Pinelle et al. (2009) found that their heuristics performed better in identifying more issues. The severity rating of issues for both sets was similar.
                                 
                                 
                                    28
                                    
                                       Sim et al. (2008, 2009)
                                    
                                    A total of 11 heuristics were created and description of each heuristic was provided. 3 were based on Nielsen's original set, 2 were modifications, and 6 were new heuristics specific to CAA.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    29
                                    
                                       Afacan and Erbug (2009)
                                    
                                    A total of 7 heuristics were proposed with description and design considerations for each heuristics provided. Two of the heuristics were similar to Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    Issues that could not have been detected solely through an analysis of the construction drawings were found. There was a substantial evaluator effect. Therefore, more than one and interdisciplinary evaluators were needed.
                                 
                                 
                                    30
                                    
                                       Carvalho et al. (2009)
                                    
                                    A total of 38 heuristics divided into four categories (workflow, content, safeguards function) were proposed. Some of heuristics were re-used in different categories. Heuristics were so specific, no overlap with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics was found.
                                    Usability issues were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    31
                                    
                                       Collazos et al. (2009)
                                    
                                    A total of 13 heuristics were proposed and description for each heuristic was provided. Ten of the heuristics were adopted and modified from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    32
                                    
                                       Desurvire and Wiberg (2009)
                                    
                                    The heuristics (broken down further into 48 principles) were intended for three genres of computer games (real time strategy, action adventure and first person shooter) and divided into three categories (Game Play, Coolness/entertainment/humour/emotional immersion, Usability & game mechanics). 7 of the heuristics (from a total of 9) were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    33
                                    
                                       Hermann (2009)
                                    
                                    Five heuristics were proposed. No overlap with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics was found due to their focused in supporting creativity collaboration.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    34
                                    
                                       Jo et al. (2009)
                                    
                                    Eight heuristics were categorised into three modules (usability, playability, and enjoy ability). Each heuristics was expanded into a list of checklist (in the form of questions). Five of the heuristics were adopted from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    35
                                    
                                       Papaloukas et al. (2009)
                                    
                                    A total 10 heuristics were proposed and description for each heuristic was provided. Four of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    The heuristics helped identification of usability problems. However, overlapping between different heuristics and broad coverage of some heuristic were reported by experts.
                                 
                                 
                                    36
                                    
                                       Singh and Wesson (2009)
                                    
                                    Five heuristics were identified and description for each heuristics was provided. Specific directions on what to inspect for each heuristic were provided.
                                    Based on severity ratings of heuristics, the authors' heuristics and Nielsen's (1994a,b) identified and focused on different usability issues.
                                 
                                 
                                    37
                                    
                                       Tsui et al. (2009, 2010)
                                    
                                    A total of nine heuristics were proposed with each heuristic was expanded with detailed questions that were based on the results of the literature review. Two of the heuristics were adopted from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    The authors' heuristics found more issues than Nielsen's heuristics, with only 18% overlapped between the two.
                                 
                                 
                                    38
                                    
                                       Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila and Wäljas (2009)
                                    
                                    A total of nine heuristics were proposed (updated and modified from initial of six. Description for each heuristics, containing purpose, applicability and examples of its pragmatics and hedonic aspect was provided.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    39
                                    
                                       Alsumait and Al-Osaimi (2010)
                                    
                                    Nielsen's usability was adopted for usability category. The description for each heuristic was adjusted and modified to suit the domain.
                                    There was 32.3% overlapped issue between heuristics evaluation and user testing. 83.3% issue found using heuristic were not found using usability testing.
                                 
                                 
                                    40
                                    
                                       Fink et al. (2010)
                                    
                                    Six heuristics were identified and checklists (in the form of questions) were created for each heuristic. No overlap with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics was found due to their high focus on the domain.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    41
                                    
                                       Forsell and Johansson (2010)
                                    
                                    A total of 10 heuristics were proposed with description for each heuristic kept original. Four of heuristics were adopted from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    42
                                    
                                       Hub and Čapková (2010)
                                    
                                    A total of seven heuristics were proposed. Heuristics were expanded in details and resulted in 92 specific questions that are relevant to the domain. Six of the heuristics matches with Nielsen's.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    43
                                    
                                       Karousos et al. (2010)
                                    
                                    The heuristics contained two major parts, user interface and system particularities. For user interface, Nielsen's (1994a,b) were adopted without any modification. For system particularities, nine heuristics were proposed. Short description was provided for each heuristics.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    44
                                    
                                       Katre et al. (2010)
                                    
                                    16 heuristics, assigned into five categories, were proposed. Each heuristic was really specific and categorical responses (e.g. yes, no) were required. No overlap with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics was found due to their high focus on the domain.
                                    No significant difference on reliability was found between the author's heuristics and reported results from other methods (Zhang et al., 2003)
                                 
                                 
                                    45
                                    
                                       Omar et al. (2010)
                                    
                                    The usability heuristics were categorised into 4 (interface, pedagogical, content, and suitability). For each category, relevant heuristics were presented. No further description of each heuristic was provided. Three of the heuristics under interface category were adapted from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    46
                                    
                                       Omar and Jafar (2010a,b, 2011)
                                    
                                    Heuristics were divided into five categories (interface, pedagogical, content, multimedia and playability). No further description of each heuristic was provided. Three of the heuristics under interface category were adapted from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    47
                                    
                                       Rusu et al. (2010, 2011, 2012), Jiménez et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    A total of 12 heuristics were proposed. In addition to description, examples, benefits, etc., each heuristic was also expanded to include a list of checklists. Seven of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    Some specific domain usability problems were not detected by using only Nielsen's heuristics.
                                 
                                 
                                    48
                                    
                                       Salvador and Moura (2010)
                                    
                                    A total of 6 heuristics were provided. Each heuristic had its description and checklists. Three of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics albeit titles were modified.
                                    Usability issues were identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    49
                                    
                                       Zaibon and Shiratuddin (2010)
                                    
                                    A total of 27 heuristic were proposed and divided into four components (usability, mobility, game play and learning). No description was provided for each component.
                                    Scores for each heuristics in each component were reported.
                                 
                                 
                                    50
                                    
                                       Jaferian et al. (2011, 2014)
                                    
                                    A total of 7 heuristics were provided with description for each heuristic provided. Only one heuristic was in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    The authors' heuristics resulted in identification of more severe issues, fewer overlaps between individual experts, than Nielsen's.
                                 
                                 
                                    51
                                    
                                       Lynch (2011)
                                    
                                    A total of 32 heuristics were categorised into 4 themes: navigation, accessibility, readability and content. No description was provided for each heuristic.
                                    The scores from heuristics was in accordance with end-user performance i.e. high score showed shorter task completion time and error.
                                 
                                 
                                    52
                                    
                                       Muñoz et al. (2011) and Muñoz and Chalegre (2012)
                                    
                                    A total of 16 heuristics were proposed. In addition to definitions, examples, etc., each heuristic was also expanded into a set of checklist (a total of 53 items). Seven of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    The authors' heuristics identified more issues than Nielsen's, although some issues identified in Nielsen's were not found using authors' heuristics.
                                 
                                 
                                    53
                                    
                                       Sivaji et al. (2011)
                                    
                                    A total of 12 heuristics were proposed with description for each provided. Five of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    Heuristics that were specific for the domain identified 17% of the overall usability issues.
                                 
                                 
                                    54
                                    
                                       Van Greunen et al. (2011) and Yeratziotis et al. (2012)
                                    
                                    A total of 13 high-level heuristics with individualized checklist items that help examine usable security
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    55
                                    
                                       Bowie (2012)
                                    
                                    A total of 7 heuristics were proposed. Description for each heuristics was provided and checklists (guidelines) for each heuristics for different part of podcast were also provided.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    56
                                    
                                       Inostroza et al. (2012a,b, 2013) and Inostroza and Rusu (2014)
                                    
                                    A total of 14 heuristics were proposed. Each heuristic had its own description and other detailed information. Twelve of the heuristics were in adopted from Nielsen's (1994a,b) with only minor modification performed on their titles.
                                    In the first stage, the new heuristics showed that it could identified slightly more usability problems than Nielsen and were easy to understand by experts. In the second stage, six of the 43 design principles could not be associated with any heuristic and two new heuristics, “user experience” and “cognitive load”, were added.
                                 
                                 
                                    57
                                    
                                       Somro et al. (2012)
                                    
                                    A total of 10 heuristics, divided into four categories were proposed. Short description was provided for each.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    58
                                    
                                       Liao and Shen (2012)
                                    
                                    A total of 36 heuristics were divided into 6 categories. Two categories (game interface and navigation) contained two of heuristics from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    Compliance rating to heuristics was reported.
                                 
                                 
                                    59
                                    
                                       Alotaibi (2013)
                                    
                                    The heuristics contains seven heuristics with 58 questions (checklist). For each heuristic, a short description was provided. Two of the heuristics were in accordance with Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics.
                                    The usability rating for websites and each heuristic was identified.
                                 
                                 
                                    60
                                    
                                       Al-Azawi et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    Heuristics were divided into five categories (quality, playability, usability, enjoyment and mobility) with a total of 26 heuristics for usability. The usability criteria contained heuristics that were adopted from existing heuristics (e.g. Korhonen & Koivisto, 2006; Desurvire et al., 2004; Federoff, 2002).
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    61
                                    
                                       AlRoobaea et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    A total of 26 heuristics were proposed and categorised based on 7 types of usability issues areas. No additional description was provided for each heuristic.
                                    The authors' heuristics identified all real problems that were discovered by user study and expert study using Nielsen's (1994a,b) heuristics with greater efficiency, thoroughness effectiveness, validity and reliability. Researchers identified real problem by extracting issues identified in three methods, removed all false positive (‘not real’) problems, ‘evaluator subjective’ problems and duplicated problems. The issues agreed on were added as unique master problem list and any problems on which the evaluators disagreed were removed.
                                 
                                 
                                    62
                                    
                                       Diaz et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    A total of 13 heuristics were proposed. For each heuristics, detailed information was provided (description, examples, benefits, checklist, etc.). 10 of the heuristics were adapted (with the same titles) from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    The authors' heuristics found more problem than Nielsen's and higher averaged severity. Checklists of heuristic which did not help identified any problem was combined with other heuristics.
                                 
                                 
                                    63
                                    
                                       Grice et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    A total of 10 heuristics were proposed with each heuristic contained several sub heuristics (a total of 36). For each sub heuristics, metrics (product, behavioural, survey) were added. A small number of the sub-heuristics were adopted from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    64
                                    
                                       Kuparinen et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    Ten heuristics were proposed with each had its own description. 9 of the heuristics were adapted from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    65
                                    
                                       Neto and Pimentel (2013)
                                    
                                    A total of 11 heuristics were proposed with short description and the literature source provided. Six of the heuristics were adapted from Nielsen's (1994a,b).
                                    The authors' heuristics found more issues than Nielsen in all categories (cosmetic, minor, major and catastrophic).
                                 
                                 
                                    66
                                    
                                       Solano et al. (2013)
                                    
                                    14 heuristics were proposed with each heuristic contain specific information on what it covers. A checklist was created to support the usability heuristics. Nine of the heuristics were adapted from Nielsen's (1994a,b), some titled were modified.
                                    The authors' heuristics found more issues than Nielsen. Some issues were identified by both heuristics and some were not.
                                 
                                 
                                    67
                                    
                                       Al-Razgan et al. (2014)
                                    
                                    A total of 12 heuristics were proposed with each has a set of questions (checklists). Six of the heuristics were adapted from Nielsen's (1994a,b) albeit with different titles.
                                    The authors' heuristics identified issues and was easy to understand and relevant for the domain.
                                 
                                 
                                    68
                                    
                                       Joyce and Lilley (2014)
                                    
                                    A total of 13 heuristics were proposed with each had its own description. Five of the heuristics (titled changed_ were adapted from Nielsen's 1994a,b)
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    69
                                    
                                       Maike et al. (2014)
                                    
                                    A total of 23 heuristics, divided into four categories were proposed. For each category, description and source were given.
                                    N/A
                                 
                                 
                                    70
                                    
                                       Paz et al. (2014), Quiñones et al. (2014)
                                    
                                    A total of 15 heuristics were proposed. Additional information (ID, name, short description, examples of violation and compliance etc.) for each heuristic was provided. 12 of the heuristics were adopted from Nielsen's (1994a,b)
                                    
                                    Some problems were wrongly associated with heuristics. Therefore, a more clear and detailed definition of some heuristics were needed, checklist would likely help addressing this.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

