@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Thermal sensations and comfort investigations in transient conditions in tropical office

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Evaluating thermal subjective responses in reference to abrupt exposure to warm temperature.


                        
                        
                           
                           Up-step temperature transition (neutral-warm condition) resulted in thermal discomfort among people in the tropics.


                        
                        
                           
                           Subjective thermal responses were more correlated with thermal skin point located at the forehead than the dorsal left hand.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Semi-outdoor and indoor

Tropical microclimate

Thermal transition

Thermal perception

Skin temperatures

Thermal preference

Thermal sensation vote

PMV

Hysteresis effect

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The study was done to identify affective and sensory responses observed as a result of hysteresis effects in transient thermal conditions consisting of warm-neutral and neutral - warm performed in a quasi-experiment setting. Air-conditioned building interiors in hot-humid areas have resulted in thermal discomfort and health risks for people moving into and out of buildings. Reports have shown that the instantaneous change in air temperature can cause abrupt thermoregulation responses. Thermal sensation vote (TSV) and thermal comfort vote (TCV) assessments as a consequence of moving through spaces with distinct thermal conditions were conducted in an existing single-story office in a hot-humid microclimate, maintained at an air temperature 24 °C (±0.5), relative humidity 51% (±7), air velocity 0.5 m/s (±0.5), and mean radiant temperature (MRT) 26.6 °C (±1.2). The measured office is connected to a veranda that showed the following semi-outdoor temperatures: air temperature 35 °C (±2.1), relative humidity 43% (±7), air velocity 0.4 m/s (±0.4), and MRT 36.4 °C (±2.9). Subjective assessments from 36 college-aged participants consisting of thermal sensations, preferences and comfort votes were correlated against a steady state predicted mean vote (PMV) model. Local skin temperatures on the forehead and dorsal left hand were included to observe physiological responses due to thermal transition. TSV for veranda–office transition showed that no significant means difference with TSV office-veranda transition were found. However, TCV collected from warm-neutral (−0.24, ±1.2) and neutral-warm (−0.72, ±1.3) conditions revealed statistically significant mean differences (p < 0.05). Sensory and affective responses as a consequence of thermal transition after travel from warm-neutral-warm conditions did not replicate the hysteresis effects of brief, slightly cool, thermal sensations found in previous laboratory experiments. These findings also indicate that PMV is an acceptable alternative to predict thermal sensation immediately after a down-step thermal transition (≤1 min exposure duration) for people living in a hot-humid climate country.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Our built environments are experiencing a shift in the performance of their heating, ventilation and air-conditioning technologies. Thermal comfort evaluations should include psychophysics factors when exposed to spatial transitions, such as the influences of local and whole body temperature in eliciting thermal satisfaction and other pleasurable aspects. Kuno (2007) emphasized that human physiological adaptation takes time, even during movement between rooms and in between indoor and outdoor spaces. He added that it is unnecessary to create uniform neutral conditions in all rooms. Building occupants who are identified to be thermally dissatisfied should stay or work in a room that has a higher temperature than the neutral temperature air conditioning set point (i.e., during summer) and vice versa, thus resulting in energy savings. Subjective thermal perception responses under transitional conditions have been addressed in previous investigations (Chun and Tamura, 2005; Parkinson et al. 2012; Renstrom and Rahe, 2013; Wu and Mahdavi, 2014). However, field surveys and experiments in these particular investigations were conducted with a temperature climate set up. The affective and sensory responses as a result of hysteresis effects due to transient conditions (e.g., neutral to warm and warm to neutral) could be significantly and are important for understanding human psycho-physical behaviours when moving from one place to another (Gagge et al., 1967; Kelly and Parsons, 2010; Marks and Gonzalez, 1974).

There have been various reports over the past thirty years of heat-related illnesses due to abrupt exposures to hot outdoor environments in people who were accustomed to air-conditioned indoors (Hitchings & Lee, 2008; Kannan, 2012; Liao and Cech, 1977). Katavoutas et al. (2015) suggest that, despite coming out from indoor climate conditions of air temperature 23 °C, relative humidity 50%, air speed 0.1 ms−1 and mean radiant temperature that equals the air temperature, the temporal energy flux of a person depended significantly upon the outdoor radiation field (i.e., shaded or non-shaded). They added that shaded participants performing sedentary tasks showed no signs of heat stress as observed through their skin-wetness values compared with when similar tasks were conducted under non-shaded conditions. To examine the subjective and physiological effects of thermal transitions within the thermal comfort zone, this study was conducted under a roofed open-air veranda. Participants were not exposed to direct radiation heat source of uncovered outdoor condition at the measured site. This is to simulate how people use indigenous buildings to avoid intense heat exposure in hot-humid climate countries like Malaysia as reported by (GhaffarianHoseini et al., 2014; Hanafi, 1994; Yuan, 1987; Zin et al. 2012).

Acceptable indoor thermal comfort for non-residential buildings in Malaysia is within the range of 23 °C–26 °C for air temperature, relative humidity between 55% and 70% and air movement between 0.15 m/s to 0.5 m/s (MS1525, 2007). Slightly wider indoor environmental ranges for air temperatures between 20 °C and 26 °C and relative humidity of 40%–60% are provided by the Department of Occupational Safety and Health Malaysia for acceptable office working environments (Shaharon and Jalaludin, 2012). Field surveys conducted by Choong and Mohd Suharizal (Star, 2011) suggested that government officers working in typical office buildings in Malaysia were thermally comfortable when the air-conditioning system was set between 24 °C and 25 °C. Other investigations (Cândido et al., 2011; Toe and Kubota, 2013) also found that an operative temperature range of 24–27 °C, with an air velocity of 0.4 m/s, was considered to be thermally acceptable to building occupants in hot-humid climate countries. However, few investigations have been conducted to evaluate thermal comfort responses in transition spaces under hot-humid climate conditions (Hwang et al, 2009; Jie Kwong and Adam, 2011; Jie Kwong et al, 2009).

In the present study, thermal sensations and comfort assessments as a consequence of moving through spaces with distinct thermal conditions (i.e., from semi-outdoors to indoor and vice versa) were collected in an existing single story office in a hot-humid microclimate that was maintained at an air temperature of 24 °C. The office was connected to a veranda, which was used as the measured semi-outdoor space in this study. Responses when the participants were adapted (i.e., before transition) and immediately after transition conditions were collected and analysed against a conventional steady-state thermal comfort model, predicted mean vote (PMV). Moreover, results were analysed to identify affective and sensory responses observed as a result of hysteresis effects in transient thermal conditions (i.e., warm to neutral and neutral to warm) outside of a laboratory setting.

The objectives of the study were to obtain empirical data needed to address the following research questions:
                        
                           1.
                           Do the thermal sensation votes of thermally acclimatized participants who are experiencing distinct outdoor and indoor transitions agree with predictions of standard thermal comfort models?

Do temperature differences influence these thermal sensation and thermal comfort votes? If yes, how statistically significant are these correlations?

This study investigates the relationship between thermal affective and sensation responses in reference to participant's adaptive behaviours when experiencing thermal transient conditions. It is important to investigate how thermal step-changes in neutral-warm-neutral conditions can influence a person's thermal comfort and acceptability, thus impacting on passive design strategies in hot-humid climate countries. This study's findings could contribute to clarify the relationship between the standard neutral indoor air-conditioned in Malaysian offices and people's thermal comfort acceptability.

To pursue these research questions, an existing one-floor office in the Faculty of Design and Architecture (FDA), Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang was selected. The office was installed with two split unit air-conditioning systems. Cooling capacity for each unit was approximately 6.9 HP or 17.6 kW. The measurements were conducted on 27 March 2015 starting from 9:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. The recorded monthly mean temperature was 27.8 °C for Serdang, obtained from the KLIA weather station. The average minimum temperature recorded was 24.4 °C, while the average maximum temperature was 32.3 °C. The average monthly relative humidity in KLIA was 79.7%, and the average monthly rainfall was 163 mm.

A quasi-experiment is designed to measure changes in participants' psychophysiological responses when exposed to series of temperature transitions under specific climate chamber settings. The experiment will be conducted to test participants’ local skin temperatures and affective votes while sedentary when exposed to thermal hysteresis condition, namely, warm-neutral-warm.

Previous researches with similar research design have shown that experiments were tested in small sample sizes of three to 30 participants (Chen et al., 2011; Gagge et al., 1967; Parkinson et al., 2012; Schlader et al., 2009; Y. Zhang and Zhao, 2009).

A pilot test to evaluate the thermal sensation and thermal comfort votes using pen and paper questionnaire form was conducted on 10 participants. The effect size calculation was calculated using SPSS version 21 under Univariate General Linear Model. For the purpose of this calculation, the thermal comfort and thermal acceptability votes were used in the calculation as dependent and independent variables, respectively. The effect size was found to be of above moderate effect size (Cohen, 1992), F(2, 87) = 43.5, p = 0.001, ƞ2p = 0.523.

In this investigation, 36 participants will be recruited from college-aged Second Year undergraduate B. Sc. students at FDA. They will be reminded to enter the measured site wearing clothing that consisted of a long-sleeved cotton shirt, long jean pants, underwear and covered shoes (clo value = 0.6). The former clothing ensemble was recommended by (Rohles et al. 1973) also known as the Standard KSU uniform. Female headscarf is assumed to be 0.2 clo, similar to the clo value for a cap, based on ASHRAE standards (ANSI/ASHRAE, 2010). The study was reviewed and approved by Research Ethics Committee of Universiti Putra Malaysia.

Subjective assessments were conducted using a questionnaire. Personal details from each participant were collected in the first part of the questionnaire, which included their gender, age, weight and height. In the second part of the questionnaire, the magnitudes of a sensation were represented semantically using the ASHRAE seven-points scale for thermal sensation, i.e., hot (3), warm (2), slightly warm (1), neutral (0), slightly cool (−1), cool (−2) and cold (−3). Next, participants were asked to rate their thermal comfort based upon a seven points scale vote, i.e., very comfortable (3), comfortable (2), slightly comfortable (1), neutral (0), slightly uncomfortable (−1), uncomfortable (−2) and very uncomfortable (−3) (Hagino and Hara, 1992; H. Zhang, 2003). A thermal preference assessment using a three point scale (i.e., want the space to be cooler (−1); no change (0) and wanting the space to be warmer (+1)) was administered as well. Lastly, participants were asked to rate their thermal acceptability using a three point scale vote, i.e., unacceptable (−1); not sure (0) and acceptable (+1).

Micrometeorological sensors were selected in accordance with the specifications outlined in ASHRAE's Handbook of Fundamentals. The OHM Delta Thermal Microclimate HD32.2 logged four basic environmental parameters known to influence thermal comfort every minute: temperature, humidity, radiant environment and wind speed. Measurements at the veranda and in the office were recorded simultaneously. Participant's clo values and metabolic rates were pre-set at 0.6 (clothing ensemble: sleeveless shirt, short pants and shoes). In this study, it is assumed that the metabolic rate per square metre of body surface area for a man with average mass of 70 kg and height 1.73 m is 1.83 m2 (Awbi, 2003; DuBois and DuBois, 1916). Moreover, the metabolic rate that corresponds to relaxed, seated person, i.e. 1 Met = 58 W/m2.

Skin temperatures were collected every 5 min using a handheld Fluke 561 infrared thermometer (accuracy of ±1 °C; operating temperature range 0 °C–50 °C) at a distance of 300 mm from target, resulting a spot size of 38 mm. Skin temperature at the forehead was measured in the survey because it has been identified as accurate in representing the core temperature so long as a +2 °C compensation is included (Sessler, 2008). Meanwhile, skin temperature measured on the dorsal surface of the left hand was included because it is the most exposed skin surface point. Participants were instructed not to touch the measured skin surface points throughout the experiment period to minimise heat gain.


                        Fig. 1
                         illustrates the experiment's spatial arrangement. Two split-unit air-conditioning systems were used to keep the interior of the office cool. OHM Delta Thermal Microclimate HD32.2 devices were mounted 1.0 m above the floor in both the office and the veranda (marked with an ‘x’ in Fig. 1). The office's air temperature and operative temperature were maintained at 24 °C and 25 °C, respectively. A day before the experimental session, participants were briefed about terms used in the questionnaire survey and how to express their thermal sensations and comfort through the scales provided. They were reminded to adhere to the clothing ensemble that was suggested for the experiment. Each participant underwent a 45-min real-time paper and pen thermal perception assessment in two distinctly different air temperature spaces, namely, at the veranda and inside the FDA postgraduate office. The experiment flow is presented in Fig. 2
                        .

Fifteen minutes of pre-conditioning were allocated, wherein students were asked to conduct a sedentary task at the veranda before casting their first vote. An adaptation phase of 5–20 min has been found to be appropriate in several studies (Arens et al., 2006; Chen et al., 2011; Goto et al., 2006; Y. Zhang and Zhao, 2009). A 5-min sedentary state period was included after the participants exited the FDA postgraduate office (V2t1 and V2t5) to investigate whether an up-step transition from an air-conditioned interior could cause thermal discomfort and, if so, whether there was a significant difference when compared with subjective votes collected before entering the office (Vt1 and Vt5).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The experiment conducted on 27 March 2015 recorded two distinct temperatures measured at the veranda and in the FDA office (Table 1
                     ). The temperature difference between inside the office and the veranda was approximately 10 K. Operative temperatures were calculated using the ASHRAE operative temperature model (ANSI/ASHRAE, 2010).

A total of 36 college-aged students participated in the experiment, 14 male and 22 female students. Table 2
                      displays the means and standard deviations of the participants’ physical information. All participants were local Malaysians and had been acclimatized to the hot-humid microclimate condition. Out of the 22 females, 15 wore headscarves during the field survey. Using a one-way ANOVA test, no significant mean differences were detected in their ratings of thermal sensations by gender or clo value throughout the experiment.


                     Fig. 3
                      shows the comparison between PMV and TSV throughout the experiment. PMV calculations were overestimating the outdoor and indoor conditions when compared against TSV. Paired samples T-test detected significant mean differences between both PMV and TSV at different experimental sequences (p < 0.01) except at sequence Ot1. At Ot1, PMV ‘slightly cool’ prediction was in agreement with the participants' TSV. Thermal sensation overshoots that occurred before the first step change (at Vt5) and after the up-step (at V2T1) conditions showed no significant difference.


                     Fig. 4
                      shows the means for thermal comfort votes throughout the experiment. Paired sample t-tests revealed significant mean differences at the p < 0.05 level between TCVs collected 5 min before entering the office (i.e., at Vt1 and Vt5) and TCV collected 5 min after exiting the office (i.e., V2t1 and V2t5). The mean values for the former and latter TCVs were −0.24 (±1.2) and −0.72 (±1.3), respectively. Fig. 5
                      shows the thermal preferences of participants for every sequence. In the office, approximately 20% of participants preferred the office to be cooler than 24 °C. However, the indoor office condition was thermally acceptable to the current participants (Fig. 6
                     ).

One-way ANOVA was used to test mean differences between genders for skin temperatures at the hand (Tsk hand) and forehead (Tsk forehead) (Table 3
                     ). Tsk hand at Ot20 differed significantly between females and males at the p < 0.01 level. Female participants exhibited a Tsk hand of 1.6 °C cooler than their male counterparts did after 20 min of exposure to a steady air temperature of 24 °C in the office.

Nevertheless, this finding is in agreement with (Hitchings & Lee, 2008; Liao and Cech, 1977; Newcombe, 1979) that adaptation to neutral air-conditioning in an indoor environment often results in thermally uncomfortable responses among city dwellers, particularly in warm-climate countries. It can be concluded that sensory changes during these transitions can be elicited by changes in skin temperatures detected at the forehead (both gender) and hand (male) from 34 °C to 35 °C, respectively, that can be observed 5 min after a neutral to warm transition (Table 3). Female skin temperatures at the dorsal left hand were slightly (2 °C) cooler than males.


                     Fig. 7
                      shows changes in thermal sensation votes based upon gender after two spatial transitions, namely, down-step (TSVOt1- TSVVt5) and up-step (TSVV2t1-TSVOt20) step changes as a function of the temperature difference between the office and the veranda, and vice versa. Thermal sensation votes shown in the negative region suggest that participants experienced a cool sensation, whereas votes located in the positive region indicate a warm sensation. These results suggest that changes in participants’ thermal sensations after a step change could be estimated based upon the difference in room temperature. Relationships between gender and temperature difference under a transition state suggest that female skin temperatures on extremities such as the hand fluctuate more than in males (Table 3), which suggests a more sensitive thermoregulation for females under neutral and warm conditions. These findings are in agreement with findings from (Schellen et al., 2012; Ugursal, 2010).

Changes in thermal comfort votes between female and male participants in corresponding temperature differences (Fig. 8
                     ) show lesser correlation values in comparison to Fig. 7. Positive TCV differences indicate that participants are thermally comfortable, whereas negative TCV differences suggest otherwise. It can be suggested that participants were most likely to be thermally comfortable after experiencing a down-step transition. More step-change assessments that are closer to the neutral temperature, namely, 24 °C (or ‘0’ when referring to Fig. 8), need to be conducted to identify the lowest temperature differences that can elicit positive affective judgements.

Participants in this study were acclimatized to the hot and humid microclimate condition and had undergone 15 min of adaptation period prior to the experiment. The first two thermal sensation votes, taken 5 min apart, showed that participants felt the thermal condition at the veranda was warm at 1.9 (±0.8) and 1.5 (±0.9), for Vt1 and Vt5, respectively. Similar thermal sensation responses were detected 5 min after exiting the office, where the TSV value for V2t1 and V2t5 were 1.6 (±0.9) and 2.0 (±0.8), respectively. However, TCV responses 5 min after entering the office revealed statistically significant differences at the p < 0.05 level. TCV collected from the former and latter transitions were −0.24 (±1.2) and −0.72 (±1.3), respectively. These differences suggested that 20 min of exposure to an air-conditioned interior of 24 °C could reduce the levels of thermal comfort encountered with hot and humid outdoor conditions.

In this study, the affective responses triggered in superficial skin temperature were examined. Two local skin points were selected, namely at the forehead and dorsal left hand, instead of the mean skin temperature. Table 4
                      shows the correlations between TSV and PMV at the two local skin temperature points. Participants' affective responses were more significantly correlated with the skin temperature detected at their forehead than their dorsal hand. This finding is confirmed by Marks and Gonzalez (1974), in which transient thermal stimulation on the forehead could influenced a person's affective dimension of thermal sensation. PMV showed slightly higher correlation with skin temperatures compared with subjective affective and sensory thermal methods. This finding may be because it was developed to predict physical changes in a surrounding microclimate. The correlation value could be improved if the PMV model was used under steady state conditions.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The limitations of this investigation include external validity, where only 36 college-aged students participated in the complete study. The air-conditioned temperature used in the quasi-experiment was limited to about 24 °C due to strict access to use the FDA postgraduate office outside of the specific experiment time slot. The skin temperature measurements were also limited to two skin surface points, namely, the dorsal skin surface of the left hand and forehead. The action was due to limited time and research enumerator to prepare the participants when more intense measurement methods are applied, such as conducting seven point mean skin temperature and core temperature monitoring using iButtons and core temperature recorder, respectively. It is hoped that the mentioned methodologies can be conducted in future investigation.

The findings also suggest that overestimating PMV results in reference to TSV mainly occurred because the former thermal comfort model was designed to predict responses during a steady state and not a transitional state, such as expressed in the present study. However, at Ot1, PMV ‘slightly cool’ prediction was in agreement with the participants' TSV suggesting that PMV can be an acceptable alternative to predict thermal sensation immediately after a down-step thermal transition (≤1 min exposure duration) for people living in a hot-humid climate country. Down-step step changes (e.g., from warm to cool environment) trigger faster responses because the skin's cold receptors are closer to the skin's surface than its warm receptors (de Dear et al., 1993). In this study, participants' thermal sensations did not overshoot the values predicted by PMV when moving from warm (Ta = 35 °C) to cooler (Ta = 24 °C) environments as suggested by Kelly and Parsons (2010), where their thermal transition investigation yielded a larger temperature difference (i.e., 13 K, from 31 °C to 18 °C).

Participants' thermal acceptability votes suggested that they were tolerant to the warm semi-outdoor condition and quite content with their air-conditioned office (Fig. 6). However, participants’ were less tolerant of the warm semi-outdoor condition for the first 5 min after exiting the air-conditioned office (at V2t1 and V2t5). This could be due to the 2 °C increase that appears in the skin temperature (hand) when passing from neutral to warm detected in female participants, which is about 1 °C more than their male counterparts. Despite having recruited participants that were local Malaysians, the findings suggest that human cannot be naturally adapted to prefer warmer temperatures. This finding is in agreement with Chun et al. (2008) and deDear et al. (1991), where it was found that people whom experienced warm sensation prefer slightly cooler indoor temperatures when experiencing warm outdoor temperature. According to Parsons (2003), people become acclimatized to the conditions to which they are exposed. Parsons (2003) referred to workers who spent long hours exposed to the direct heat such as construction workers. Makaremi et al. (2012), reported that tolerance to hot-humid outdoor conditions among acclimatized local Malaysian university student participants were higher compared to their international counterparts. However, their participants were not exposed to transient conditions between air-conditioned indoor and warm semi-outdoor/outdoor spaces. Therefore, it can be suggested that the participants in this study were accustomed to air-conditioned indoor conditions and were not fully acclimatized to hot-humid temperatures when experienced with abrupt warm-neutral-warm temperature step-changes.

As depicted in Figs. 4–6 participants' thermal comfort, preferences and acceptability responses are described as hysteresis effects, obtained in thermal measurements when thermal lags exist between the sensor elements (i.e., local skin temperatures) and sources of heat production (i.e., heart rate) (Gagge et al., 1967). In Gagge et al. (1967), subjects were unclothed and tested in a laboratory setting within an air temperature range from 12 °C to 48 °C. Participants in this study were instructed to wear clothing ensembles with clo values up to 0.8, and measurements were conducted under actual conditions. The cool sensation immediately after an up-step transition (and skin temperatures of 34 °C) as found in (Gagge et al., 1967) was not replicated in this study. Overshoots in the thermal sensation occurred before the first step change and after the up step change showed no significant differences, i.e., participants voted both former and latter conditions as warm. It can be suggested that participants’ thermal acceptability depended on their whole thermal state before the step change and the level of temperature step range. Therefore, it can be suggested that temperature step ranges of 10 K in both former and latter step changes in a hot and humid climate elicited similar warm thermal sensation responses. However, higher level of thermal discomfort and thermal unacceptability percentages were observed when passing from neutral to warm environments in which findings from this study are in agreement with (Du et al., 2014).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Sensory estimates of comfort and thermal sensation for sedentary participants were compared with local skin temperatures for the range of ambient temperature of 24 °C–35 °C under actual thermal transition conditions. The major finding of this study suggests that sensory and affective responses are a consequence of thermal transitions; however, travel from warm-neutral-warm conditions did not replicate the hysteresis effects of brief slightly cool thermal sensations found in previous laboratory experiments. Moreover, 20 min of exposure to an air-conditioned interior of 24 °C could reduce the level of thermal comfort once the hot-humid outdoor condition was re-entered. The investigations illustrate how thermal step-changes can influence a person's thermal sensation, comfort and acceptability, where an indoor temperature with an air-condition set point of 24 °C is suggested to elicit thermal discomfort with up to 2 °C skin temperature (hand) difference when exposed to abrupt warm semi-outdoor weather.

It is recommended that future investigations examine the possibility of reducing the temperature difference in transient hysteresis-effect driven conditions between air-conditioned indoor and warm outdoor conditions in order to suggest more suitable indoor and semi-outdoor passive design strategies in hot-humid climate countries. Methods to reduce the hotter outdoor air temperature should be taken into consideration to complement the neutral indoor temperature. Gagge et al. (1967) claims that when the body has undergone a hysteresis effect from neutral to warm, these hysteresis effects are less noticeable and could be overlooked if immediate judgements after the transitions are ignored. It is believed that less noticeable hysteresis effects are partially a result of reduced thermal stress.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to acknowledge the support of Mohd Khairun Nizam Mohamad Noh and Mohd Saufi Mohamad in the organization of experiments and in data collection. We also thank all of the students who participated in this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

