@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Cycling at varying load: How are experiences of perceived exertion integrated in a single measurement?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Participants scaled perceived exertion (PE) for systematically varied cycling intensities (steady, ascending or descending).


                        
                        
                           
                           Scalings were altered by the order of the intensity changes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Alterations were more pronounced for ascending than for descending intensities.


                        
                        
                           
                           Practitioners should mind that scalings for ascending work intensities can be overestimated.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Scaling

Perceived exertion

Category partitioning procedure

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  How are experiences of perceived exertion (PE), associated with varying load, integrated in a single measurement? In search of an integrating pattern of scalings of PE, 209 participants were randomly assigned to 7.5-min pedalling trials on a bicycle-ergometer. Intensities were either kept constant at 25 W, 50 W, 75 W, 100 W, 125 W, or were systematically varied after 2.5 and 5 min whereby the overall load was kept constant at either 50 W, 75 W or 100 W. Systematically varied intensities were either continuously increased or decreased by steps of 25 W. A nearly linear relationship between steady presented intensities and session scalings of PE confirmed the validity of the Category partitioning (CP) procedure. Scalings obtained in sessions with systematically varied loads were altered by the order of the intensity changes. The influence was more pronounced in sessions with increasing loads than in sessions with loads in decreasing order.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Valid and realistic measurements are the basis for the optimisation of work processes in the service of the workers' health. Following DIN EN ISO 10075-1 (2000), as long as mainly physical work is addressed, work load (referred to as stress) is measured in physical units. The resulting work-related strain, defined as the effect of stress on the individual, which depends on each individual's pre-existing condition, can be assessed by measuring perceived exertion (PE).

PE, defined as the perceived intensity of strain experienced during physical exercise (Robertson and Noble, 1997), can reliably be measured, if the underlying work load is kept constant during the monitored period. This has been repeatedly confirmed by experiments using category rating scales (Borg, 1962; Borg et al., 1985; Borg et al., 1987) or the Category partitioning (CP) procedure (Müller et al., 1995). Both methods have been mutually validated (Müller et al., 1995) and verified by simultaneous registration of heart rate (Borg et al., 1985, 1987; Kakarot et al., 2012; Stamford, 1976). Fleishman, Gebhardt and Hogan (1984) confirmed the reliability and validity of scalings of PE for a variety of occupational and manual material handling tasks.

Unlike controlled experiments, daily work situations are usually characterized by changing load intensities. Furthermore, workers cannot repeatedly be asked for strain assessments without disturbing the work flow and altering the working process. Relying on only few but global descriptions of PE, comprising different work steps, practitioners need to know how varying loads are integrated into a single measurement and whether these measurements give a reliable and realistic picture of the underlying strain. Since workers regularly do not know that they have to scale PE for a period with varying loads, it is to question if all work steps gain the same attention by the worker. In this case, all loads should be equally weighted. However, scalings could also be most influenced by the final load (e.g. Do et al., 2008) or by an average of the peak and end load (e.g. Fredrickson and Kahneman, 1993).

Session category rating scales are known to work for monitoring episodes of aerobic (Foster et al., 2001; Herman et al., 2006; Sweet et al., 2004) and resistance exercise (Day et al., 2004; Sweet et al., 2004). To our knowledge, only a single study up to now (Kilpatrick et al., 2012) addressed the question of how experiences of PE, associated with systematically varied load intensities, are integrated in a single measurement. Results revealed that presenting ascending as well as descending intensities resulted in higher session scalings of PE than presenting the same physical load steadily. However, since only the differences between the ascending and the steady conditions proved statistically significant, but not those between the descending and the steady conditions, the authors presumed that session scalings are most strongly influenced by the highest presented intensity.

The dominating position of the highest load intensity in the study by Kilpatrick et al. (2012) could probably be attributed to their experimental procedure. Before session scalings, the authors asked for predicted (before work) and in-task scalings of PE (for each of the presented intensities). Such prior scalings change the scaling attitude from just describing the actual perceived intensity of the given stimulus to a comparative analysis of prior given and present loads (Müller et al., 1995; Petrov and Anderson, 2005; Podlesek, 2010). Since participants remember the scalings they have already given when they are asked for session PE, it is to be questioned whether session scalings of PE reflect the unbiased perception of strain for the entire experiment or result from conscious judgement and calculations based on the judgements given before.

Findings of Hutchinson and Tenenbaum (2007) indicate that the cycling intensity is moderating the influence of the attention focus on scalings of PE. Scalings were found to be mainly lower if dissociative thoughts are involved (thoughts diverting attention away from internal sensations and toward external distracting stimulation) and to be increased by associative thoughts (thoughts seeking to monitor sensory input). Especially at high intensities attention was focused on the associated overwhelming physiological sensations, dominating focal awareness.

We expected session scalings of PE in our study, where they were for the first time assessed with the CP procedure, to increase with the average stress presented within a session. The general aim of our study was to explore whether scalings of PE are altered by the presentation of the loads, when participants are only asked to scale session PE, not to predict PE before or assess PE during the task. Due to the findings of Hutchinson and Tenenbaum (2007) we expected differences between session PE in ascending/descending and steady conditions to increase with increasing average intensities.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

All experiments were conducted with participants from the university student population. To avoid the possible influence of previous experiences, we conducted the experiments with an independent sample (e.g. Borg, 1998; Lawless et al., 2000; Müller, 1996; Petzold and Haubensak, 2004).

Two hundred and thirteen participants were randomly assigned to one of 11 experimental conditions. Since four women could not maintain the required 60 rotations per minute for the entire 7.5 min (two participating in the steady 100 W condition, one in the descending 100 W condition and one in the steady 125 W condition) their data had to be excluded from the analysis.

The remaining 209 participants (65 men & 144 women) ranged from 16 to 49 years (M = 24.42, SD = 6.06). Mean height in cm was 173.90 (SD = 8.02), mean body mass in kg 66.06 (SD = 10.60) and mean Body Mass Index (BMI) was 21.74 (SD = 2.30). The experimental groups did not differ significantly with regard to their BMI (χ² = 5.413, df = 10, p = .862), sex (χ² = 7.134, df = 10, p = .713) or age (χ² = 17.901, df = 10, p = .057).

PE was measured with the CP procedure, introduced by Heller (1982) (see Fig. 1
                        ). The CP procedure builds on the reference frame theory (Witte, 1960, 1966) and the orientation approach (Heller, 1990). Specific perceptions, e.g. perceptions of exertion, become naturally stabilised through the daily experience of this perception. The magnitude is mainly determined by the poles of the perception, i.e. the least intense and the most intense ever experienced perception. Only those experiences which are within a stable reference frame (Bezugssystem) can be perceived and scaled as having absolute qualities (Heller, 1982; Müller, 1996; Witte, 1975). Familiarizing participants with the CP scale by linking the given scale to the subject's general life experience ensures that subjects fully refer to the whole reference frame of their experience, even when only a sub-sample of this frame is presented.

The CP procedure was tested for validity and reliability by Müller et al. (1995). Ratings showed almost perfect agreement (p = .991) between experiments presenting only a single stimulus and experiments using series of stimuli presented in ascending/descending order. Test-retest reliability was very high (r = .816). Results further showed that data obtained with the CR20 scale, an early Borg scale (Borg, 1962 in Borg, 1990), can be converted into category partitioning (CP) measures and vice versa, if the measuring instructions of the CP procedure are followed. Although this observation was not published in the study by Müller et al. (1995), participants experienced less difficulties in handling the equidistant intervals of the CP scale than the logarithmic intervals shown in Borg's RPE scale in the experiment by Müller et al. (1995).

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants were randomly assigned to one of 11 bicycle ergometer conditions each lasting 7.5 min (see Fig. 2
                        ). Intensities in five conditions were presented steadily at 25 W, 50 W, 75 W, 100 W, 125 W. Intensities in the remaining six conditions were presented either ascending or descending with average intensities of 50 W, 75 W and 100 W. Conditions presented with ascending and descending intensities were subdivided into three periods of 2.5 min without any breaks in between. Stages differed from each other by 25 W. Thus, ascending loads having an average intensity of 50 W started at 25 W, were followed by 50 W and ended up at 75 W. Descending intensities were presented in reversed order. In the steady condition, cycling at 50 W lasted for the entire 7.5 min. The same principle was applied for each three conditions with average intensities of 75 W and 100 W. Steady intensities of 25 W and 125 W were only conducted to display the whole experimental range, i.e. to check if steady presented loads (expressed in Watt) and scalings of PE (expressed in CP units) are linearly related (see Table 1
                        ).

Participants pedalled on a bicycle ergometer (Ergo-Fit Cardio 400 Med) and were instructed to maintain about 60 rotations per minute, displayed on a digital monitor on the handlebars of the cycle ergometer. During 15 s in the beginning of the experiments, workload was progressively increased until the desired intensity was reached. Subjects were asked to cycle for 7.5 min but were not informed about the average load intensity nor about the order of the stimulus presentation. Immediately after the entire cycling session, subjects were asked to scale PE by answering the question of how much exertion had been required to perform the whole exercise.

Since working conditions are usually characterized by objectively equal work loads of moderate intensity and since participants who complete a task are expected to experience something different from those who prematurely curtail a task due to exhaustion, we looked for moderate intensities which could hopefully be endured by all participants for the whole cycling duration of 7.5 min. Since we knew from experimental demonstration in university courses as well as from previous experiments (Kakarot et al., 2012) that most participants are able to maintain 125 W for at least a few minutes, intensities were set from 25 W to 125 W.

Prior to the experiments subjects were familiarized with the CP scale (as described in Section 2.2). In order to link the given scale to general life experience (Bezugssystem) of exertion, each participant anchored his/her individual CP scale by two extreme situations which served as anchoring standards for the scaling procedure (e.g. Borg, 1962; Gearhart, 2008; Parducci, 1983; Robertson and Noble, 1997). To this end, participants were asked to remember two situations they had experienced, requiring very low and very high exertion. Subsequently they assigned these two situations to the corresponding verbal category on the printed version of the CP scale. Finally, they fine-tuned their assignment of categories by means of the numerical subdivisions within each pre-selected verbal category.

Participants were further asked to describe PE as evoked by four daily situations, covering a wide range of possible physical exertion. These situations were 'relaxing in a beach chair'; 'carrying a crate containing 12 bottles of water (1 L each) to the 1st floor using stairs'; 'lifting a 5 kg bag of potatoes from the floor and putting it on a table'; 'carrying a sofa up a narrow staircase from the 1st to 3rd floor with another person'.

Differences between conditions with average intensities of 50 W, 75 W and 100 W (which were presented as ascending, descending and steady) were determined using a two-factor ANOVA. The independent factors were load intensity and load presentation and the dependent variable was session scalings of PE.

All PE group data were displayed in bar charts as means with standard errors (SE). The relationship between steady loads (expressed in Watt) and session scalings of PE was investigated by means of Pearson's coefficient of correlation. All calculations were made using SPSS 12.0 for Windows. Significance was set at the 0.05 level and post-hoc tests were conducted with Bonferroni.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Fig. 2 displays bar charts of the average scaling of PE with SE. Pearson's coefficient of correlation reveals a highly significant relationship between steady loads (expressed in Watt) and scalings of PE, r = .669, p = .000. The line in Fig. 2 illustrates this relationship.

The ANOVA confirms that overall session scalings of PE are mainly determined by the average intensity, F(2, 174) = 31.707, p < .001. Session scalings are further influenced by the order of the different intensities, F(2, 174) = 9.095, p < .001, i.e. highest in the ascending conditions, followed by the steady conditions and lowest in the descending conditions.

Detailed analyses show that differences between the ascending and the steady conditions (p = .004) as well as between the ascending and the descending conditions (p = .000) are statistically significant, while differences between the steady and the descending conditions (p = .205) are not. The ANOVA reveals no significant interaction between the average intensity and the order of the different intensities, F(4, 174) = .254, p = .907.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Taking only the results of the steady conditions into account, we obtained a highly significant relationship between steady presented loads (expressed in Watt) and session scalings of PE (expressed in CP units), confirming the validity of the CP procedure to capture session scalings of PE. Compared to the steady conditions with the same average load, session scalings with descending conditions were, albeit statistically not significant, always lower. Moreover, session PE reported in ascending series was significantly higher than that obtained in the comparable steady and descending conditions.

In a former study by Kilpatrick et al. (2012) session scalings of PE were most strongly influenced by the highest presented intensity, regardless of its position. Kilpatrick et al. (2012) observed higher session scalings for systematically varied load intensities for ascending and descending presented intensities than for steady ones, although statistically significant only for the ascending intensities. That session scalings in their steady and in their ascending condition were significantly different, while differences between the steady and the descending condition were not, was explained by the authors with the serial position of the highest intensity. The authors suggested that the presence of the highest intensity segment at the beginning of a session (i.e. in the descending condition), when participants were relatively fresh, caused lower exertion than when occurring at the end of the session (i.e. in the ascending condition), when participants were more exhausted.

Our finding, that session scalings for all three intensities were highest in the ascending and lowest in the descending condition, did not support that session scalings are mainly influenced by the highest intensity. Instead, our data suggest that session scalings of PE are either determined by the intensity trend, with the overall sessions being perceived as becoming increasingly straining or increasingly relieving, or are determined by the final intensity, which remains fresher in mind than the strain perceived before.

Our data also did not support the suggestion of Kilpatrick et al. (2012) that lower session scalings in descending compared to ascending conditions could be explained by the serial position of the highest intensity segment in the descending condition. Participants in our study were working for shorter (7.5 min instead of 30 min) and at lower average intensities than participants of Kilpatrick et al. (2012). Even conditions in our study with average intensities of 100 W did only result in averaged session CP scalings of 29.3 (SD = 6.2), what is corresponding to about 60% of the 50-point CP scale range. Participants of Kilpatrick et al. (2012) instead worked at higher intensities, corresponding to 95% of maximal aerobic capacity.

The lower stress level in our study is because we analysed session scalings for real work situations. Since working conditions are usually characterized by objectively equal workloads of moderate intensity and since participants who complete a task are expected to experience something different from those who prematurely curtail a task due to exhaustion, we looked for objectively equal moderate intensities which could hopefully be endured by all participants for the whole cycling duration. Since we knew from previous experiments with the student population that most students are able to maintain 125 W for at least a few minutes, intensities were set from 25 W to 125 W.

According to this lower stress level in our experiments, differences in participants' freshness from the beginning to the end of a condition should be less pronounced in our data than in the study by Kilpatrick et al. (2012). Thus, session scalings in our study should be less influenced by the serial position of the highest intensity segment and differences between the ascending and the descending conditions should be smaller. However, our data show quite the inverse: the differences between the ascending and the descending conditions were more pronounced in our study than in the study by Kilpatrick et al. (2012).

Differences in participants' freshness should also become visible in the three average intensities of our experiments, i.e. being highest at 100 W and lowest at 50 W. The analysis of our data, however, showed no significant interaction between the average intensity and the order of the presented intensities. This again contradicts the suggestion of Kilpatrick et al. (2012) that higher scalings in ascending than in descending conditions can be attributed to participants' freshness.

The missing interaction between the average intensity and the order of the presented intensities further contradicts our hypothesis on the moderating effect of the average intensity on session scalings. The hypothesis that differences between session scalings for ascending, descending and steady presented intensities might be more pronounced for sessions with higher average intensities was based on a study by Hutchinson and Tenenbaum (2007). The authors showed that the cycling intensity moderated the influence of the attention focus on scalings of PE. Especially at high intensities attention was focused on the associated overwhelming physiological sensations, causing higher scalings of PE. Since in our study even sessions with average intensities of 100 W resulted in average scaling of PE of only 29.3 (SD = 6.2), corresponding to about 60% of the 50-point CP-scale range, intensities were probably too low to cause overwhelming physiological sensations. Intensities in the study by Hutchinson and Tenenbaum (2007) corresponded to at least 70% of participants' maximal capacity.

As already hypothesized in the introduction the dominating position of the highest load intensity in Kilpatrick et al. (2012) could probably be attributed to their experimental procedure. Unlike our study, they asked not only for session scalings of PE but also for predicted and in-task scalings. However, to fully understand the influence of in-task scalings on session scalings, further experiments are needed and must include conditions with and without in-task scalings. Further experiments, e.g. in which participants vocally express their thoughts during cycling, could also reveal the underlying reasons for the higher session scalings of PE in series presenting ascending intensities. Such a procedure was e.g. carried out by Hutchinson and Tenenbaum (2007) who analysed the attention focus during physical work as well as the mediating role of the task intensity.

A limitation of our study is that we cannot finally decide with our study design if session scalings of PE were determined by the intensity trend or by the final intensity. Thus, further analyses which include sessions with a high and a low finish but no ascending or descending trends are needed.

Another limitation of our study occurred while we progressively increased the workload during 15 s at the beginning of the experiments. Increasing workload to 125 W, which is the starting load in the descending 100 W condition, differs by about 50 W from increasing workload to 75 W, which is the starting load in the ascending 100 W condition. Such differences in the beginning of an experiment could have caused differences in session scalings of PE. A short warm-up phase, equally for all conditions, would have been helpful to harmonise this.

Finally, having each subject only exposed to one experimental condition made it difficult to assess inter-subject variance and increased the sample size. This procedure, however, became necessary to avoid sequential effects (Müller et al., 1995; Petrov and Anderson, 2005; Podlesek, 2010), i.e. the influence of a former cycling experience and PE scaling on session scalings of PE for subsequent conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Session scalings of PE for planned intensity variations have been found to be influenced by the presentation order of the intensities, whereby PE was more pronounced for ascending than for descending presented intensities. Further experiments are needed to shed light on the underlying reasons for the significantly higher session scalings of PE in series with ascending presented intensities. Practitioners, who analyse work strain with session scalings of PE, should mind that session scalings for ascending work intensities can be increased compared to steady or descending intensities with the same average intensity.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

