@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A comprehensive approach to environmental and human factors into product/service design and development. A review from an ergoecological perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The need of approaching and intervening simultaneously human and environmental problems has been identify. This are the results of a systematic review of design concepts and methods associated with human and environmental factors.


                        
                        
                           
                           It shows conceptual and methodological segregation between human factors and environmental factors in published documents.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hints are giving towards a comprehensive approach based on ergoecology to strengthening decision making processes. The paper contributes to recognize methods for product/service design and development with perspective human-environmental.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Human factors/ergonomics HFE

Sustainability

Design methods

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This article presents the results of a documentary-exploratory review of design methods and concepts associated with human and environmental factors, based on a qualitative-quantitative analysis of coincidences with the fundamentals of ergoecology and in line with sustainable dynamics, with a view to putting the principles of ergoecology into practice in product/service design and development. 61.6% of 696 documents found represent work on conceptual developments, while the remaining 38.4% refer to design methods. Searches were refined using Nvivo-10 software, and 101 documents were obtained about theoretical aspects while 17 focused on the application of methods, and these formed the analysis universe. The results show how little concern there is for working comprehensively on human and environmental aspects, and a trend toward segmentation of human and environmental aspects in the field of product/service design and development can be seen, at both concept and application/methodology levels. It was concluded from the above that comprehensive, simultaneous work is needed on human and environmental aspects, clarity and conceptual unity, in order to achieve sustainability in practical matters and ensure that ergoecology-compatible design methods are applied.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The need to expand the vision of Human Factors and Ergonomics (HFE) and include environmental aspects more directly has been pointed out by various authors since the 90s (Nickerson, 1992; Moray, 1995; García-Acosta, 1996; García-Acosta et al., 1997), but has gained interest during the last decade due to the proposals of Eco-Ergonomics (Brown, 2007); green ergonomics (Thatcher, 2013); HFE and Sustainability (Zink and Fischer, 2013; Zink 2013 iFirst); and Ergoecology (Garcia-Acosta et al., 2012; García-Acosta et al., 2012 iFirst). In addition to offering an overall alternative toward this end, ergoecology provides a validated, evolved method for applying its fundamentals in production processes (Garcıa-Acosta et al., 1999; Saravia, 2005; Barrero et al., 2006; Saravia and Rincón, 2006).

Continuing with this line of research, aiming to take ergoecology to be applied practically in product/service design and development with a symmetrical human-environmental perspective, a research project was proposed for examining progress made in terms of the state of the art on matters relating to ergoecology. Within the context of this research project, the present article presents the results of a systematic review between 1996 and 2013, about design concepts and methods associated with human and environmental factors.

Ergoecology seeks going beyond the hegemonic notion of ‘sustainable development’ (WCED, 1987) and to orientate itself towards true sustainable dynamics between systems; in other words, system co-existence or co-dependence.

Ergoecology is based around three principles: the anthropocentric approach, the systemic focus, and sustainability. Under sustainability, it proposes that two postulates be achieved: eco-productivity and eco-efficiency. Eco-productivity is to be construed as the ability of systems to transform energy, matter and information without generating waste or producing negative impacts on others systems. Eco-efficiency, meanwhile, can only be achieved when any type of negative impact can be generated between human-technological and terrestrial-natural systems (García-Acosta et al., 2012 iFirst). Finally, three axioms have been proposed: energy, matter, and information. These axioms can quantify interactions between built systems – which use resources – and natural systems – from which those resources come –, (García-Acosta et al., 2012). These concepts have also been addressed in other areas related to the economic sciences (Abukhader, 2008; Barbiroli et al., 2008; Dyllick and Hockerts, 2002; Kobayashi et al., 2005; Mauerhofer, 2008; Schaltegger et al., 2012; Villarroel Walker et al., 2009; Wang and Côté, 2011).

Previous design-related research aimed at human beings/users/customers (García-Acosta et al., 2011; Puentes et al., 2013) set out to embrace conceptual and methodological trends associated with product design and development, with relation to life cycle, human factors, and context-surroundings. Seven trends were identified, and it was established that while some of them have gradually established their own methods, certain methods are common to some of these seven trends. No proposals were found in the said reviews that were directly related to the fields of environmental management or ergonomic and quality studies.

Another systematic review used sustainability, design, and ergonomics as queries (Martin et al., 2013). Only 14 papers were obtained. This study didn't include other environmental aspects, such as ergoecological postulates i.e. eco-efficiency and eco-productivity. Therefore, proposals like ergoecology, take on importance as an innovative vision that can both evaluate processes and intervene in product and service improvement and innovation.

It should be stressed that all the aforementioned studies are based on documents that have been published and are accessible in databases. In other words, it is information and knowledge that has been made public. However, when products and services are being designed and developed, much of the knowledge that is developed, including methods and procedures, is classified information that companies treat as a jealously kept secret, as they consider it to be part of the technology that gives them competitive advantages. Any systematic study based on published sources (including this one) will therefore take into account only knowledge that is in the public domain, and which accordingly does not reflect the latest developments in product design and development.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

The research is of the documentary-exploratory type, investigating possible coincidences with the basic fundamentals of ergoecology (postulates, principles and axioms) that could support product/service design and development processes in line with sustainable dynamics. The methodological approach is divided into enquiring into concepts and methods, construction of search equations, and qualitative-quantitative analysis.

Under this premise, an analysis matrix was constructed which established the notions of design and of product/service development, human aspects and environmental aspects as macro-concepts. These macro-concepts were cross-checked in this matrix against the three principles of ergoecology: anthropocentric posture (human aspects, in the first two columns), sustainability (environmental aspects, in the next two columns), and systemic focus, which was assumed for all categories. The macro-concepts were grouped together as follows: (1) design and product development, (2) environmental and sustainability, and (3) ergonomics. The descriptors (key words) that were used for constructing the search equations and refining database findings were taken from this matrix (see Table 1
                        ).

In order to guide the search and guarantee its relevance, two groups of differentiated equations were produced. The first group concentrated on conceptual developments and was given the name Search 1 (henceforth S-1), while the second group looked at design methods and was called Search 2 (henceforth S-2). This grouping was designed allowing each group to be analysed independently and, at the same time, to be related to each other, in order to establish the extent to which they converged. Each step described below adheres to this division.

From a universe of 56 databases that were available across the three participating universities, 13 were chosen, based on robustness and coverage criteria. Finally, a categorisation of academic articles was made, and a selection process by relevant subject covering product/service design and development was performed, and from this, six databases were selected: Scopus, IEEE, Compendex, ScienceDirect, Proquest, and EbscoHost.

Three terms were used for constructing the S-1 equations. Design and ergonomics were the constants, while the following variables were used: (1) sustainability, (2) eco-productivity, (3) eco-efficiency OR eco-effectiveness, (4) ecology, and (5) sustainable development. The following terms were also used independently: (6) eco-efficiency, (7) eco-productivity and (8) eco-effectiveness, making a total of eight search equations (see Fig. 1
                        a).

A single term was used as a constant when producing the S-2 equations: design method. Variable terms came into two categories. The first category of descriptors was obtained from trends deduced by García-Acosta, (2009) and García-Acosta et al. (2011), with six concepts associated with the human aspect and ergonomics being selected: (1) user-centred design, (2) usability, (3) participative design, (4) universal design, (5) emotional design, and (6) cross-cultural design. The second category of descriptors came from the eight concepts associated with the environmental aspect: (1) sustainable design OR eco-design, (2) environmentally friendly design, (3) design for the environment, (4) restorative design OR design for recovery, (5) design for reuse, (6) clean production OR design for reducing emissions, (7) design for disassembly OR design for waste minimisation, and (8) vernacular design. The result was 48 search equations (See Fig. 1b).

As a result of performing the two searches, almost 1900 documents were obtained. Refinement criteria were applied such as robustness, publication date, author name verification, etc., as well as the expression ‘product design’ and relevance to product/service design and development, significantly reducing the database. Repeated documents were eliminated and access to each complete document was verified. The figure was thus reduced to 696 documents, with 429 corresponding to S-1 and 267 to S-2 (see Fig. 2a).

Two tools were employed for performing a deeper analysis. Firstly, NVivo-10 software was used to determine the number of references to the concepts in question in each text, and in the documents found as a whole. Secondly, a Delphi study of methodological developments in the documents was conducted, with a view to (a) deducing what international experts understood about different concepts relating to sustainability, (b) drawing up a consolidated list of methods and tools applicable to product/service design, considering environmental impact evaluation or minimisation, (c) identifying the role played by human aspects in the methods, and (d) deducing conceptual trends in environmental aspects and grouping methods together on the basis of these.

The international experts' study led to two sub-projects. The first resulted in a guide for designers and product developers, about methods and trends in environmental factors (Muriel and García-Acosta, 2014). The second, based on the relationship between ergonomics and sustainability, defined: product/service design and development trends from human and environmental aspects (Calderón and García-Acosta, 2014).

For the guide sub-project, the methods found were evaluated, and their relevance was determined with respect to product life cycle (PLC); the established evaluation and classification criteria were that the methods should focus on product design, include environmental variables, and provide sufficient information to be analysed and included in the guide.

The trends sub-project, was also based on the same Delphi study, with emphasis being placed on concepts relating to the fundamentals of ergoecology concepts (García-Acosta et al., 2012) and green ergonomics principles (Thatcher, 2013). It also identified possible relationships between these proposals and social and environmental responsibility. The inventory of methods was also studied in depth, to group the methods by families and establish how close they were to the fundamentals of ergoecology, through the concepts proposed in the sustainability triangle (Dyllick and Hockerts, 2002). The starting point was 267 available documents in which 159 methods, models, or tools, were identified enabling links or derivations between them forming conceptual, similarity-based families. Once the methods' families were defined, they were located on the sustainability triangle proposed by Dyllick & Hockerts, based on the six corporate sustainability criteria.

@&#RESULTS@&#

61.6% of the 696 documents found were in category S-1, and the remaining 38.4% in S-2. These proportions illustrate a greater development of conceptual matters than of design methods. By using semantic occurrences queries associated with ergoecology principles, 102 documents were obtained in S-1 (23.7% of the group) but only 17 documents in S-2 (6.3% of the group). There were almost six times as many theoretical articles –associated with the ergoecology fundamentals– as there were with applied methods (see Fig. 2b).

Results were found with the eight S-1 equations in four databases. Scopus/IEEE with 68.1% (292 documents) stood out as the most robust database for finding concepts associated with design, ergonomics, variables relating to environmental aspects and ergoecology postulates (see Fig. 3a).

Six databases produced results with the 48 S-2 equations, four of which had the largest number of articles. Of these four, the highest percentage occurred in IEEE, with 38.2% (121 items), while PROQUEST produced the lowest figure, 14.8% (47 items), indicating that no database stands out when it comes to searching for design methods that consider human and environmental aspects (see Fig. 3b).

Of the eight equations used in S-1, 35.5% of documents (186 items) produced results involving the design, ergonomics and sustainability variables. The word eco-efficiency, associated with ergoecology postulates, occurred in 37.8% (198 items) of works spanning more than two decades, hence sufficiently illustrating how mature this concept is in the scientific community. However, the eco-productivity concept, which was put forward more than three decades ago, has not been sufficiently discussed in the scientific community, and the documents that do so show it as an indicator that is applied in macro-scales (macro-economics and politics). Works referring to eco-effectiveness, meanwhile, are few and more recent, thus indicating that this concept is less well developed, although, at the same time, it is closer to product design and development (see Fig. 4a).

Of the 48 equations used in S-2, the results obtained were spread over the six human aspect variables and were contained in documents that refer to at least one of the environmental aspect variables. Thus, works about ‘participative design methods’ and ‘usability’ that take environmental aspects into consideration are the ones most published by the scientific community, the former with 49.8% (158 items) and the latter with 26.2% (83 items). It can be seen here that the scientific community practically does not relate ‘user-centred design methods’ to environmental variables (1 item) (see Fig. 4b).

As far as proceedings and journals per year are concerned, S-1 ranged from 1989 to 2013. No more than four articles per year were found for the period from 1989 to 1996, and these were not accessible. Between 1997 and 1999, the number of proceedings and journals per year only reach 10. Between 2000 and 2005, this figure rose gradually from 14 to 29. The yearly figure continued to rise between 2006 and 2013, reaching 53 per year. 2012 was atypical, with 72 documents, almost twice as many as in 2006 (see Fig. 5a). It can be said from the above that discussion in the scientific community on the question of relating design to environmental and human issues was marginal in the 90s, with only 3.5% in 1999, incipient between 2000 and 2005, with 7.9% in 2005; and discrete even between 2006 and 2013, with barely 11% in 2012. These figures clearly illustrate that those who are interested in product/service design and development should work more on relating environmental matters to human aspects (see Fig. 5b).

In the case of S-2, articles were found between 1992 and 2013. The number of articles reached 11 from 1992 to 1999. Production was irregular between 2000 and 2005, the even years (2000, 2002 and 2004) having less than 2.5% while the odd years (2001, 2003 and 2005) had a maximum of 7.9% (25 items). The number remained stable between 2006 and 2013, never exceeding 30 documents per year, apart from 2012, with 35 items. Here it can be said that the figure for design methods that dealt with both environmental and human aspects during the first decade was very small. Over the following decade and a half, it was not the custom in product/service design and development to apply integrated variables, which led to products being supplied that had been developed with only an environmental or a human emphasis. Similarly, it can be seen that concern to integrate human and environmental variables has not only stagnated but tended to diminish (see Fig. 5b).

The documents found in S-1 (61.6% of the total) covered the period from 1989 to 2013. However, because the articles were spread over a large number of different proceedings and journals, a five-year window (2009–2013) was taken. 68 proceedings and journals were found from this period, containing a total of 253 papers covering the conceptual discussion. 45 of these proceedings and journals contained just one article, 13 had two, while six published up to three papers. Considering that this was a five-year window, little was produced and it was well spread out, because only five proceedings and journals were found that contained six or more articles on the conceptual discussion. Two of these focused on environmental aspects (18 items), and three on human factors (60 items). These latter, which contain the greatest quantity of published articles, indicate a clear willingness to discuss subjects relating to human aspects and to bring in environmental aspects, while journals which concentrate on environmental matters include human aspects only marginally (see Fig. 6a).

The documents found in S-2 (38.4% of the total) covered the period 1992–2013. Since the number of documents was smaller in this case, the contemporary discussion was taken as reference, from 1996 - when ergoecology was first expounded - to 2013. 179 proceedings and journals were found from this period, containing 282 papers relating to the application of product/service design and development methods. Of these, 140 different proceedings and journals contain one single article, 26 contain two, and seven of them have up to three. This shows that over a period of 17 years, no more than three articles were published in a universe of 173 journals. Six proceedings and journals published four or more articles. Three of them are consecutive proceedings from the same symposium: 2001 (9 papers), 2003 (6 papers) and 2005 (13 papers). From the other three journals and proceedings, one of them publishes almost three times as many papers as the others (see Fig. 6b).

In order to reduce the number of articles and focus the discussion on ergoecology, combined NVivo-10 software searches were undertaken, using ergoecology principles and postulates.

The results of searches for words used in the indicators produced 110 articles in S-1 and 25 in S-2 for eco-efficiency. It will be seen that four times as many publications treat eco-efficiency as a concept than as an application.

With eco-productivity the results were seven in S-1 and none in S-2, thereby illustrating that although the discussion has commenced, there are still no product/service design and development applications.

In the case of eco-effectiveness, there were 17 documents in S-1 and seven in S-2. Following the same trend as above but with fewer publications, eco-effectiveness is dealt with more from the theoretical than from the methodological angle (see Fig. 7a).

When search couples were formed, the results were: ‘eco-efficiency and eco-productivity’, four documents for S-1 and none for S-2; and ‘eco-productivity and eco-effectiveness’, a single document for S-1 and none for S-2; ‘eco-effectiveness and eco-efficiency’, 11 articles for S-1 and four for S-2. Searching by couples revealed that scientific literature does not deal with the terms simultaneously or discuss them sufficiently. More importantly, however, they are not being applied as part of product design and development methods (see Fig. 7b).

In the first equation, which cross-checks the three principles against eco-efficiency, the results were five documents for S-1 and four for S-2. The second equation, which associates the principles with eco-productivity, revealed two articles for S-1 and none for S-2. Finally, three for S1 and two for S-2 were found for the third equation, which relates the principles to eco-effectiveness. Because of the way the search was directed, it was confirmed that more articles are related to conceptual development (10 items) than to applied work (six items). Similarly, the following results, in descending order, were found from observing the frequency of the debate: eco-efficiency with nine items, eco-effectiveness with five, and eco-productivity with two (see Fig. 7c).

Specifically with respect to S-2 and the guide for designers and product developers, about methods and trends in environmental factors (Muriel and García-Acosta, 2014), it should be stressed that this was built around 22 methods which met the evaluation and classification criteria. Three groups of methods were formed: (1) Impact Measurement Methods, (2) Eco-design Tools, and (3) Impact Measurement Software (see Fig. 8a). Each and every one of the 22 methods is described in the guide, based on the following analysis criteria: (1) what is its origin?; (2) what is it?; (3) what concepts does it manage?; (4) how is it applied?; and (5) how is it evaluated? This is followed by advantages and disadvantages, relevance in relation to PLC stages (Lapeña-Rey et al., 2008; Recchioni et al., 2007) and, finally, a number of recommendations. The purpose of the guide is to assist designers when they are making decisions about the relevance of the method to the project they are working on, bearing in mind the following points: (1) type of analysis (quantitative and qualitative); (2) robustness of the method (variables); (3) project complexity; (4) time available for the analysis; and (5) method approach (to problem damage).

Reference is made to the following example, in order to explain the usefulness of the guide. Six general phases can be seen on the PLC axis: (1) decision and definition, (2) design and development, (3) production, (4) distribution and marketing, (5) use and maintenance, and (6) end of life. Because of the characteristics of the method, in this case ‘LIDS Wheel’ (Bernstein et al., 2010; Birch et al., 2012), the most relevant points at which to apply it are determined as being in ‘decision and definition’ and ‘design and development’ stages (see Fig. 8b).

With respect to work with product/service design and development trends from human and environmental aspects (Calderón and García-Acosta, 2014), six families were defined which grouped methods together by similarity of characteristics, such as, for example, the purpose of applying them or because other methods and tools derive from or complement a ‘master’ method.

A brief description will now be given of each of the families defined.
                        
                           
                              Family 1: 
                              Eco-Design/Design for Sustainability (D4S)/Design for Environment (DfS). These three terms are deemed by some of the authors reviewed to be synonyms. Their similarity lies in the fact that all three deal with the relationship between product design, environment, and the economic benefit that should be maintained (Crul and Diehl, 2006; Guinee, 2002; Masui, 2008).


                              Family 2: 
                              Life Cycle Costing (LCC). This places emphasis on the economic evaluation of flows so that products can be obtained with certain processes, and cost-cutting and rationalisation in the use of resources over the life cycle can be sought (Yang and Song, 2006).


                              Family 3: 
                              Quality Function Deployment (QFD). Although this is not a method that applies exclusively to environmental aspects, it can be directed, depending on the needs of the stakeholders, towards requirements such as reducing materials used, energy, or even end-of-life aspects like recycling. Green QFD, for example, is a derived method (Li-Jen et al., 2011).


                              Family 4: 
                              Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). This is the most developed and complex quantitative method, since it covers aspects ranging from the raw materials extraction and processing stage through manufacturing and distribution processes to use and final disposal. This is the family with the most checklist derivations and developments, guides, and application software (Yang, 2010).


                              Family 5: 
                              Recovery Conscious Design (RCD). This focuses on product recovery at the end of products' useful life from a ‘curative action’ perspective, in order to improve recovery processes, and ‘preventive action’, also known as ‘design for recycling’ (Mathieux et al., 2008).


                              Family 6: 
                              Cradle to Cradle (C2C). This proposes a production system that imitates the effectiveness of natural processes, where the concepts of trash or waste do not apply. It seeks to emulate natural metabolic processes, where materials are taken as nutrients (Braungart et al., 2007).

Once the families had been defined –based on the analysis of the applications methods– each family was placed on the ‘corporate sustainability triangle’ (Dyllick and Hockerts 2002) depending on the approaches and possible applications of the methods (see Fig. 9
                     ). Family 5 (RCD) methods are distributed evenly between eco-effectiveness and eco-efficiency. There is recycling of materials but not reduction from the design concept or resources recovered achieved. As far as Family 6 (C2C) methods are concerned, some tend toward the eco-effectiveness axis and others toward the sufficiency axis. In both cases, they tend toward the ‘natural capital’ apex.

Ergoecology expounds a fair and synergic relationship between socio-technical systems and natural systems. It is currently interested in putting its principles into practice in the fields of product/service design and development, in order to achieve ontological continuity between human beings and the environment.

Although six databases ranging over a period of more than twenty years were reviewed, it is clear that the small number of documents interested in approaching human aspects and environmental aspects jointly shows the lack of interest, at least in published work. It is also of concern that growth in the conducting of these studies indicates signs of declining, before conceptual maturity has been achieved, since design problems (environmental or human aspects) are solved in a fragmented manner, resulting in a duplication of efforts. Working on proposals that aim to integrate would therefore lead to conceptual harmony in these two aspects, in an attempt to get closer to the so-called absolute sustainability.

Greater progress can be seen in publications that discuss conceptual aspects than in ones which discuss methodological ones, as few examples were found in the material reviewed of application in production sectors. The question that can therefore be asked is what factors could motivate companies to take these aspects on board and apply them in an integrated manner. One way to encourage them would be through innovation, since this has been one of the reasons for applying human factors and ergonomics in product and services design and development. Thus, if innovation methods that integrated human and environmental factors were developed and promoted, application of these could be fostered.

This literature review confirmed the disciplinary fragmentation of work published in journals. To motivate the two scientific communities to work together and encourage journals specialising in both areas to publish these types of work, multidisciplinary work should therefore be stimulated via the environmental and human aspects through cooperative work and also by fostering interdisciplinary and trans-disciplinary work aimed at integration and based on training by academia.

In view of the above, the three concepts of eco-efficiency, eco-effectiveness and eco-productivity need to be put on the table so that their interpretations can be discussed and the scientific community be invited to reach a consensus on them, in order to ensure that methods can be developed without conceptual ambiguity. Those who write are therefore already working to identify similarities and differences between the three concepts in the literature found.

Although work on sustainable development and the application of eco-efficiency as an impact-level indicator has been going on for more than twenty years, the same problems of environmental pollution and depletion of natural resources are still occurring. This presents a great opportunity to develop product design, to develop methods, and to work with methods that transform socio-technical systems into sustainable ones (Brown and Legg, 2010). There is also a need to permit natural recovery cycles, in order to avoid natural capital depletion. An example of a product oriented to eco-efficiency is “Naked Renewabottle”. Naked Juice is the first brand in USA using 100% recycled plastic for producing the juice bottles, reducing the consumption of virgin plastic in 8.1 millions pounds per year, sparing around 57.000 oil barrels.

Sustainability goals cannot be achieved through eco-efficiency alone. Similarly, eco-productivity, even combined with eco-efficiency, will not achieve them. These two concepts need to be associated with eco-effectiveness if they are to function in truly sustainable product development practices. Eco-effectiveness is therefore integrated into ergoecology postulates, and opens up the possibility of delving further into an understanding and application of it.

Based on the S-2 findings, it can be said that participative methods are capable of integrating environmental aspects and community needs more easily (Moore and Barnard, 2012). The challenge of creating strategies that foster the integration of knowledge with other design methods, such as usability (e.g. Brown, 2007; Anjos et al., 2012) is therefore reinforced, an example being to work with emotional design for dealing with environmental problems (Norman, 2004), or other approaches to changing consumer attitudes, and behaviour (Harvey et al., 2013; Martin et al., 2013). There is also a need to explore work from the perspective of other design methodologies that support the notions of corporate, social and environmental responsibility, which have been looked at in human-aspect proposals (Zink, 2013 iFirst; Zink and Fischer, 2013).

Concentrating on the documentary review of methods over the last five years resulted in two currents being identified. The first seeks to minimise impacts related to the ‘cradle-to-grave’ concept (Guinée et al., 2005). This has been developed sufficiently, with numerous methods being found for applying it. The second proposes a cyclical metabolism dynamic in products, and is associated with the ‘cradle-to-cradle’ concept (Braungart et al., 2007), which has been developed very little and for which there are insufficient method application proposals. The challenge which therefore arises is to work on possible applications for methods that lean toward an eco-effectiveness focus. An example towards eco-effectiveness is Playworld Systems which create safe and healthy environments for children to play. They succeeded in becoming 99.99% PVC-free from its products and working to source only safe and healthy materials that can be kept in infinite use cycles (MBDC Portfolio Playworld Systems, n.d).

In line with the above, a symmetrical human-environmental approach would make it easier for design decisions to be more robust and not consider only economic, social and environmental sustainability (Dyllick and Hockerts, 2002; Mauerhofer, 2008), but also look at eco-productivity in relation to technological sustainability. A change should also be promoted in environmental rules and ethical values within companies with respect to political sustainability, in order to move, as a result, away from ‘cradle to grave’ and toward ‘cradle-to-cradle’. One example of this is the article entitled “Towards a sustainable world through human factors and ergonomics: it is all about values”, which proposes that social responsibility and environmental/ecosphere responsibility are the connecting threads between ergoecology and green ergonomics, from which derive the values of respect for human rights, respect for the Earth, respect for ethical decision-making, appreciation of complexity, respect for transparency and openness, and respect for diversity (Lange-Morales et al., 2014).

The guide for designers and product developers, about methods and trends in environmental factors (Muriel and García-Acosta, 2014) is a first step toward orientating decision-making in product design and development processes. Strategies should therefore be drawn up on product life cycle (PLC) stages, in order to achieve sustainable dynamics, where there are still gaps in design decisions. Although human aspects should be considered in PLC stages, the same can also be said for environmental aspects. It has been shown that a high percentage of design decisions affect the way in which a product may or may not generate impacts in the environment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Based on the evidence of published knowledge, this study confirms the trend toward segmentation of human and environmental aspects in studies, reflections and applications in the field of product/service design and development. Similarly, the study shows the limited amount of comprehensive work on human and environmental aspects that has been published. Given that the ratio between conceptual developments and design methods in the documents found was six to one, there is a need for more work to be done and published on integrated, holistic methods that approach human and environmental problems associated with product design and development jointly, with continuity and ontological inseparability.

It is imperative to work both on assembling existing methods and on developing new design methods which apply the concepts of eco-efficiency, eco-effectiveness and eco-productivity together, in order to achieve truly sustainable dynamics.

Ergoecology expounds the comprehensiveness of the systemic approach, the anthropocentric approach - with an eco-spherical perspective - and sustainability for dealing with human and environmental problems as a whole and guaranteeing ontological continuity. Considering the poor conceptual comprehensiveness of the design methods found, these could be strengthened if they were classified according to their compatibility with the fundamentals of ergoecology, and if strategies were proposed for them to be applied. These strategies would simplify the process of making decisions that are ethical and responsible, with respect to both human beings and the environment.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

Sincere thanks are due to the Design Department at Pontificia Universidad Javeriana and to the School of Industrial Design at the National University of Colombia, for their time spent and support given in the conducting of this research. To Lissa Muriel and Salomé Calderón for contributions made through their undergraduate work. We appreciate the support of Karen Lange for her guidelines on this paper.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

