@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Matching physical work demands with functional capacity in healthy workers: Can it be more efficient?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Functional capacity and work demands can be matched in most instances for a varying group of workers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Normative values for functional capacity are validated and compared to direct workload measurements.


                        
                        
                           
                           Normative values can be considered as an efficient tool in clinical decision making, although restrictions apply.


                        
                        
                           
                           Comparing functional capacity to normative values enables clinicians to screen for imbalances between work load and capacityt.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Physical workload

Normative values

Work ability

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Objectives
                  To determine if functional capacity (FC) and physical work demands can be matched and to determine the validity of normative values for FC related to physical work demands as a screening instrument for work ability.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Forty healthy working subjects were included in this study. Subjects were categorized into four physical work demand categories (sedentary, light, moderate and heavy). FC was tested with a standardized Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE) following the WorkWell Protocol and physical work demands were determined with an onsite Work Load Assessment (WLA) according to the Task Recording and Analyses on Computer (TRAC) method. Physical work demands were compared to FC and normative values derived from previous research.
               
               
                  Results
                  88% of the subjects scored higher on FCE than observed during WLA. The tenth percentile of normative values appeared valid in 98% for sedentary/light work for the subjects tested in this study. For moderate or heavy work, the thirtieth percentile of normative values appeared valid in 78% of all cases.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  Functional capacity and physical work demands can be matched in most instances, but exceptions should be kept in mind with regards to professions classified as moderate or heavy physical work, especially concerning lifting high. Normative values may be considered as an additional screening tool for balancing workload and capacity. It is recommended to further validate normative values in a broader and more extensive working population.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In health literature, much focus is given to (reduction of) work demands, but the focus on its relation to work capacity is rather limited (Heerkens et al., 2004). Functional capacity (FC), which includes the total of all physical, cognitive and emotional characteristics of the worker (Dijk van et al., 1990), and work demands need to be in balance in order to regain or maintain working successfully (Heerkens et al., 2004). This can be achieved by either increasing capacity or decreasing workload by application of ergonomic interventions. A previous study focused on interventions to reduce musculoskeletal complaints in the nursing profession and described strong effects of ergonomic interventions (Bos et al., 2006). FC can be measured with a Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE). This is a battery of tests measuring the capacity to perform work-related activities (Soer et al., 2008). FCEs can be job-specific (Frings-Dresen and Sluiter, 2003), pathology-specific (Reneman et al., 2005; Gross et al., 2006) or can be used for the assessment of capacities for activities of daily living (Soer et al., 2009). Physical work demands (PWD) can be measured through standardized questionnaires or onsite measurement (van der Beek et al., 1992; Lindstrom et al., 1994). A disadvantage of questionnaires used for PWD measurement, is ambiguity with respect to the validity. Because in practice, patients and healthy workers estimate their PWD considerably higher than can be objectified by onsite observations (van der Beek et al., 1992; Lindstrom et al., 1994), it is recommended to assess PWD, besides by self-report, through observational methods (Winkel and Mathiassen, 1994). To determine if a worker holds sufficient FC to return to or stay at work, it is important that the FC of the worker is equal to or higher than the PWD (Dijk van et al., 1990). This comparison is important in determining whether increasing capacity of the worker or adaptation of the workplace is needed. In the study of Kuijer et al. (2006), FCE activities derived from the Isernhagen Work Systems protocol were matched to the observed PWD in workers with chronic low back pain by video and real life observations (Kuijer et al., 2006). It was concluded that seven FCE activities could directly be matched with the PWD as measured through video observation on an onsite Work Load Assessment (WLA). These activities were carrying, pushing, pulling, crouching, kneeling, static forward bending, and dynamic bending and rotating. Lifting could indirectly be matched. Disadvantages of this method, however, are that WLA are time consuming and expensive and therefore practically impossible to use for each worker or patient.

Better knowledge concerning the relationship between PWD and FC enables practitioners to better advise with respect to return to or stay at work and develop better work rehabilitation programs or apply ergonomics principles more effectively. A more practical and inexpensive method to match FC and PWD is to compare FC with normative values (NVs) which were previously obtained (Soer et al., 2009). In that study, it was assumed that the FC expressed by NVs of healthy workers was sufficient to meet the PWD (Soer et al., 2009), because all subjects were healthy and working in the year prior to the study. To interpret normative values validly, however, it is essential that these NV correspond to direct measurements of PWD for healthy subjects in a broad spectrum of occupations. When the normative values for the FCE are proven valid, FCE may serve as a screening instrument for potential imbalances and WLAs to measure PWD may be redundant, in cases where studying the physical part of the work capacity is needed.

This study had two objectives. The first objective was to determine if functional capacity (determined by FCE) can be matched with PWD (measured by a WLA) in healthy working subjects. The second objective was to determine the valid cut-off percentile of the NVs of FCE for healthy workers in jobs with different levels of physical work demands.

@&#METHODS@&#

Forty subjects out of a group of 701 who participated in the normative values study of Soer et al. (2009) and whose PWD had not changed since participation were included in the study. Subjects were between 20 and 65 years of age, worked at least 20 h a week and had no sick leave from work higher than 5% in the year preceding this study. After selection and invitation, subjects received written information about the study. Of all forty subjects, 10 subjects per PWD category were randomly selected. These PWD categories were based on the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) (US Department of Labor, 1991). In the DOT, occupations are classified into five categories of physical work demands, based on the intensity and duration of lifting or carrying and on the number of metabolic equivalents (METS) assumed to be needed for the job. The categories used in this study were sedentary (PWD 1), light (PWD 2), moderate (PWD 3) and heavy/very heavy (PWD4: DOT 4 and DOT 5 combined). All occupations of participants were coded with the DOT and stratified in the according PWD categories. For example in PWD 1, subjects were working as manager, publisher or administration. In PWD 2, subjects worked as waiter, teacher or chauffeur; in PWD 3, subjects worked as nurse or plumber and in PWD 4, subjects worked as farmer or concrete worker. Employers and participants provided informed consent. This study was approved by the medical ethical committee of the University Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands. After participation, subjects received a gift certificate of €15.

Cross-sectional study design. This study uses cross sectional data of 40 subjects which were compared to normative data retrieved in 2009 (Soer et al., 2009).

In the previous study of Soer et al., 701 subjects performed a 12 item FCE, largely based on the FCE following the WorkWell protocol (Soer et al., 2009). Five of these FCE tests were previously found to be directly or indirectly matched to PWD (Kuijer et al., 2006) and were used for this study. These tests were lifting low, lifting high, carrying, overhead working and forward bending stand and formed the protocol. Energetic capacity was added to the protocol. A complete description of these tests is presented in Appendix A. Normative FCE values were established for four PWD categories, based on the DOT.

A 4 h WLA was performed to determine PWD of the job of each of the subjects. A 4 h duration was reported to be sufficiently valid to determine the PWD of a working day (Hoozemans et al., 2001a,b). The WLA was performed according to the Task Recording and Analyses on Computer (TRAC) method (Hoozemans et al., 2001a). The PalmTRAC consists of a portable computer (Palm Tungsten E2) and a PC-component in which observation on the workplace can be saved and processed. Prior to testing, inter- and intra-observer reliability were tested with video material by two researchers. Inter-observer and intra-observer reliability were calculated using Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) model ‘two-way mixed’ and type ‘absolute agreement’. Correlations were interpreted according to Portney and Watkins (2008): ICC ≥0.50 was interpreted as moderate; ICC >0.75 was interpreted as strong. Energetic workload was measured during 4 h with a heart-rate monitor with memory (Polar S610i). The mean and maximum heart rates of a subject during the WLA were collected. The protocol for WLA was constructed according to previous research (Kuijer et al., 2006; Drury, 1995; Kilbom, 1995). For each individual activity, intensity, frequencies, maximum duration and total duration were registered. The forces for lifting low and carrying were measured separately, and categorized into four categories as described in Table 1
                           . The scoring of workload with the PalmTRAC was tailored to the operationalization of the FCE activities. Observed activities and postures are described in operational definitions for the PalmTRAC which are presented in the library of the PalmTRAC in Appendix B.

To match PWD and FC, it was hypothesized that the FC tested in all six tests in the FCE, was higher than or equal to the PWD. The hypothesis was rejected when PWD < FCE. To test the hypothesis, postural tolerance was measured with the FCE tests forward bending and overhead working. Peak load and total load were recorded during the WLA. Peak load was defined as the maximum holding time (seconds) a subject bent forward or worked overhead during the 4 h WLA. Total load was defined as the sum of all times a subject bended forward or worked overhead. Material handling was measured in the FCE with the tests lifting low, lifting high and carrying. The peak load was registered and was defined as the heaviest load (kilograms) a subject lifted during the WLA. Energetic capacity was determined with the use of the sub-maximal Bruce Treadmill test (Bruce et al., 1973). With this test, maximum oxygen uptake was predicted based on heart rate and matched with the average heart rate of the WLA. Both were converted into METS. The scores of the WLA were individually compared with the corresponding FCE scores.

Normative values (NVs), derived in previous research (Soer et al., 2009) are presented in Table 2
                           . PWD were compared to the NVs to determine at which percentile of the normative values (%NV) the functional capacity is higher than or equal to the PWD of the corresponding PWD category. A match with NV was observed when in 95% of all subjects, the NVs of all individual tests exceeded the score on WLA.

@&#RESULTS@&#

40 subjects (28 male and 12 female) were included in this study. Subjects worked in 36 different occupations. Characteristics of the subjects are presented in Table 3
                        .

ICC's for intra-observer reliability were strong, for frequencies (ICC = 0.901) as well as duration (ICC = 0.887) of activities. Inter-observer reliability was moderate, for frequencies (ICC = 0.692) as well as duration (ICC = 0.533) of activities.

Observed PWD and FCE scores are presented in Table 4
                        . Percentages of occasions were observed where FC was higher than or equal to PWD measured by WLA (Table 5
                        ). In total, five subjects' PWD were higher than the FCE scores in one or more activities, leading to an overall match of 88% for all subjects. For postural tolerance, FC exceeded PWD in 98% of all subjects. For material handling, FC exceeded PWD in 90% of all subjects. In three subjects, lifting high during WLA exceeded FC. All subjects' energetic capacity exceeded the mean and peak heart rate during the WLA. For all subjects working in sedentary and light PWD, FC exceeded the PWD. For workers in medium PWD, an 80% match for material handling and a 90% match for postural tolerance was observed, leading to an overall match of 70%. In the heavy PWD category, a 100% match for all domains was observed, except for material handling (one subjects' FC was lower than observed PWD).

The results of matching PWD with NVs are presented in Table 6
                        . When all tests are included, for the PWD categories sedentary and light, in 91% of the observations, the 10th percentile of NVs was observed to be higher than the PWD, meaning that a subject who's capacity is equal or higher than the 10th percentile of that NV has sufficient FC for working in sedentary or light work with a sensitivity of 91%. In the moderate and heavy PWD categories, 78% of all subjects' FC exceeded the 30th percentile of NVs. Overall, comparing to the 30th percentile leads to a correct interpretation in 85% of all cases. Postural Tolerance: For postural tolerance tests, 95% of all subjects' FC exceeded the 10th percentile of NVs. Overall, the 10th percentile appears a valid cut-off point in which capacity exceeds this percentile for the postural tolerance domain. Material handling: comparing to the 10th percentile leads to a match of 80%, where a distinction can be made between the lower PWD categories (PWD 1; sedentary work and 2; light work) and the higher PWD categories (PWD 3; medium and 4; heavy/very heavy). For PWD 1 en 2, the 10th percentile appears valid in over 90% of the cases. For the medium and heavy PWD categories, material handling FC exceeds the 30th percentile in 78% of all cases.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The first aim of this study was to explore if PWD and FC in healthy subjects can be validly matched. Three domains of PWD were measured in a 4 h WLA. Taking all physical work demands together, in 88% of all cases FC exceeded PWD. The second aim of the study was to determine at which percentile of the NVs the PWD of the subjects could be matched. It can be concluded that when matching the NVs with PWD, a distinction needs to be made between the FC domains and the PWD categories. For sedentary and light work, the 10% NV is a valid cut point to use in 95% of the cases. This can be observed in Table 6, where for the 10% NV for the sedentary and light PWD, a match was found in 95% of all cases. For medium and heavy PWD, the 30% NV is the best cut-off point with a match in 78% of all cases, which may be insufficient for clinical decision making. Reasons for this may include differences in operational definitions used for determination of the PWD. For example, one of the subjects lifted and carried an iron pole of 65 kg, which is different than the FCE test lifting high which demands lifting a cradle to crown height.

For clinical interpretation, it is assumed that when the FC of healthy workers is equal to or higher than their PWD, the FC of healthy workers may be considered the norm to which the FC of patients or clients can be compared to (Dijk van et al., 1990, Soer et al., 2009). Comparing FC to the cut-off points of the NVs of healthy subjects working in the corresponding PWD category may indicate the following: (1), when the patient's FC is equal to or higher than the lowest valid cut-off point of the relevant PWD category, the FC of the patient is sufficient to meet the PWD; and (2), when the patient's FC is lower than the lowest valid cut-off point of the relevant PWD category, it is unknown if the patient's FC is sufficient to meet the PWD (Soer et al., 2009). Additional assessment of PWD related to capacity may be necessary in those cases. Comparing patients' FC to NVs of FC instead of comparing to data gathered from a WLA, enables clinicians to screen for potential imbalances between PWD and work capacity without having to perform a time consuming and expensive WLA.

The FCE used in this study was a general FCE protocol, in which activities are included that may occur in different occupations. This general approach could contrast with specific activities at the workplace. It is known that when a work-related assessment is more standardized, it moves further away from the actual work environment and specific job requirements (Innes and Straker, 2002). Therefore, some activities were not included in the library, while others were included but not observed during the WLA. A standardized FCE can be used for different occupations and therefore gives a higher external validity. Additional measures should be performed when factors including fatigue, concurrent mental workload demands, heat exposure, clothing, psychosocial factors, previous task experience and/or physical fit with the workspace design are of interest. In this study, a single dimension of physical work demands was measured and measuring a single dimension cannot be expected to fully capture the multidimensional construct of workload, but results can be used effectively for screening the physical part of the construct. In a job-specific FCE, the library of the PalmTRAC can be adapted to the activities included in the FCE. A job-specific FCE may have high face and internal validity, but results cannot be generalized to other occupations (King et al., 1998). Therefore, clinimetric properties should be analyzed for each job-specific FCE before performing such. This is highly unpractical and very time consuming and expensive, but may be worth the effort for certain well described and high demanding jobs. Because the aim of this study was to test the validity of NVs that are applicable for many different jobs, a more generic FCE was used to enable external validity for the majority of jobs. Because a standardized FCE was used, a strict use of the cut-off points of % NV appeared not desirable to determine if a subject meets the PWD at work. From this study it can be recommended that application of NVs provide a starting point relative to a generic description of sedentary and light work. In work with moderate and heavy PWD, additional clinical assessment is likely to be necessary to study the individual balance between capacity and PWD, which may lead to application of ergonomics principles to reduce the PWD or may require increasing a person's functional capacity.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Some standard FCE protocols use formulas to make extrapolations to a full working year, but evidence for validity is limited (Saunders et al., 1997). Some support was reported for the use of a formula to estimate the weight a client can frequently lift, because it is based on the weight lifted occasionally in a 6 day FCE, however the authors recommended caution to use such formulas (King et al., 1998). Another limitation in this study was that a distinction was made between total load and peak load for the activity forward bending and overhead working. When FC of subjects was compared with total time instead of peak time of forward bending in the 4 h WLA, results would be different for this domain. For example, when a subject stopped bending forward and after 5 s started bending again, a new registration of peak load was registered. One of the problems may be that there is insufficient muscle recovery from the first activity. Recovery times between activities have previously been reported as twelve times the length of the time of activity (Corlett and Manenica, 1980). It is challenging to develop a method able to correct for recovery times because it is dependent of personal factors, posture, intensity and pace of the activity. A task performed with lower fatigue sensation and with shorter periods of rest is more successful in preventing muscle fatigue than a task with higher fatigue sensation and longer rest durations (Movahed et al., 2011). There are differences how to deal with the ratio of work intensity and rest of a worker (Panter-Brick, 2003). It is stated that work intensity does not receive the same attention as energy expenditure and that levels of physical activity and data concerning rest periods are scarce (Panter-Brick, 2003). The only study retrieved which reported on work to rest ratios of posture holding times was based on lumbar flexors in cats (Sbriccoli et al., 2007). The authors observed that work-recovery ratios may not exceed a 1:1 ratio. More research on work recovery ratios of postures such as forward bending and overhead working is recommended because this could be beneficial for guidelines concerning work postures, intensities and rest.

In theory, the PWD of a subject should not exceed the FC except when a sub-maximal effort is given during FCE. The PWD of a subject were measured with a standardized method; the Task Recording and Analysis on Computer (PalmTRAC). Measuring with a PalmTRAC is a reliable and valid method to measure activities and working postures at the workplace (Hoozemans et al., 2001a). However, it is unknown if the WLA protocol and the library for PalmTRAC used in this study were valid. Kuijer et al. (2006) concluded that seven FCE activities could be directly matched with PWD, measured through video observation or an on-site WLA. In practice, there are several complications concerning operational definitions and matching of the activities as measured in the WLA. For example, subjects lifted weights of different sizes and compositions such as fences, hay bales or children. In contrast, in the FCE a high lift is operationalized as a standardized lift of 74 cm until crown height of an object. In the WLA, the activity lifting high is operationalized as lifting a weight of all composition with the starting and endpoint of the object above 74 cm, which means that the subject does not have to lift the object towards crown height as demanded during FCE. Thus in the WLA, the minimal vertical distance to be overcome was not operationally defined equally to the FCE. This may be a plausible explanation for the ‘poor’ performance of lifting high in this study.

The energetic load in the WLA was determined by using average and maximal heart rate data and converting this into METS. This method gives an indication whether subjects exceeded their energetic capacity. It does not give an exact representation of energy expenditure. A heart rate monitor does not measure physical activity directly, but is based on the linear relationship between oxygen uptake and heart rate (Christensen et al., 1983). A limitation of using heart rate to determine the energetic load is that the slope of the relationship between heart rate and VO2 varies depending on the extent to which the activity is static (heavy resistance) versus dynamic (low resistance). Heart rate is also strongly influenced by factors such as physical fitness, emotional status, body posture, environmental conditions and medicine intake (Haskell et al., 1993; Leonard, 2003). A combination of accelerometers and HR monitors is assumed to be more accurate and precise (Butte et al., 2012) and is recommended in future studies. Another limitation is the use of the DOT and normative values as a ‘gold’ standard for comparison. Validity of the normative values as well as of the DOT has never been scientifically tested nor has it been based on quantitative work-related task analyses, but rather on consensus meetings of experts (Bos et al., 2002). In this perspective, data derived from this study contribute to validity of both standards. Further validation of both standards is necessary.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Functional capacity and PWD can be matched in healthy working subjects. The 10th percentile of normative values for FCE appears to be a valid cut-off point for subjects working in sedentary and light work demands for the limited subjects tested in this study. For moderate and heavy work, additional assessments (as derived in onsite workload assessment) may be necessary. Normative values may be considered as an additional screening tool for balancing workload and capacity.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was financially supported by the Stichting Beatrixoord Noord Nederland.

Descriptions are similar to the study of Soer et al. (2009).

Objective: capacity of lifting from table to floor. Materials: plastic receptacle (40 × 30 × 26 cm). A wallmounted system with adjustable shelves and weights of 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 kg. Procedure: 5 lifts from table at 74 cm to floor and vice versa in standing position within 90 s. Four to five weight increments until maximum amount of kilograms was reached. Test-retest reliability: in LBP patients (ICC = 0.81) (Brouwer et al., 2003) and in healthy subjects (ICC = 0.95) (Reneman et al., 2004).

Objective: capacity of overhead lifting task. Materials: plastic receptacle (40 × 30 × 26 cm). A wallmounted system with adjustable shelves and weights of 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 kg. Procedure: 5 lifts from table (74 cm) to crown height and vice versa in standing position within 90 s. Four to five weight increments until maximum amount of kilograms was reached. Test-retest reliability: in LBP patients (ICC = 0.87) (Brouwer et al., 2003) and in healthy subjects (ICC = 0.89) (Reneman et al., 2004).

Objective: capacity of 2-handed carrying. Materials: plastic receptacle (40 × 30 × 26 cm). A wall-mounted system with adjustable shelves and weights of 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 kg. Procedure: 20 m carrying at waist height with receptacle within 90 s. Four to five weight increments until maximum amount of kilograms was reached. Test-retest reliability: in LBP patients (ICC = 0.81) (Brouwer et al., 2003) and in healthy subjects (ICC = 0.84) (Reneman et al., 2004).

Objective: capacity of postural tolerance of overhead working. Materials: aluminum plate adjustable in height with 20 holes, bolts, and nuts and 2 cuff weights of 1.0 kg each. Procedure: standing with hands at crown height, manipulating nuts and bolts wearing cuff weights around the wrists. The time that the position was held was measured in seconds. Test-retest reliability: healthy subjects (ICC = 0.90) (Soer et al., 2006).

Objective: capacity of postural tolerance of forward bending. Materials: a wall-mounted system with a shelf at 74 cm height. Bolts and nuts and 1 weight of 5.0 kg. Procedure: standing with flexed trunk between 30° and 60°, manipulating nuts and bolts. Upper thoracic spine is loaded with a weight of 5.0 kg, placed between center and shoulder blade at approximately T3. The time that position is held was measured (s). Test-retest reliability without weight: in LBP patients (ICC = 0.96) (Brouwer et al., 2003) and in healthy subjects (ICC = 0.93) (Reneman et al., 2004).

Objective: To predict the maximum oxygen consumption (presented in METS) by submaximal Bruce treadmill test. Materials: treadmill with a slope capacity of 22% and a heart rate monitor. Procedure: the treadmill is set up with the stage 1 speed (2.7 km/h) and grade of slope (10%), and the subject commences the tests. Every 3 min, slope and speed are adjusted following the Bruce protocol. Test is terminated when subject's 85% of age-related maximum heart rate is reached. Prediction of maximum oxygen consumption was done according to the following formula: METS = [16.62 + 2.74 (1.17 min of exercise) − 2.584 (weighting factor for sex) − 0.043 (years of age) − 0.0281 (kg body weight)]/3.5, where weighting factor for sex is 1 for men and 2 for women. Test-retest reliability: in healthy subjects (r = 0.99) (Bruce et al., 1973).


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Observed activities
                                    Operational definitions
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    HFLink
                                    Link heart rate monitor and PalmTRAC.
                                 
                                 
                                    Pauze
                                    Smoke-, coffee- or lunch break.
                                 
                                 
                                    Anders
                                    All other activities and postures than mentioned in the library.
                                 
                                 
                                    FOULT
                                    Last entered variable is wrong and has to be replaced by the next entered variable.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    LiftLo (lifting low)
                                    To manually lift, hold it for a short time (less than 10 s), and lower objects of more than 1 kg. The beginning and endpoint are less than or equal to 0.74 m with respect to the absolute floor.
                                 
                                 
                                    LL4,5
                                    Lifting low between 1 and 4.5 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    LL9,1
                                    Lifting low between 4.5 and 9.1 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    LL22,7
                                    Lifting low between 9.1 and 22.7 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    LL45,4
                                    Lifting low between 22.7 and 45.4 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    LL > 45,4
                                    Lifting low above 45.4 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    LiftHi (lifting high)
                                    To manually lift, hold it for a short time (less than 10 s) and lower objects of more than 1 kg. Endpoint is higher than 0.74 m with respect to the absolute floor.
                                 
                                 
                                    LH4,5
                                    Lifting high between 1 and 4.5 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    LH9,1
                                    Lifting high between 4.5 and 9.1 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    LH 22,7
                                    Lifting high between 9.1 and 22.7 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    LH45,4
                                    Lifting high between 22.7 and 45.4 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    LH > 45,4
                                    Lifting high above 45.4 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Carry (carrying)
                                    To lift with both hands, hold it for some time and lower subjects of more than 1 kg. The object will be held for more than 10 s and/or will be carried for at least 1.20 m.
                                 
                                 
                                    C4,5
                                    Carrying between 1 and 4.5 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    C9,1
                                    Carrying between 4.5 and 9.1 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    C22,7
                                    Carrying between 9.1 and 22.7 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    C45,4
                                    Carrying between 22.7 and 45.4 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    C > 45,4
                                    Carrying above 45.4 kg
                                 
                                 
                                    Overhd (overhead work)
                                    Standing with both hands at crown height and manipulating something with the hands.
                                 
                                 
                                    ForBnd (forward bend)
                                    In a standing position, forward bending the trunk and maintaining this position for 4 s. Trunk flexion between 30° and 60°.
                                 
                                 
                                    Walk (walking)
                                    To move on foot, walking distance should be > 1 m
                                 
                                 
                                    Sit (sitting)
                                    Maintaining a sitting position. Trunk flexion <30°/trunk rotation <15°
                                 
                                 
                                    Stand (standing)
                                    Maintaining an upright position while standing on both feet. Knee flexion is < 45° in combination with trunk flexion <30° and trunk rotation <15°. Movement <1 m.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Note. Trunk flexion is measured by drawing an imaginary line from hip joint to shoulder joint.
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

