@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Ergonomics and comfort in lawn mower handle positioning: An evaluation of handle geometry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           User-centric handle position defined for a lawn mower control system (MCS).


                        
                        
                           
                           Required forces were higher with larger grip spans.


                        
                        
                           
                           Forces in a nontraditional position were lower than vertical and pistol positions.


                        
                        
                           
                           The MCS must reduce force requirements or grip spans for user health and comfort.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Lawn mowing

Grip force

Grip span

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Hand operation accompanied with any combination of large forces, awkward positions and repetition may lead to upper limb injury or illness and may be exacerbated by vibration. Commercial lawn mowers expose operators to these factors during actuation of hand controls and therefore may be a health concern. A nontraditional lawn mower control system may decrease upper limb illnesses and injuries through more neutral hand and body positioning. This study compared maximum grip strength in twelve different orientations (3 grip spans and 4 positions) and evaluated self-described comfortable handle positions. The results displayed force differences between nontraditional (X) and both vertical (V) and pistol (P) positions (p < 0.0001) and among the different grip spans (p < 0.0001). Based on these results, recommended designs should incorporate a tilt between 45 and 70°, handle rotations between 48 and 78°, and reduced force requirements or decreased grip spans to improve user health and comfort.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Repetitive high grip force exertions have been related to fatigue, discomfort, and injury to the hand and wrist. It has been shown that factors such as force, exertion angle and grip span greatly affect comfort and maximum exertion (Shivers et al., 2002). Manual hand actuation may seem trivial; however, in combination with high forces, non-neutral positions, and/or high multiple repetitions, along with exacerbation from vibration, musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) become a very serious risk (Garg and Kapellusch, 2011; Ma et al., 2009; Adamo et al., 2002). More specifically, work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WRMDs) have been an area of great concern in the industrialized world (Bernard, 1997). Not only can these conditions cause discomfort or pain to the user but they can result in lost time and profit for the employer. Discomfort and fatigue are often considered predictors or early warning symptoms for WRMDs (Garg and Kapellusch, 2011; Ma et al., 2009). It has been shown that factors such as force, exertion angle and grip span greatly affect comfort as well as maximum exertion (Shivers et al., 2002). Similarly, wrist posture in the flexion/extension plane (Hallbeck and McMullin, 1993) and the radial ulnar deviation plane (Lamoreaux and Hoffer, 1995) can alter potential maximum grip forces. If maximum exertion is decreased, the amount of force comfortably generated may proportionately decrease. Therefore, it is crucial that steps are taken to minimize fatigue by reducing the ratio of high maximum exertion to lower required force and through designs that ensure user comfort (Kong et al., 2011; Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). Investigation into the effect of work piece orientation and hand tool interface is important for the evaluation of hand tool utilization and in the designing of a work environment (Lin and McGorry, 2009; McGorry and Lin, 2007). Through these investigations, designers should be able to reduce user fatigue and discomfort.

Designers often strive for a neutral wrist position (Estill and Kroemer, 1998; Drury et al., 1985). One study by Gustafsson and Hagberg reported that a neutral wrist position during computer mouse work resulted in less productivity and lower perceived comfort (2002). This investigation indicated that comfort is dependent on more than just a neutral wrist position and that the activity at hand may dictate a different position that is more comfortable and therefore preferred. For example, the height of the work space may alter wrist angles for individuals of different heights. Investigations in the garment industry on discomfort in the upper extremities of workers reported that a simple adjustment in seat height through adjustable chairs could not only reduce pain in the upper extremity but it could decrease occurrences of non-neutral positioning of both the right elbow and wrist (Herbert et al., 2001). Handle grip spans have also been shown to affect both comfort and grip strength and researchers found the most comfortable grip spans lie between 50 and 55 mm (Lee et al., 2009). These examples describe the different factors that affect the comfort and maximum forces. Garg and Kapellusch stated that even gripping that occurs on and off over a period of time should not meet or exceed 17% of a user's maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) (2011).

Commercial lawn care employees, which we will refer to as landscapers, spend a major portion of their day operating lawn mowers. Commercial mowers used by professional landscaping companies often subject the users to hours of awkward grip forces five days a week for the duration of the mowing season. Many mowing sites are filled with numerous landscaping obstacles, varying terrain, and tight spaces. Therefore, companies provide walk-behind machines in order to give the employee more precision and control. Walking behind a mower is slower than riding on stand-on or seated mowers. Therefore an attachment, known as a sulky, allows the operator to ride behind the mower increasing the speed without sacrificing maneuverability. The attachment is designed with one or two wheels, a platform for standing, and a simple hitch which attaches to the walk-behind machine. The sulky allows the operator to run the lawn mower at a higher speed than walking; however, it also slightly confines the position of the operator.

Although the lawn care industry has improved the efficiency of the employee's work, there remain some areas of improvement for user health and comfort. One of these areas is in the handle control systems. There have been several research papers covering the correlation of hand size, wrist angle, and grip span on grip strength; these studies however are not sufficient for the factors that affect the professional mowing system in this study. Most of these studies have been conducted on hand dynamometers (Edgren et al., 2004; Sancho-Bru et al., 2003; DiMartino et al., 2004; Fiebert et al., 1998; Pazderka et al., 1996; Hansen and Hallbeck, 1996; Ramakrishnan et al., 1994; Ayoub and Lo Presti, 1971). Previous studies have explored specific hand tools and their ergonomic design specifications (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). However, none have been aimed at lawn mowing hand controls or similar tasks. Traditionally, these machines have been designed with the focus on the mechanics and not the operator. For example, the lawn mowers are designed to move quickly for faster task completion, but the resultant vibration experienced by the operator is not ideal (Thrailkill et al., 2013). Without the user-centered design focus, the operator works in non-neutral body postures, which are uncomfortable and could lead to WRMDs.

Since lawn mowing employees spend large amounts of time performing these repetitive tasks, it is crucial that measures are taken to reduce discomfort and minimize fatigue during operation in order to prevent WRMDs. A local manufacturing company contracted the researchers for an ergonomic analysis of their current commercial lawn mower handle geometry. This handle geometry was very different than traditional commercial lawnmower. Based on a search of other commercially available lawn mowers, the common control systems are currently a straight bar or a pistol position (Fig. 5). The manufacturing company specifically cited pistol position as their main competitor. Since the pistol position is the most similar to the nontraditional control system (NCS), this research aimed to determine a significant postural and comfort differential between the systems. There is no formal ergonomic comparison of handle geometries. The lawn mower under investigation allows landscapers to set a speed and release the control bar to accelerate. By engaging the control bar, the landscaper can brake (by engaging both control bars on the right and left), turn left (by engaging the left control bar), turn right (by engaging the right control bar), or reverse (by engaging the control bar past the neutral zone). The neutral zone is 6.3 mm and full speed acceleration is 9.0 mm. Two different forces are required while operating the nontraditional handle system. Based on the drivetrain of the mower the manufacturing company measured the required grip force to be about 88 N for engaging the handles (squeezing). In order to release the handles in a controlled manner, the manufacturing company measured the required force to be about 44 N of force.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate different conditions under which a commercial lawn mower may provide optimal comfort, help promote neutral wrists and incorporate injury prevention through ergonomic handle geometry. This study specifically aimed to evaluate the physical requirements and ergonomic geometry of the commercially available NCS position of the local manufacturer compared to a commonly used pistol-grip position and a completely vertical position in order to better understand the strength capacity required in job performance and highlight areas in this field that may require attention and future innovation. This was pursued through the evaluation of maximum grip forces in various handle configurations and an investigation of chosen comfortable handle positioning. The goal of this study was to evaluate the ergonomics and comfort of the nontraditional lawn mower handle geometry based on the postures and physical force required to operate the machine. The hypothesis of this research group is that the nontraditional handle will provide better user conditions than other commercially available geometries due to a relatively neutral user posture during operation.

The study on grip force compared four different handle geometries along with three different grip spans. The handle geometries were chosen based on the NCS (X), the commonly used pistol position (P), an average comfortable position (C) which was measured in the comfort study later in this text, and a vertical position (V) that potentially allowed for more neutral wrist angles.

Following IRB approval, participants were recruited and consented. For this grip force study, 72 participants were recruited ranging from 19 to 54 years of age from the population of students the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (63) and employees of the contracting manufacturing company (9). The manufacturing company employees increased our age range and had experience with lawn mowers. Of the participants, 46 were male, and 26 were female. These participants voluntarily completed the study and each individual was informed that his/her standing at the company or the university would not be affected by his/her willingness to participate, and told that they could withdraw at any time.

Instrumentation used for the force and comfort studies included a mock-up apparatus that simulated lawnmower handle bars as seen in Fig. 1
                           . This stationary simulation device could be adjusted to various heights, grip spans, handle angles, handle spreads, and tilt (Figs. 3–5
                           
                           
                           
                           ). This mockup (Fig. 1) was made of a camera tripod with a bracket mounted at the center of a horizontal piece of steel that allowed the handles to slide in order to achieve a desired handle spread. The handles rotated to the various angles with a pin rotation using a wingnut. The camera tripod allowed the angle and the height of the handle to adjust for maximum comfort. The two handle grips were made of PVC pipes and covered by the rubber grips from the NCS. A weight was suspended from the bottom of the mockup. This allowed for users and researchers to move the handles up and down without lifting the entire mockup or without someone holding down the mockup.

This device allowed for measurement of the grip forces exerted by the participant's hands when extended to various grip spans and arranged in different geometries. The handle bars of the device were instrumented with Sensotec 250lb load cells (Honeywell International, Morristown, NJ) that were connected to an A/D converter (U12 LabJack, LabJack Corporation, Lakewood, CO) using a power source (Model DMD-465WB, Omega Products, Inc., Stamford, CT) which sent the information into a LabVIEW program that displayed a graph of the forces applied by each hand during the force data collection for instant feedback and error detection (noisy signal or no signal) as well as for future data analysis. Participants squeezed the red handle (Table 2) toward the black handle and activated the load cell that was at the end of the PVC pipe. The metal screws at the top and the bottom of the handle helped keep the red and black handles parallel and therefore reduce shear force which would cause noise in the force readings.

The one-wheeled sulky from the NCS lawnmower system was used in this study to constrain foot placement. As shown in Fig. 1, the wheel was removed and the sulky was placed on the ground in front of the handle mock-up during testing.

For the testing, the device handles were set to the specific position (Table 1
                           , Figs. 3–5) and grip span (Table 2
                           ) based on a complete randomization, and the participant was asked to grasp the handles with his/her maximum force for six seconds. After six seconds the participant was informed that he/she could relax. Each grip span and position combination was only tested once and the participant was given time to rest for at least two minutes between each trial to reduce effects of fatigue. The participants were blinded to the positions that were tested. This was especially important with the manufacturing employees and their familiarity with the NCS. The forces were measured for four different positions: the nontraditional geometry of the commercially available mower under investigation (X), the position that was determined to be the most comfortable in initial comfort testing described in section 2.2.3 (C), the pistol-grip position (P), and the vertical position (V). P and V consisted of handles that were parallel to each other and 90° angles from the horizontal attachment bar. The difference was that P was parallel to the ground and V was perpendicular to the ground. Each position (X,C,P,V) was repeated at three different spans (Table 2) which represented the largest (90 mm), middle (80 mm) and smallest (63 mm) grip span widths for the required for actuation with the NCS for a total of 12 grip force maximums collected on each participant.

The Caldwell Regimen was used to test the maximum forces exerted in each configuration (Caldwell et al., 1974). Using this method the participant was allowed approximately three seconds to build up to his/her maximum force, and then he/she held this force for three more seconds.

After the force data were collected, it was all compiled and cropped into a two second section for each exertion (starting 3 s from the beginning and ending 1 s from the end). The average over the two second sections was calculated for an average maximum force for each participant.

For the comfort evaluation, two different groups of participants were recruited. IRB approval was obtained for all groups. Informed consent was obtained for the participants in the student group. However, the landscapers were orally consented in order to keep interference with their workday to a minimum and to ensure their data were completely de-identified leading to reduced stress regarding potential reporting to a supervisor since names were not collected through written consent. Landscapers using the commercial mower with the nontraditional handle geometry in the field, along with three additional landscapers who do not regularly use this machine (total of 14 participants from the field), placed the mock-up of the NCS handles in their most comfortable position for mowing. Anthropometric and demographic data were not collected for these participants in order to prevent any negative repercussions to the participants. The researchers did not want any chance of the employers identifying their employees in the data we collected due to their vulnerable status as employees. For the more rigorous evaluation students were recruited for total of 62 (42 male) participants to provide comfort evaluations.

The same apparatus from the force study (Fig. 1, Section 2.1.2) allowed users to move the handles in each of the different adjustable directions in order to locate their most comfortable position.

This study was performed in three phases. The first was performed out in the field with commercial mowers, the second at a local manufacturing company and the third was a laboratory study employing students with a more rigorous controlled procedure.

Using the stationary mock-up (Fig. 1), participants were asked to adjust the mock-up handle system into a comfortable position. Researchers then measured the height in which participants set the mock-up, the spread between the two handles, the tilt of the handles forward from the user, and the angle of the handles (Fig. 2). Participants from the field simply provided researchers with their comfortable position and then continued working. The average of these measurements resulted in the comfortable position (C) tested in 2.1.3.

Before the different positions were assessed with the second and third groups, participants took a short general survey to define the participant population. This survey consisted of demographic questions to determine their lawn mowing experience, stature, weight, body side dominance (handedness), age, and gender. Next, anthropometric data were collected for each subject with a full GPM anthropometer (Seritex). The dimensions collected were standing eye height, acromial height, and elbow height.

While the participants from the first and second groups were simply asked to adjust the mock-up handle system into a comfortable position, the subjects in the third group completed a more rigorous controlled study. They were randomly assigned an order in which to evaluate three different handle positions. Position 1 was the NCS experimental (X) position that began with the mock-up in the starting geometry of the investigated machine. Position 2 was an extreme (E) starting position for the same apparatus. See the dimensions for the starting positions X and E in Table 3
                           . Starting with each position in a randomized order, the subjects adjusted the height and tilt of the apparatus, as well as the angle and distance between the handles. The foot position of the participants was limited by the sulky and the distance between the sulky and the apparatus was fixed as these are constraints of the current mower and sulky design. This distance was set to mimic the actual distance from the sulky to the handles on the machine. Grip force was not tested simultaneously, allowing the participant to focus on postural comfort.

The subjects were helped into a comfortable standing position in front of the apparatus and on the sulky. Next each subject was asked to, “Move the apparatus into a comfortable position for mowing”. The dimensions of the comfortable position chosen by the participant were measured by the researchers.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

The measured force data from the twelve positions, averages and standard deviations for the comfortable positions were calculated for the whole population, and for each gender. ANOVA analyses were performed for the dependent variables with a significance level of α = 0.05. Any significant factors had a post-hoc test performed. Box and whisker plots were plotted for handle height, and distance between the handles. Correlations were calculated between the chosen comfort position and anthropometric dimensions using the Pearson product correlation (SAS, V9.2).

The maximum force for each of the 12 positions was compared to the force required to actuate the nontraditional handle system during operation. To calculate the percentage of force required for grasping and the percent of force required for releasing the actuator, the average maximum forces for male and female participants were divided by 44 N (grasping) and 88 N (releasing) values for each participant (by gender).

@&#RESULTS@&#

For the 72 participants (Table 4
                        ) that completed the force study, he two most similar positions X and C (angle and tilt), showed no statistically significant difference between the forces users produced in these configurations. Therefore, only position X was compared with the more common pistol grip mowing position, P, and the neutral or theoretical position V or vertical position. Forces produced by participants in position X were significantly different from the forces in positions V and P (p = <0.0001). Forces produced by positions V and P averaged between 8 and 10% lower than the forces in position X. Statistical analysis using ANOVA found the different grip spans to have a significant effect on the forces associated with each span for the group of females (p < 0.0001) males (p = 0.0034) and for all participants (p < 0.0001). This was further confirmed by Tukey tests for each of the three gender groupings. In the analysis of all participants where male and females were not separated, a significant difference in the force associated between the different positions was detected. A further Tukey post-hoc test determined that the differences were significant between the positions V and P and positions C and X. Measured forces compared to actual actuation forces can be seen in Fig. 6
                         below. At the largest grip span, the forces required to actuate the handles would be over 90% of the maximum grip strength trials for some handle positions. Even the second position required up to almost 71% MVC for females.

As shown in Fig. 7
                        , the data produced a position that is slightly lower than the existing system (92 cm vs 94.1 cm, respectively), with less extreme, more perpendicular handle angles (78.8° vs 53°, respectively) and a slightly smaller spread between the handles (35.6 cm vs 45.7, respectively). However, the area where the hand would most likely be positioned in space, is similar to the current handles. Dimensions are displayed in Table 1 for the NCS (X) and average comfortable (C) positions.

When participants from the third group or the student population started in both the X (eXperimental) and the E (Extreme) positions, there was a statistically significant correlation between their chosen comfortable position and their measured eye height (RX = 0.358 and RE = 0.502, respectively) acromial height (RX = 0.384 and RE = 0.532, respectively), elbow height (RX = 0.337 and RE = 0.473, respectively). The correlations were all positive but not very strong, however there were stronger correlations when users started in position E (see Table 5
                        ).


                        Fig. 7 shows the average handle height and spread (grey) that the student participants chose as a comfortable handle position compared to the NCS position (red). In Fig. 8
                        , the extreme starting position is on the left and the NCS starting position is on the right. The lines labeled on the right provide a reference for the starting position heights. The two outliers for male extreme starting position (*) are males who were 165 and 170 cm tall; relatively short males who were more than one standard deviation below the male height mean; however, these males were not the shortest males tested. In Fig. 9
                        , the extreme starting position is on the left and the NCS starting position is on the right. The lines labeled on the right mark the starting position distance. The outlier for male with the NCS starting position (*) was not particularly tall, but chose a large distance every time.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The difference in maximum forces that participants produced in positions X and C was not significantly different. This is probably due to the similarity between the two positions as can be seen in Fig. 7. Both positions provided a tilt between 55 and 57° and slight angling of the handles. The tilt reduced the wrist angles in both the flexion/extension and radial/ulnar deviation planes by allowing the user to adjust the wrist angles by moving the elbow. The angled handles similarly allowed users to keep their wrists more neutral even when the height is not adjustable. Fig. 7 shows that users can have their hands in almost the same orientation in space while grasping the handles.

Due to the similarity between positions C and X, only position X was used for subsequent statistical comparisons. Participants were able to produce significantly higher forces in position X compared to P and V. There are many differences that could cause the reduced grip forces during actuation in positions P and V such as differences in the radial and ulnar deviation that participants experience during operation; however there would be no flexion or extension forced upon the user since the handles have an angle of 90°. In position P participants would always experience some degree of ulnar deviation. Holding handles in the V position theoretically seems to place wrists in a neutral position with no extension, flexion, radial deviation or ulnar deviation and neither supination nor pronation. However, if the height is not perfectly fitted to the participant, the wrists are forced into radial or ulnar deviation (for handles that are too low and too high, respectively). Therefore, with the angled handles that are present in positions X and C users have more flexibility to adjust their elbows and reduce the awkward wrist angles despite the slight wrist pronation. Positions P, V and X varied in height which may have further exacerbated the non-ideal wrist angles. Position P was much lower than the other handle positions which placed users in awkward ulnar deviation at the wrist and even forced some users to bend over at the waist, which led to a decrease in maximum grip force.

Decreased maximum grip force is a problem that could lead to fatigue and injury in the daily users. The comparison of maximum grip forces collected on users to the required forces for lawn mower actuation showed that users may be required to consistently provide forces of 70–90% MVC. Although users are more often male, this is too much grip force to require of any user (Garg and Kapellusch, 2011).

Based on previous research (Pazderka et al., 1996; Ramakrishnan et al., 1994; Terrell and Purswell, 1976), the posture assumed in position X was expected to outperform the pistol grip for force generation and the tested grip spans of 1 and 2 were expected to outperform those at grip span 3. Grip 3 has too low of a maximum force that can be exerted by participants for the current handle actuation. For intermittent gripping tasks, there are no ergonomic guidelines at this time on acceptable limits for percentage of maximum grip force. However, under no circumstances should the exertion be more than 90% of a person's maximal grip strength. It is important that the amount of force required for actuation is at a lower percentage of maximum grip strength. Therefore, either the largest grip span (grip 3 at the onset of the task) needs to be decreased or the force requirements need to be decreased. Further research is needed to determine the ideal grip spans for the NCS that can improve user grip force ability but maintain appropriate sensitivity for the control of the mower.

A limitation for the grip force comparison was that the comparison was only within the constraints of the NCS. The researchers would like to compare it to the comfortable grip span recommendation from the literature mentioned in the introduction (Lee et al., 2009). However, that span was not possible with the equipment. Additionally, for the 8 manufacturing employees, there may have been some bias toward the NCS handle position. However, blinding the participants to the positions during force measurements mitigated the potential biases toward the NCS position.

Since comfort aspects are not only a selling point for users, but may be linked to WRMD, it is important that manufacturers are able to use this data in design and redesign. Eye height, elbow height and acromial height are mildly correlated to the chosen height which may lead to predictive values in the future. The correlation, while statistically significant, is not terribly strong. This correlation still suggests that adding a height adjustment to the current lawn mower design would allow users of a broader range of heights to find a more comfortable position. Researchers observed some differences in comfort position between the commercial mowers and the other volunteer users. It would be beneficial for researchers to evaluate more commercial mowers in a controlled, rigorous investigation for a more accurate prediction for this data.

From this study it became evident that manufacturers of lawn mowers may provide benefit to users by adding the ability to make a height adjustment for the control mechanism(s). This ability may be especially necessary for users in the upper percentile for height and when the sulky attachment is in use. Researchers observed more problems with participants of taller stature who were forced to lean forward or bend at the waist compared to shorter individuals who simply adjusted with their elbows allowing their arm and wrist posture to remain relatively neutral.

As mentioned before, small changes to the handle geometry will not greatly affect the force output by users. Similarly, comfortable positions are very similar to the position of the current nontraditional handle system and therefore comfort is not greatly affected with small changes. If changes are made to the tilt, it is recommended that the angle of the handles be adjusted accordingly.

All studies were completed with users of various mowing experience levels. Those with very little mowing experience and specifically no experience with the nontraditional handles may not have had the same ability to judge mowing equipment. However, through randomization and explanation all users were aware of the purpose of the study and the bias toward one type of mower was mitigated. Additionally, the study did not specifically quantify postures. While the researchers focused on the wrists, there may be back and shoulder postures that cause discomfort for different positions. Therefore, this study is limited in its ability to truly compare the postural differences between the different positions.

Finally, with stronger correlations between the anthropometric data and comfortable height when beginning with the mock-ups in position E, it appears that since the E position is so extreme and awkward, participants were more inclined to make adjustments and to find the exact mock-up position that was most comfortable. Since the participants were close to a comfortable position when starting in position X, it was likely difficult to identify any discomfort in the short amount of and therefore less adjustments were made. Additionally, Figs. 8 and 9 show the bias that starting position can have on the final positioning. Participants were likely to choose a position similar to their starting position. Even with this starting position as a bias, the data shows that the NCS provides a comfortable position for a majority of users.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

A nontraditional handle position for commercial lawn mowers can provide significant benefits to users. Some areas could use some improvement through angle and height adjustments. Ideally, a tilt between 55.5 and 57° along with handle rotations between 53 and 78.8° would be beneficial to the health and comfort of commercial mowers. These positions allow the largest grip strength to be generated by the operator. Due to the correlation between height (acromial, elbow, and eye), adding a height adjustment would be beneficial for users especially for individuals with taller stature or during sulky use due to the added height. Lawn mowing machines that assist the user in maintaining proper hand, wrist, and elbow positions could lead to less fatigue, resulting in fewer injuries and higher productivity. New handle positions may also provide the user with benefits based on a more thoroughly tested preferred angle. The new angles tested in the comfort and force studies were not tested during mower operation. Therefore, more testing will be needed to validate these positions in real-world tasks.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

Acknowledgement goes to Badr Mogari, Blake Ritter, Haley Hatter, Ian Barger, Liz Norris and Luke Lingenfelter with UNL for their assistance during data collection and processing.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

