@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Dynamic push–pull characteristics at three hand-reach envelopes: Applications for the workplace

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We investigated dynamic push pull strength and work measures during a seated task, at different reach envelopes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Dynamic pushing work capability was best at medium reach envelopes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Pulling was best at maximum, followed by medium, reach positions.


                        
                        
                           
                           A recommendation was made to avoid strenuous push–pull tasks at neutral reach envelopes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Push/pull strength ratio was approximately 1.00.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Push–pull

Isokinetic

Reach envelope

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Pushing and pulling are common tasks in the workplace. Overexertion injuries related to manual pushing and pulling are often observed, and therefore the understanding of work capacity is important for efficient and safe workstation design. The purpose of the present study was to describe workloads obtained during different reach envelopes during a seated push–pull task. Forty-five women performed an isokinetic push–pull sequence at two velocities. Strength, work and agonist/antagonist muscle ratio were calculated for the full range of motion (ROM). We then divided the ROM into three reach envelopes – neutral, medium, and maximum reach. The work capacity for each direction was determined and the reach envelope work data were compared. Push capability was best at medium reach envelope and pulling was best at maximum reach envelope. Push/pull strength ratio was approximately 1. A recommendation was made to avoid strenuous push–pull tasks at neutral reach envelopes.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The acts of pushing and pulling are often utilized in the workplace. Sliding objects such as cartons on flat surfaces or conveyer belts, opening and closing doors, and pushing manual carts are a few typical examples. It has been estimated that pushing and pulling constitutes around 50%–75% of all manual material handling across selected industries (Baril-Gingras and Lortie, 1995; McDonald et al., 2012). As much as 20% of all overexertion injuries were ascribed to push–pull activities by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) (Kumar, 1995a).

An important parameter for the design of a workstation setup is reach capability, referred to as reach envelope. In defining the area of the workplace, three upper body reach envelopes have been classified. Normal or neutral reach envelope is the workspace closest to the body, where the forearm can pivot about around a relaxed vertical arm (Das and Sengupta, 1995; Sengupta and Das, 1999). Medium to maximum reach envelope is described as movement towards a fully extended arm around the shoulder. Extreme reach workspace is described as when movement of the trunk extends the reach of the fully extended arm.

Little is known about the exact distribution of dynamic muscle work or about the optimal agonist/antagonist ratio through the different reach envelopes during a push–pull activity. Dynamic data regarding workplace efforts are lacking, but are vital in order to assure safe and efficient working environments in industrial settings. Isometric push–pull strength profiles in the workspace were reported by a number of investigators (e.g., Chaffin et al., 1983; Davis and Stubbs, 1977; Kroemer and Robinson, 1974; Kumar, 1995b; Tiwari et al., 2010), with comparisons made of positions and reach envelopes between genders. Reach level was found to have a significant effect on women's static pull strength in the seated position (Das and Wang, 2004a, 2004b). Highest values were recorded for the extreme reach envelope, which was defined as a large area extending beyond the maximal reach available with a fully extended elbow. Push strength was found to be less affected by the reach level in the Das and Wang studies but followed a similar trend of force values recorded of extreme > maximal > normal reach envelope. These works focused on static positions under various combinations of reach distance and height. Dynamic strength profiles of a push–pull motion were reported for various athletic activities through the use of common field tests, such as push-up and pull-up exercises. Antagonist ratios of 97% were reported by Baker and Newton (2004). Negrete et al. (2013) reported markedly different values of pulling strength, measuring 37% of pushing muscles strength as evaluated by a modified push-up versus a modified pull-up exercise. Negrete et al. (2013) related the marked differences in these strength levels identified in their study to the experimental set-up, which resulted in a longer level arm utilized during pulling, and contributed to the skewed results.

Isokinetic devices have been considered the gold standard for evaluating dynamic muscle work for many years (Dvir, 2004). Linear motion patterns, such as push–pull, typically involve the simultaneous contraction of a number of muscles using several joints, for the purpose of executing a given task. The resulting motion of the end segment pattern is a linear displacement. A significant relationship has been demonstrated between muscular output during linear isokinetic testing and various functional tests, primarily for the lower extremities (Manske et al., 2003).

The use of linear motion patterns has been reported for upper extremity shoulder protraction-retraction (see Cools et al., 2004; Kovaleski et al., 1999). The current protocol was expanded beyond previously reported scapular motion (Cools et al., 2004) to simulate functional push–pull sequences commonly used in the workplace. Seated push–pull tasks seen in the work place include vertical lever operation, such as a floor shift on heavy equipment, or moving objects on or off conveyors. The purpose of the present study was to describe normal strength characteristics of a push–pull functional sequence motion conducted in a seated posture, and to describe workloads obtained during different reach envelopes of the workspace.

Forty-five healthy women, without a history of or current upper extremity or neck pathologies were randomly recruited in a university setting to participate in the study (age: 28 ± 12.2 years, height (cm): 166 ± 1.0, mass (kg): 58 ± 6.4 and bmi: (kg/m2): 21.3 ± 4.2). Participants did not have prior isokinetic training experience and were not involved in any form of competitive sports during the time of the experiment.

Prior to enrollment, each subject completed a qualification interview, received an explanation regarding the aims of the study, and signed an informed consent form complying with the regulations of the Institutional Review Board of the University of Haifa. This was done in accordance with the code of ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki). Each subject was required to present a medical clearance for fitness training, signed by a licensed physician, in accordance with the governmental sports medicine law. Criteria for exclusion beyond those mentioned above included restricted range of motion (ROM) of the shoulder or elbow, any history of surgery or functional limitation of the upper extremities, or the presence of pain or other symptoms in the upper extremity and neck region, for a period of six months prior to the study.

We conducted testing with the isokinetic Biodex System 3 (Biodex Medical Systems, NY, http://www.biodex.com and the computer software program version 3.29 and 3.30), utilizing the upper extremity closed kinetic chain (CKC) attachment (Fig. 1
                        a and b). The apparatus was calibrated according to the manufacturer's instructions. The linear ROM was established in the following manner: For the push phase, also termed the “Away” motion, the subject was seated in the starting position with her arm held parallel to the body and the elbow flexed (Fig. 1a). This phase consisted of scapular protraction, gleno-humeral flexion, and elbow extension to a position of 0° extension. From that point (Fig. 1b) the pull phase consisted of elbow flexion, shoulder extension, and scapular retraction back to the starting position. This phase was termed the “Towards” motion. The wrist joint perpendicular handle was not fixed, allowing for some adjustments away from neutral grip position. Work done by Seo et al. (2010), suggested that greater pull/push forces may be exerted at right angles to the handle than parallel to it. The procedure was repeated on both sides, with randomization of testing order.

Performance of a pull task alongside the body was shown to be conducive to better force production, particularly when handle height increased (Lin et al., 2013). In order to learn about workloads endured at different reach envelopes, the linear ROM was divided into three reach envelopes typical of a workspace. This is discussed in detail in the data collection section.

We utilized a full ROM for all testing procedures. We defined the full ROM (R) as the distance covered by pushing the handle from a neutral arm position to a fully extended elbow position, while preventing trunk participation by stabilizing straps applied across the trunk. Linear displacement values of the hand-held handle ranged from 31.3 to 37.1 cm, with an average value of 34.8 cm. Two velocities were employed for testing in order to best simulate tasks which require considerable force exertion (slow velocity, resulting in an approximate effort of 3 s in each direction), as well as tasks that are more fluid in nature (high velocity, resulting in a 1 s effort in each direction). Prior to testing each subject was asked to answer the question “Which side is your favorite side?”, or if there was no conclusive preference, “Which hand do you use for throwing a ball?” This was done during the initial screening and while obtaining informed consent.

Prior to data collection, calibration of the isokinetic device was performed according to the manufacturer's recommended procedure. In order to establish reliability for this novel movement pattern, a reliability study was conducted prior to the beginning of the main study. Data were collected from 15 women volunteers who performed two sets of 5 repetitions of the pull–push motion at two velocities – 12.22 cm/s and 36.67 cm/s. Two testing sessions were conducted one week apart. Peak force and work data were collected and analyzed for all repetitions, at both testing velocities on both days. In order to test for the degree of agreement between repeated measurements, an interclass correlation coefficient was calculated. With values ranging between 0.784 and 0.981, excellent reliability was achieved.

A familiarization/warm-up procedure consisting of an inverse velocity pyramid was performed: Each subject performed three comfortable repetitions (defined as an effort of 50% of their own perceived maximal effort) at each of the following velocities: 36.67 cm/s, 24.24 cm/s, and 12.22 cm/s, in that order. This sequence was chosen as the most comfortable by participants in the preliminary trials. Satisfactory scores achieved by the “naive” participants of the reliability study assured an adequate level of learning through this procedure. Following this, participants rested for 10 min, after which final adjustments were made and testing commenced with a warm-up of six graded sub-maximal repetitions followed by a 1-min rest.

All participants performed five maximal repetitions through the full range (R), on the dominant and the non-dominant side, at two linear velocities (12.22 cm/s and 36.67 cm/s).

Peak Force (Pk F) expressed in Newton (N) was collected for the full range (R) in the push and pull phases, and reported for each velocity, for the dominant and non-dominant sides. Mean maximum work (Max W) for each direction and at each velocity was also analyzed for the full (R), for the dominant and non-dominant sides.

Mean maximum work (Max W) for each direction and at each velocity was analyzed for the three ranges r1, r2, r3 corresponding to the three reach envelopes. The following simulation was assumed: r1 = normal (neutral) reach, r2 = medium reach, r3 = maximum reach. This was carried in the Away = push phase and in the Towards = pull phase of the motion, and is demonstrated in Fig. 2
                           .

These ratios were derived from the Pk F values obtained. The agonist/antagonist strength ratio was derived from the mean Pk F in the Away = push direction, divided by the mean Pk F in the Towards = pull direction (Pk F Away/Pk F Towards).

A within-subject repeated measure analysis was used. Means and standard deviations were reported for each variable. A paired T–test was used to compare means between sides for the Pk F and Max W values of corresponding velocities, in each direction. Paired T–testing was also used to examine the force ratio obtained at both velocities.

A 2 X 3 ANOVA with repeated measures analysis was used to examine the differences in max W values between sides (dominant versus non-dominant), and between reach envelopes (r1, r2, r3). Partial eta square, defined as the proportion of variance accounted for by an effect of a dependent variable while partially excluding other factors, was reported for statistically significant results (Cohen, 1973; Ferguson, 2009). For significant overall differences between factors, further assessment via Tukey test was undertaken. The level of statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Pk F and max W values for the full pushing and full pulling motion, at each velocity. These values are presented in Table 1
                     .

Pushing: While the dominant side was stronger in all parameters evaluated, differences did not reach statistical significance. This was true for work and force for both velocities, with the one exception of Pk F values at the velocity of 12.22 cm/s (p = 0.022).

Pulling: The dominant side was stronger in all parameters evaluated, with significant differences for both work and Pk F values at both velocities (p < 0.000 and p < 0.001, respectively. As expected, Max W and Pk F values were higher at the slow velocity in both directions.

The dominant side was stronger in all parameters evaluated, with significant differences for both work and Pk F values at both velocities (p < 0.000 and p < 0.001) respectively. As expected, Max W and Pk F values were higher at the slow velocity in both directions. Work values were then evaluated for each reach envelope, and are summarized in Table 2
                     .

Pushing: Max W values varied significantly among reach envelopes at both velocities (F2, 88 = 112.47, p < 0.001, Partial eta Squared = 0.719 at 12.22 cm/s, F2, 88 = 223.88, p < 0.001, Partial eta Squared = 0.836 at 36.67 cm/s). Table 3
                      summarizes the ANOVA findings.

Max W values varied significantly among reach envelopes at both velocities (F2, 88 = 112.47, p < 0.001, Partial eta Squared = 0.719 at 12.22 cm/s, F2, 88 = 223.88, p < 0.001, Partial eta Squared = 0.836 at 36.67 cm/s). Table 3 summarizes the ANOVA findings.

Post-hoc analysis confirmed significant differences among the three reach envelopes at both velocities, with highest values reported for the medium, followed by the maximum reach envelope.

Pulling: Max W values varied significantly for the different reach envelopes at both velocities (F2, 88 = 447.97, p < 0.000, Partial eta Squared = 0.910 at 12.22 cm/s, F2, 88 = 223.88, p < 0.000, Partial eta Squared = 0.919 at 36.67 cm/s). Table 3 presents the summary of the ANOVA procedure.

Post-hoc analysis confirmed significant differences among all three reach envelopes at the velocity of 12.22 cm/s. Post-hoc analysis of work values at the velocity of 36.67 cm/s demonstrated a significant difference between the neutral reach envelope and the two other ranges. The difference between the medium and the maximum reach envelopes was not significant. Highest values were reported for the maximum followed by the medium reach envelope.

Ratio: The values for the strength ratio calculated for each side and for both velocities are presented in Fig. 3
                     . It is noted that the ratio of push/pull strength at the slow velocity of 12.22 cm/s resulted in numbers close to “1”, reflecting a relatively balanced force production in both directions. A paired t-test indicated a significantly higher ratio on the non-dominant side. At the velocity of 36.67 cm/s the ratio was lower, thus indicating a relative shift towards less pushing force – a trend noted for both sides.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Horizontal application of a push–pull force is a common activity performed by workers, but little is known about the normal distribution of muscle work, agonist/antagonist force ratio for different reach envelopes, or their relationship to work demands. The knowledge of available strength levels at each reach envelope is cardinal for proper planning of work tasks and ensuring a safe work environment. When applying a push–pull force, switching back and forth between these actions, a reciprocal-type assessment, is a very suitable job simulation.

The first important finding relates to differences in the amount of work at the three reach envelopes. The neutral reach envelope yielded the lowest work values for both the pushing and the pulling tasks. A possible implication of this finding would be a recommendation to avoid strenuous push–pull tasks at neutral reach envelopes. Pushing tasks may be performed efficiently at medium reach envelopes, and tasks requiring pulling may be best positioned at maximum followed by medium reach positions.

Previous studies utilizing a variety of testing conditions and protocols presented similar trends, pointing to the enhanced pull strength (static and dynamic) obtained at maximal reach distances (e.g., Herring and Hallbeck, 2007; Imrhan and Ayoub, 1990; Mital and Faard, 1990). A recent study investigated steering performance velocity and precision as functions of reach position (Schmidt et al., 2014). The best results were obtained at the range corresponding to the medium-maximum range of the current study.

What may account for this enhanced pulling capacity is the posture of workers who have their arm at a horizontal extension, thus providing the shoulder extensor muscles with a good mechanical advantage (improved strength capability). A mean maximum pull force that was 29% greater for an extended elbow than for the flexed elbow was found by Seo (Seo et al., 2010). For the extended posture, maximum pull force may not be limited as long as sufficient upwards force is applied, which may assist in joint stabilization, providing an advantage to maximum pulling force.

With the arm elevated further beyond shoulder height, reaching the extreme reach envelope, or working close to the body with a flexed elbow (neutral reach) (as depicted in the work of Sengupta and Das, 1999), the benefit of the stretched shoulder extensors is negated by the relative mechanical disadvantage, so that the pull strength generated is not that strong. These results are also well in line with muscle physiology principles according to force-length relationships (Huxley, 1969).

When considering muscle involvement in a pushing task, one can reasonably consider the Anterior Deltoid, Triceps Brachii, and Serratus Anterior as probable contributors (Hintermeister et al., 1998; Illyés and Kiss, 2005). As the motion progresses from the neutral, near the body arm position into shoulder flexion, these muscles will function in a slightly lengthened position in the medium range, where the best work values were obtained.

A second interesting finding of this study relates to the push–pull force ratio. This ratio presents a relative distribution of muscles active in each direction, and thus can be viewed as the “sum” of torques of muscles active in pushing divided by the torque of muscles active during pulling. Other studies (e.g.,; Basmajian and Latif, 1957; Hintermeister et al., 1998; Illyes and Kiss, 2005) recognized the main muscles active in pushing (i.e., triceps, serratus, anterior deltoid, and scapular protractors) and the major contributors to pulling (i.e., scapular retractors, long head of triceps, biceps brachii).

Despite a limitation of this measure of muscle ratio stemming from the fact that Pk F values are traditionally obtained without regard to joint position, it is widely used as an acceptable tool for evaluation of agonist/antagonist muscle balance.

The importance of investigating muscle ratio for a multi-joint, reciprocal job task is directly derived from task load requirements. In those scenarios where significant force is required bi-directionally (with equal load and no gravity effect), equal force production would be required, bringing the ideal muscle ratio to approximately 1.00.

The third important finding relates to velocity and force production. In the present study the slow velocity produced higher force values, as expected, and the maximal force levels for both directions were relatively balanced (Fig. 3). While Pk F at both directions of movement declined at the higher velocity, the lower ratios noted at the high velocity suggest that pushing force declined more than pulling force when the task was undertaken under higher velocity conditions.

The practical implication of this finding would be to adopt slower velocities for higher-demand tasks in the workplace, in particular those requiring reciprocal execution. This finding is in agreement with the work of Garg and Beller (1990), who concluded that one-handed pulling tasks should be performed at slow speeds, in order to maximize worker's strength capability and minimize overexertion injuries. Thus, higher velocities might be a limiting factor for pushing tasks.

Breaking down the push/pull components of the current study task yields the sum of muscle forces of elbow extension, shoulder flexion, and scapular protraction which make up the pushing task. The opposite motions will contribute to the force of pulling.

To date, published data regarding muscle ratios for the upper extremities have been based largely on single joint or open kinetic chain testing, which makes the comparison of ratios very difficult since the relative contribution of each muscle group is unknown.

Several authors investigated the agonist/antagonist scapular muscle strength ratio derived from Pk F values in healthy participants and patients (e.g., Cools et al., 2004; Forthomme et al., 2007), gymnasts (Cools et al., 2007), athletes participating in overhead sports (Cools et al., 2005), and swimmers (Van de Velde et al., 2011).

The reported ratios were derived from a closed chain, push–pull motion with the elbow held straight. This position differed from the testing procedure applied in the current study, which produced a multi-segment, functional-type motion incorporating the elbow joint as well. Despite the differences in procedure, the ratios obtained in the current study compare favorably with published data. Strength ratios at the slow velocity of 12.22 cm/s ranged from 0.95 to 1.24 in previous studies (see Cools et al., 2002; Cools et al., 2004, 2005, 2007; Forthomme et al., 2007), and from 0.97 to 1.01 in the current study (mean value of 1.0).

Thus a relative equal balance of strength seems to be a normative finding for protractors and retractors of the scapula, as well as for the push–pull motion presented in the current study. This similarity is not entirely accounted for by the present protocol, where scapular muscles act as stabilizers, allowing for smooth reciprocal motion produced by other shoulder and elbow muscles. Decreased protraction forces, as well as a decreased agonist/antagonist strength ratio at a high velocity of 36.67 cm/s, were reported for overhead athletes with impingement symptoms (Cools et al., 2005). Our study focused only on women, who are often vulnerable to overuse injuries, and future research should include male workers as well.

Strength deficits or imbalances between opposing muscle groups may predispose a worker to injury. With the shoulder and neck frequently implicated in overexertion injuries related to push–pull activities (Van der Beek et al., 1993), it is evident that further knowledge regarding the mechanical load on the upper extremities is needed (Hoozemans et al., 1998). Harmful effects of this load may be minimized by exerting the push or pull force in a mechanically favorable manner, utilizing the advantages of perpendicular handle placement and larger reach envelopes (Lin et al., 2010; Seo et al., 2010). Recognizing normal scapular and shoulder muscle balance patterns may aid in matching the proper job assignment to prospective workers when evaluating their ability to perform a seated push–pull task at the workplace.

Our study demonstrated different work capacities obtained at three hand-reach envelopes during a push–pull task. The neutral reach envelope produced the lowest work capability, and is therefore not recommended for strenuous tasks. Recognizing normative strength data at different hand-reach envelopes may contribute to the optimal design of work environments, and positively affect the worker's efficiency, comfort, and safety.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

