@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A four-year follow-up study of physical working conditions and perceived mental and physical strain among food industry workers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Deteriorating physical working conditions increases physical and mental strain among food industry workers.


                        
                        
                           
                           The change in physical strain was associated with the change in mental strain.


                        
                        
                           
                           Younger employees were mostly affected due to poorer ergonomic factors at work.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Environmental factors

Ergonomic factors

Food factory

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study hypothesized that in a longitudinal setting deteriorating physical working conditions increases the perceived physical and mental strain among food processing employees. The study was conducted in 2003 and 2007. It examined 248 blue-collar workers, all of whom were in the same occupation throughout the entire follow-up period. The data were obtained through a structural questionnaire distributed to the employees at the workplace. Mental strain had increased (7%) significantly among younger employees during the follow-up. The changes in mental strain for the younger employees were positively associated with the changes in physical strain. The changes in physical strain were also significantly associated with the changes in physical working conditions among both younger and the older workers. The results of this study partly support the study hypothesis, namely that deteriorating physical working condition increases physical strain and also increases mental strain, especially among younger employees.
               
            

Perceived exertion is the single best indicator of the degree of physical strain (Borg, 1970). The perceived exertion (RPE) scale values range from 6 to 20 and can be used to denote heart rates ranging from 60 to 200 beats/min. This scale is easier to use because a certain value on the scale, e.g. 13, would match approximately a heart rate of 130 beats/min for 30–50-year-old subjects.

Details of the scale:
                           
                              6 – No exertion at all

7 – Extremely light

8 –

9 – Very light

10 –

11 – Light

12 –

13 – Somewhat hard

14 – Hard (heavy)

15 –

16 – Very hard

17 –

18 –

19 – Extremely hard

20 – Maximal exertion

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Although the demands of work have changed from physical to more mental demands in recent decades (Frese, 2000; Sutela, 2007), there are still branches where the physical demands are heavy. Food manufacturing is an example of such branches where the work still includes a lot of lifting and carrying, repetitive movements and other heavy physical load. The work environment of the food processing industry is also characterized by low and high temperatures, draught, noise and poor lighting which are risk factors for early cessation of working life, especially in that industry (Salonen et al., 2003). Additionally, in many situations the environmental factors and physical factors may act independently or collectively as stressors (LaDou, 2007). As a result, repetitive strain injuries are the most prevalent work-related diseases in the food processing industry in Finland (Riihimäki et al., 2004).

Industrial workers are most exposed to job strain (Nicot, 2007). The high job strain is mostly due to the physical work environment in the industry. Several other studies have reported that physical working conditions, especially heavy lifting and uncomfortable work postures are associated with sick-leave (Laaksonen et al., 2010; Lund et al., 2006; Allebeck and Mastekaasa, 2004). Consequently, the risk for sick leaves and early retirement is typically increased in such working conditions (Ilmarinen et al., 1997; Nygård et al., 2005; Sell, 2009). Food industry workers have been shown to have twice as much sick leave as the average among industry workers in Finland and the EU (Ilmarinen, 1999; Vahtera and Kivimäki, 2004; Gimeno et al., 2004). The branch is also at the top of the early retirement statistics (Salonen et al., 2003; Ilmarinen et al., 1997).

Our study was based on a four-year follow-up of stress and strain in four food processing factories. The stress-strain concept (Rutenfrantz, 1981; Cox et al., 2000) assumes that the stress on a worker depends on objective environmental factors acting upon the person, whereas strain denotes the effects of stress which will be individually different. The use of the stress-strain concept is practical in the study of the effect of physical workload on the cardiovascular system which is directly related to the individual's physical work capacity (Rutenfrantz, 1981). It also emphasizes the role of individual characteristics such as age, gender, and health status and work ability as modifiers of the relationship between physical working condition and strain. Work ability is a comprehensive concept for occupational health research and prevention (Ilmarinen, 2009). The relationship between the physical strain and heart rate depends on the type of muscular work (Ilmarinen, 1984). Heart rate at a given physical strain is the highest in industrial work that also includes much static work (Ilmarinen, 1978). Moreover, the associations of work stressors and individual stress symptoms with work ability are unclear: there seems to be a strong effect in particular among the aging (Tuomi et al., 1991), but there are also studies (Gamperiene et al., 2008) that have not found a relation between physical strain and work ability. Also, the physical working conditions among younger and older workers are poorly understood, as some previous research concluded that in the same occupation younger workers are at greater risk of physical strain than older workers (Pailhe, 2005). But the subjects of the aforementioned study were not only the blue-collar but also the others who were working in different job settings. Another study by Nygård et al. (1997) reported higher strain among older municipal employees in both blue- and white-collar jobs.

Although many studies have previously assessed the association between work environment and strain, the association between changes in physical working conditions and parallel changes in perceived strain has rarely been studied before. One of the experimental study found that physical capacity is adversely affected by mental stress (Mehta and Agnew, 2012) and that also mental stress adversely affect biomechanical responses during low back exertion (Marras et al., 2000). Our study is an original contribution to studies of the links between physical working conditions and perceived strain among food industries workers. We hypothesized in this study among industrial blue-collar workers that; a) deteriorating (negative changes) of the physical working condition increases the perceived physical and mental strain among younger and older workers and b) the perceived mental and physical strain interact with each other among younger and older workers.

@&#METHOD@&#

The study subjects were employees from four factories and from one office department of a food industry company employing more than 2000 people in Finland. Food processing is a universal industry, employing substantial number of workforce, e.g. in Finland, 34,000 workers (1–2% of the workforce) (Neupane et al., 2013a). The questionnaires were distributed in the workplaces, filled in during working hours, and the closed response envelopes were collected and sent to the researchers. A questionnaire survey was conducted among all employees of the company in spring 2003 (N = 1995, 1581 blue-collar and 414 white collar employees) with a response rate of 56% (N = 1220). Of the respondents, 71% (N = 861, 603 blue-collar and 258 white-collar employees) gave consent to being identified. The majority of the blue-collar employees were working in food processing and maintenance departments, which entails muscular work with a lot of lifting and carrying, while majority of white-collar employees worked in the management department (Neupane et al., 2013a, 2013b). The 603 blue-collar employees are the cohort of interest in the present study. In a corresponding survey in 2007, 126 of them were no longer in the service of the company; among those who had not resigned, the response rate was 52% (N = 248). Their mean age at the beginning of the follow-up was 39 years (SD = 9.5) ranging from 20 to 60 years, and 70% of them were women which is similar to European statistics where food manufacturing blue-collar workers are mainly female dominated (Eurofound, 2012). Statistics on sample attrition revealed that non-respondents were somewhat younger than the other groups, there was no gender difference, and the working conditions at baseline tended to be worse among those who had resigned between the surveys visits (Table 1
                        ). The study was approved by the ethical committee of Pirkanmaa Hospital District, Tampere, Finland.

Perceived mental strain was assessed by a modified version of the occupational stress questionnaire (Elo et al., 1992), using a single question (“Stress means a situation in which a person feels excited, apprehensive/concerned, nervous or distressed or she/he cannot sleep because of the things on her/his mind. Do you feel this kind of stress nowadays?”) (Elo et al., 1992), with the reply scale from 0 (not at all) to10 (very much). Perceived physical strain was elicited with the rating of perceived exertion (RPE) with the question “How physically hard/exhausting do you feel your job is on a normal work day?” on a scale from 6 (not at all) to 20 (very much) (Borg, 1970) Box 1
                        .

Factors in the physical working condition were asked by the question “Do the following factors increase your strain at your work? draught, noise, poor indoor climate, hotness, coldness and blinding lighting” on a scale going from 1 (very little) to 5 (very much) (Lehto and Sutela, 2009). In our study, the variable describing environmental factors was summed into a single variable ranging from 6 to 30. In a similar way, the variable describing physical working conditions (restless work environment, repetitive movements, bent or twisted working postures) was asked in a scale 1 (very little) to 5 (very much) and the answers summed up into a variable ranging from 3 to 15 (Virtanen et al., 2008). The Cronbach's alpha from the reliability test of the sum measures for physical working condition was 0.80 and environmental factors were 0.78.

The single-item question, in this study concerned one item from the work ability index (WAI) “current work ability compared with the life time best” with a possible score of 0 (absolutely incapable to work) to 10 (work ability at its best) (Ilmarinen, 2009; de Croon et al., 2005).

Changes of the physical working conditions as well as change in the mental and physical strain during follow-up were calculated by subtracting the values of the year 2003 from the values of the year 2007. Descriptive statistics of physical strain, mental strain, work ability, physical working conditions and environmental exposures in the cohort were performed in means and standard deviation (SD) stratified by age. Distributions of the change from the year 2003–2007 were shown as means and standard deviations. Paired samples t-test was used to test the significance of the changes of all outcome variable and determinant variables at baseline and the follow-up year. Associations between changes in physical working conditions and environmental factors with the changes in mental and physical strain were first studied with Spearman's correlation coefficients. Then multifactorial analysis was conducted using linear regressions with enter method (procedure for the multivariable regression analysis) by adjusting for each independent variable by age, gender, changes in work ability and baseline factors (perceived work ability, physical working conditions, and environmental factors, physical and mental strain) in the model. All the analyses were divided into two age groups <45 years (young) and ≥45 years (old), (WHO, 1993) to analyze the association separately among younger and older workers. Statistical analyses were performed by SPSS for Windows version 16.0.2. P-values under 0.05 were considered as statistical significant.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Perceived environmental factors significantly (p < 0.01) deteriorated among the younger workers but improved among the older workers (p < 0.01) (Table 2
                     ). As regards the outcome variables, mental strain had increased significantly (p = 0.02) among younger workers and the changes in physical strain were not significant. Work ability decreased among the older (0.04), whereas no changes were seen among the younger workers. Perceived mental and physical strain and working conditions among younger workers was higher than their older counterparts in both baseline and follow-up year.

Changes in physical strain correlated positively with the changes in mental strain in both age groups; the correlation was statistically significant (p = 0.02), and was particularly strong among the older workers (Table 3
                     ). The correlation between changes in physical strain and changes in mental strain and physical working conditions was significant among both younger and older workers. The changes in physical strain correlated significantly with the changes in environmental factors among young workers.


                     Table 4
                      shows the unstandardized β – coefficients with 95% confidence intervals, R
                     2 and p-values for age, gender, changes in work ability and baseline factors adjusted linear regression models. The change in mental strain was linearly associated with the change in physical strain among younger workers (p = 0.02) and also with the changes in physical working conditions among both younger and older workers. However, the significant factors explained the low variance of the change, which is from 5 to 9%. As to the change in physical strain, statistically significant associations were found with the changes in physical working conditions among both young and older workers, and there was also a significant association with the change in environmental factors among the younger employees. For the change in physical strain due to significant factors was comparatively low as well and ranged from 6 to 14%. Positive change in mental strain explained positive change of physical strain among younger employees but the effect was nearly significant among older ones.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The result of this study supports our first hypothesis partly; deteriorating physical working conditions increases perceived physical and mental strain. We found (in this study) an association between deteriorating physical working conditions and increased physical strain among both the young and the older workers, whereas the associations of environmental factors with perceived mental and physical strain proved out as non-significant except for the association with physical strain among younger workers. Moreover, our analysis revealed that the change in physical strain was associated with the change in mental strain, especially among younger workers, which confirmed our second hypothesis. Due to the limited number of earlier studies looking into the parallel changes in physical and mental strain, a meaningful comparison with the results of the present study is warrant.

The last finding is noteworthy: it indicates that among the younger workers an increase of poor physical working conditions not only increased physical strain but also increased mental strain. A possible explanation could be that the older people are less exposed than their younger colleagues to the most adverse physical factors in the workplace, such as physical strain, vibrations, extreme temperatures, etc. (Agathocleous, 2004). In our study, the prevalence of mental strain at baseline was 18.1% while at follow-up it was increased by 7% (data not shown). Our results are comparable with the results of the study by Sein et al. (2010) among rubber-glove factory workers in Thailand which found that the prevalence of job strain was 27.5%. Stress factors (physical working environment) were found to predict future strain in personnel on ships that can have adverse effect one year later (Bridger et al., 2011). Risk due to physical working conditions such as poor physical working conditions at work in Finland is above EU27 average and exposures to poor physical working conditions in industrial sector are also high compared to other industrial sector (Eurofound, 2012). Some researchers also assume that environmental conditions may be the prime cause of increasing mental strain (Cooper and Roden, 1985). For older employees the actual working method applied may be considered as an important instrument in order to compensate for increasing strain and declining work ability and also an increase in mental strain. In our study working conditions are the factor that can affect physiological strain. In particular, an increase in heat stress results in an increase in heart rate, even during rest. In blue-collar occupation in the food industry, workers are exposed to a wide range of ambient conditions. Thus, monitoring of physiological strain is important as it reflects both the effect of physical work but also the strain provided by any working conditions (Gertner et al., 1984). Furthermore, physical capacity deteriorates earlier with age than mental capacity (Nygård et al., 2005; Savinainen et al., 2004). Mental capacity may also decline in middle age, but this seldom occurs before the age of 65, and even thereafter the drop is individual and depends partly on how much mental stimulation an individual receives. It is very important to notice in the female dominated food factory branch that women are more sensitive to environmental factors, and tend to perceive their health problems more intensely, and to report more problems than men do (Verbrugge, 1985).

In a study by Tuomi et al. (1991) people over 45 years working in jobs with high physical demands, poor physical environment and poor work postures were physically more stressed than people in jobs with mental or mixed mental and physical demands. This may be explained by the fact that older employees may be more sensitive to changes in the environment than younger employees and also due to a decline in capacity and work ability with increasing age. In another study (Myrtek et al., 1999) it has been postulated that blue-collar workers are subjected to higher physical workload than white-collar workers but the latter are subjected to higher mental workload (Nerell and Wahlund, 1981). In this study too, physical factors were found to be an important tool for changing mental and physical strain among both younger and older workers. By contrast, perceived workloads of the aged and young construction workers and vehicle inspectors (blue-collar workers) were not age dependent (Louhevaara, 1999).


                     Kalimo and Mejman (1987) showed that exposure to adverse physical conditions in the working environment plays a role in shaping the psychosocial environment, and quite often the existence of such adverse conditions leads to poor health. In another study by Rusli et al. (2008) found that poor working conditions were associated to the higher self-perceptions of stress and depression. In our study too, increase of physical working conditions for e.g. uncomfortable work posture and repetitive work task was positively correlated to changes in physical strain. One study among rubber glove factory workers in Thailand found the prevalence of high strain was associated with psychosocial working conditions (Sein et al., 2010). The employees in the food factory often stand for long periods and may be required to lift heavy objects or use cutting, slicing, grinding, and other dangerous tools and machines, which may be physically more demanding. In occupations with comparable work demands for all employees, individual differences e.g. in actual working methods may finally result in a variation in the working postures (Burdorf, 1992; Kilbom and Persson, 1987) and add to the strain.

The high physical strain among the food industry workers must be noted. Physical strain had not changed during follow-up despite possible technical changes in the working environment intended to improve the physical working conditions during the follow-up years, for instance modernization of the production lines. However, detailed registration of changes e.g. in the product lines was not done in the present study. Thus, awareness of physical risk factors is important, in particular because food processing work includes many females and older workers. One recent study concluded that the perception of female and male of their work environment differed significantly in magnitude and occasionally in direction (Brunette et al., 2011). Generally females perceive higher physical strain than men in the same kind of work (Nygård et al., 1997). Male workers in manufacturing and construction are much more likely to be regularly exposed to physical risk than women in these sectors (Eurofound, 2012). Among blue-collar female workers a decrease in functional capacity may occur especially after the age of 45 years (Savinainen et al., 2004; Nygård et al., 1988). It has been shown in an earlier study (Nygård et al., 1997) that older employees experience higher strain than younger employees. By contrast, Pailhe (2005) reported that younger cohorts are exposed to physical strain more frequently than older cohorts. However, the present study also showed higher perceived physical strain among younger employees than their older counterparts. Also, for the similar occupational group, perceived high strain was more prevalent among females than males irrespective of age (Butler et al., 2005).

In this study, the employees showed on average relatively good work ability (Gould et al., 2008). However, it was appropriate to adjust the regression analyses for work ability, as stress may be associated with higher strain when work ability is low, according to the theoretical model of our study. Relatively good work ability can also be explained by the healthy worker effect in this relatively tough branch of industry.

The strength of the study is a four-year follow-up of the population in a prospective design where we could follow up the changes in individuals and the changes in the work environment and their relationships. Moreover, some variables e.g. work ability was measured by single questions, asking respondents to range their current work ability on 5- or 10-point Likert scale which is one of the commonly used methods (Bobko, 2002). Due to the theoretical complexity and practical issues, the single-item question on work ability has often replaced e.g. the WAI in clinical work and research (Sluiter and Frings-Dresen, 2008). In our survey we used a single-item question to measure physical working conditions which have already been used in scientific research since 1977 in Statistics Finland (Lehto and Sutela, 2009; Virtanen et al., 2008). The study concerned only the food processing industry, and the specific environment homogenous employee group and longitudinal setting are one of the strengths of the study but this may also limit the generalization of the results.

This study may have some bias because all the information regarding mental and physical strain and perception of physical working conditions were collected by questionnaire, i.e. no objective measurements for the physical working condition were carried out. Response rate for the first survey was satisfactory; while, it considerably improved at follow-up to 71%. The respondents who participated in the baseline survey but did not answer at follow-up (N = 430) were involved in both blue and white-collar professions, may cause systematic underestimations and bias the association between exposure and outcome. The selection during the follow-up might also have affected our results: the drop-out subjects were relatively young and more exposed to poor working conditions, and this may have reduced the amount of variance explained. Furthermore, it is likely that the low correlations and explained variances were attributed to the adjustments for the model, which means that the covariates in the regression models were actually the main explained factors for the changes in mental and physical strain. Selection out of the workforce is more likely to occur among the workers with most health problems, as well as the highest exposure levels, leaving healthiest workers at the workplaces and being selected in cohort studies as ours. Such biases diminish the associations between workplace exposures and health outcomes. There is a need for future research with corresponding design, as other types of workplaces may pose different challenges to the physical environment and different physical environment-strain interaction.

Despite the low level of changes in the work factors (physical and environmental), increases in mental or physical strain were found to be significantly correlated with increases in the work factors (i.e. poorer working conditions) after adjusting for age, gender, and several baseline work factors related to work ability and working conditions. Deteriorated physical working conditions were associated with high mental and physical strain of the employees and this could ultimately lead to early retirement or higher sick leave rates. It is therefore important to monitor the consequences of changes in the workplace.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This study was supported by the Finnish Work Environment Fund, grant no. 102308 and 105365.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

