@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Lifting strategies of expert and novice workers during a repetitive palletizing task

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examine the difference between expert and novice workers.


                        
                        
                           
                           The workers had to transfer 24 boxes of 15 kg from one pallet to another.


                        
                        
                           
                           The experts bent less their lumbar spine and are closer to the box.


                        
                        
                           
                           Expertise had very small effects on the back loading variables.


                        
                        
                           
                           An ergonomic intervention should not only focus on workers' training.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Manual material handling

Lifting

Expert

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Thirty manual material handlers (15 experts and 15 novices) were invited to perform series of box transfers under conditions similar to those of large distribution centers. The objective of the present study was to verify whether multiple box transfers leading to fatigue would also lead to differences between expert and novice workers in joint motions and in back loading variables (L5/S1 moments). The task consisted in transferring 24 15-kg boxes from one pallet to another (4 layers of boxes; 6 boxes/layer: 3 in the front row, 3 in the back) at a self-determined pace and then at an imposed pace of 9 lifts/min for a total of 240 lifts. The underlying idea was to set a challenging task that would force the experts to use their skills. Full-body 3D kinematic data were collected as well as external foot forces. A dynamic 3D linked segment model was used to estimate the net moments at L5/S1. The results clearly show that the experts bent their lumbar spine less (10° less) and were closer (4 cm) to the box than novice workers. Knee flexions were similar in both groups except when the box was lifted from ground level (expert ≈ 71°, novice ≈ 48°). The peak resultant moment was not statistically different (expert = 168 Nm, novice = 184 Nm) although experts had lower values on average than novices when lifting heights (and deposit heights) of the boxes increased. Therefore, experts differed from novice workers mostly in the posture-related variables. These differences are especially important to consider when the box is located on the ground, as the back posture and back loading are then at their greatest magnitude and could have a major impact on the distribution of internal forces on the spine.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Manual material handling (MMH) involves considerable physical work demands and is considered a high-risk task for low back pain (LBP) (Hoogendoorn et al., 1999; Kuiper et al., 1999; Lötters et al., 2003; National Research Council, 2001; da Costa et al., 2010; Nelson and Hughes, 2009). Large spine loading sustained during MMH is a potential cause of low back pain (National Research Council, 2001). The risk increases with the magnitude of the physical exposure in terms of the load moment, trunk motion dynamics and trunk posture (Marras et al., 1993, 1995, 2000). There exists a large variability in low back loading and lifting posture that could be explained by individual differences (between subjects) and by trial-to-trial variations (Granata et al., 1999; van Dieen et al., 2001; Gagnon et al., 2002). Thus, for the same task, spine loading and posture can change markedly between trials and individuals. The study of different groups of workers (experts and novices) could help to reduce this variability and to develop new principles of good manual handling to decrease physical exposure.

Various intervention strategies, such as training employees in safe lifting techniques, are used with the aim of protecting workers from back injuries. Recent reviews have seriously questioned the effectiveness of training programs as a mean of reducing back injuries (Clemes et al., 2010; Demoulin et al., 2012; Haslam et al., 2007; Martimo et al., 2007, 2008; Robson et al., 2012; Verbeek et al., 2011). However, these reviews are based on a small number of studies, and the quality of the training intervention is generally not questioned. Important aspects such as the content of the training course, its duration and its specificity to the work context are worth consideration. Kroemer (1992) asked a simple question about training, namely “What to teach?” This question still needs to be answered. For instance, Demoulin et al. (2012) indicated that training content was not consistent among studies and that the training was generally given over a very short time; as a result, the “training” was more like an information session. When training is specific to the task and dispensed over a long time, a decrease in back loading is possible (Schibye et al., 2003), which could lead to fewer back injuries. From our point of view, current knowledge is not sufficient, and it is far from clear whether or not lifting training programs achieve the goal of reducing back injuries by teaching better lifting techniques. Further research is needed to determine the training needs (content) of different subject groups (Demoulin et al., 2012) and the value of training in reducing back injuries.

In the search for the best technique for training workers, different types of studies have been conducted. A first type of study is to instruct participants (generally novice workers) about the technique they should use during MMH, and to measure the effect. These studies have demonstrated the importance of technique in decreasing the horizontal distance between the L5/S1 joint and the load lifted in order to reduce the external back moment (Faber et al., 2009b, 2011; Kingma et al., 2004, 2006, 2010). A second type is to copy the technique used by expert (or experienced) workers. Ergonomic studies (Authier et al., 1995, 1996) have shown that expert workers use techniques—different from those of novices—that could be both safe and advantageous in terms of productivity, but their impact on back loading has not been assessed. Some studies have explored the experts' techniques such as foot movements, knee bending, the width of the base of support, lifting dynamics, and box lifting and tilting strategies (Delisle et al., 1996a,b, 1998, 1999; Gagnon, 2003). These studies have confirmed the value of these techniques in reducing back loading during the handling operation.

A third type of studies have been interested in determining the difference between experienced (or expert) and novice workers (Gagnon et al., 1996; Granata et al., 1999; Marras et al., 2006; Plamondon et al., 2010; Lee and Nussbaum, 2012, 2013) with the aim of applying experts' techniques to reduce back loading among novice workers. In one study (Gagnon et al., 1996), the most marked distinction was reduced knee flexion in experts, but the external back moments were not significantly different. Another study (Granata et al., 1999) showed that experienced workers underwent surprisingly greater and more variable lumbar loading (external moments and internal forces) than novice subjects. Conversely, Marras et al. (2006) showed that internal loading was greater for inexperienced subjects than experienced lifters over the course of an 8-hour workday and that biomechanical risk is greatly reduced with experience. Plamondon et al. (2010) found, during a low lifting task from a conveyor to a hand trolley, that although external peak L5/S1 moments were similar, the lifting posture of experts differed from novice workers, with the experts bending their lumbar spine less but bending their knees more. Recently, Lee and Nussbaum. (2012) indicated that experienced workers used lifting/lowering methods with significantly higher peak lumbar extensor accelerations and lumbar moments. Peak flexion/extension angles and velocities were also higher (not significantly) among experienced workers, putting them at higher risk of back disorders. On the other hand, Lee and Nussbaum (2013) in a subsequent paper suggested that the higher torso kinematics and kinetics observed among their experienced workers had the advantage of keeping them in better balance and giving them more torso movement stability compared to the novices.

There is not yet a clear understanding of the advantages/disadvantages of using expert techniques to train workers with the aim of reducing back loading and back injuries. A possible reason why there are such differences between studies could be that the definition of an expert in MMH is not known. How do we classify a worker as an expert? Years of experience is often used to identify people as experts (Farrington-Darby and Wilson, 2006) but is it the only valid criterion? Authier et al. (1993) suggested other criteria such as the recognition of co-workers and few lifetime back injuries. Moreover, what about the selection of novice workers? Their level of skill can vary widely, from “naivette” (one who is completely ignorant about a domain) to “apprentice” (one who is learning about a domain) (Farrington-Darby and Wilson, 2006). As suggested by Lee and Nussbaum (2012), more studies are needed to assess the utility of training based on the techniques of experienced (expert) workers.

The choice of task and its difficulty are also critical since expertise is likely task-specific. Faber et al. (2011) showed that a typical laboratory simulated lifting task as opposed to a more realistic one could give different results. In addition, according to Farrington-Darby and Wilson (2006), tasks that are unfamiliar or so simple that the experts cannot use any of their specific skills or too difficult for novices are potential sources for misleading findings. The degree to which the task is meaningful, challenging and familiar contributes to task realism (Farrington-Darby and Wilson, 2006). The study of Plamondon et al. (2010) presented the results of a specific task that was not very strenuous: transferring boxes from a conveyor to a hand trolley, with frequent rest periods to prevent fatigue. The present study aimed to investigate if a more challenging task of multiple depalletizing–palletizing, bringing fatigue into play, would make experienced workers' strategies differ more clearly from those of novices. In this challenging task, the workers had to continuously transfer 24 15-kg boxes five times from one pallet (depalletizing) to another (palletizing) at two different lifting frequencies: self-paced and imposed pace (9 lifts/min). Only a few studies (Davis et al., 1998; Marras et al., 1997, 1999; Jorgensen et al., 2005) have addressed either the depalletizing or the palletizing task without restricting their workers. The objective of the present study was to verify whether multiple box transfers leading to fatigue would also lead to differences between expert and novice workers in joint motions and back loading variables (L5/S1 moments). A secondary aim was to evaluate the effect of box height and distance on back loading during the repetitive depalletizing-palletizing task. This research is original as both the subjects (experts vs novices) and the repetitive nature of the task have rarely been studied.

@&#METHOD@&#

The study was divided into three experimental sessions. The first was a session during which the subjects were familiarized with the different experimental procedures and some physical capacity parameters (strength and endurance) were measured. The second session specifically studied the continuous transfer of boxes from one pallet to another, which is the subject of the present paper. The third session consisted in studying the effect of expertise during transfer of a box from a conveyor to a hand trolley as published earlier (Plamondon et al., 2010). Most of the sections below, except for the task description, present (with some new elements) the main steps in the method used, which has already been described in detail (Plamondon et al., 2010).

Two groups of male subjects were recruited. The first group consisted of 15 expert workers who met the following three criteria: a minimum of 5 years of experience; a low lifetime incidence of injuries (particularly to the back); and no injury in the year preceding the study. A fourth criterion, in which the expert has to be recommended by either his peers, the union or management (Farrington-Darby and Wilson, 2006), was included but it was not possible to check its application. Ten experts were recruited from two distribution centers, where their work consisted in picking products from the “pick slot” by hand and moving the order for redistribution to retailers or wholesalers. The other five experts worked in stores, where they had to receive the products on a pallet and place them in the store racks. All experts were familiar with the task investigated in the present study. The second group consisted of 15 novice workers meeting the following criteria: 3–6 months of handling experience and no incidence of injury in the year preceding the study. This group can be classified between the level of “novice” (someone having very little exposure to the domain) and “apprentice” (someone who is learning) (Hoffman et al., 1995, reported in Farrington-Darby and Wilson, 2006). None of the subjects (experts and novices) had musculoskeletal problems that could affect the normal performance of their work. Ten expert workers and three novices had taken a training program during their working life, while the others had not. The training program (for most of them) consisted of a three-hour session on back injury prevention and safe lifting. Table 1
                         presents the subjects' main anthropometric characteristics. The two groups of subjects, namely experts and novices, were not significantly different (t test; p > 0.05) with regard to weight, height and strength. These latter variables should therefore have no impact on the different biomechanical parameters. It should be noted that the two groups were significantly different with regard to experience (experts ranged from 6.5 to 33 years; novices from 1 month to 1.5 yr) and, incidentally, age.

All participants completed the informed consent forms approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Sherbrooke (Faculty of Medicine and Health Science). The subjects were allowed at least one day of rest between sessions, and the three sessions were generally completed in less than 10 days.

The MMH task consisted in transferring 24 15-kg boxes from one pallet (depalletizing) to another (palletizing), and back, five times over a period of 30 min (total box transfers: 240). The height of each pallet was 16 cm and the box dimensions were 26 cm deep by 35 cm wide by 32 cm high. The subjects were instructed to remain on the force platform (Fig. 1
                        ) and to pile the boxes (total of 24) in a column stacking pattern 4 layers high (1st layer = 16 cm above the floor, 2nd = 48 cm, 3rd = 80 cm; 4th = 112 cm) by 6 boxes/layer (3 in the front row, 3 in the back row). The five-trip sequence was divided into two parts: the first consisted of two round trips for all 24 boxes on the pallet (total of 96 boxes handled), performed at a rhythm the subject would use in an eight-hour day for this type of manual handling (self-paced). The second part (imposed pace) consisted of three round trips for all 24 boxes (total of 144 boxes) at a nine-box-per-minute rhythm (Garg and Saxena, 1979) to increase challenge and potentially fatigue. According to Snook and Ciriello (1991), this workload could be tolerated by 75% of men. The goal was to make the job harder than at regular speed, with the intended purpose of forcing the experts to demonstrate their skills.

The complete description of the MMH task is as follows: at the signal of the experimenter, the worker started the depalletizing task (or lifting phase) by grasping the first box at the front of the top row. In an upright position and usually facing the pallet, he then lifted the box in his own way and made a 90° turn with a step. The step strategies to transit to the destination pallet varied from one worker to the next (turn, pivot, forward step(s), backward step) but generally ended with the worker facing the destination pallet in an upright position. The worker performed the palletizing task (or deposit phase) by lowering and dropping the box on the pallet and moving it to its final destination. The worker continued the transfer at his self-paced until all the boxes were moved to the destination pallet. Once finished, he immediately started to move them back to the first pallet, then repeated this until two round trips were completed. The choice of which box to lift (in the depalletizing task) and its destination position (in the palletizing task) was left up to the worker. As shown in Table 2
                        , close to 80% of the boxes were moved from the top of the origin pallet to the bottom of the destination pallet and vice versa. Also the majority of the front boxes in the depalletizing task were transferred to a back location in the palletizing task. The transfer of boxes at the imposed pace was similar to the self-paced task with the exception that (1) the pace was controlled, with the subjects regularly informed if they were too fast or too slow, and (2) three round trips were made.

Workers' localized muscular fatigue was evaluated several times during the experiment with a standardized isometric sub-maximal task where surface electromyography (EMG) was used. The sub-maximal tasks (EMG tests) consisted in holding the trunk in a horizontal position for 5 s while lying prone on a Roman chair. In addition, the subject's perception of overall physical fatigue and of back muscle fatigue was assessed with a CR-10 Borg's scale (Borg, 1982).

Two photogrammetric measuring systems were used to record the 3D coordinates of the clusters of markers attached to the primary body segments. The first system consisted of infrared LED diodes whose signals were collected by four ‘Optotrak’ columns (Northern Digital Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). Since this system did not generate video images, a second system consisting of three video cameras allowed verification of the Optotrak system's data, correction of some missing data (because of occlusions), and ergonomic observation of the handling tasks. The external forces on the feet during the handling tasks were obtained by means of an in-house-designed force platform (1.90 m × 1.30 m) mounted on six AMTI mini platforms (model MC3A-6–1000; Advanced Mechanical Technology Inc., Watertown, MA, USA). A Horita, FP-50 system (Mission Viejo, CA, USA) was used to synchronize all of the measuring instruments (Optotrak, video cameras and force platform).

Fatigue was estimated by means of EMG (localized back muscle fatigue), heart rate and Borg's scale (perception of local and overall fatigue). EMG was recorded at 1024 Hz with two pre-amplified electrodes (gain: 1000, model DE-2.3, Delsys, Boston, MA) placed bilaterally over the longissimus muscles (3 cm lateral to L3). Heart rate (HR) was monitored with a Polar system (model RS800; www.polar.fi),

At the beginning of the experiment, the workers were dressed appropriately to put on the EMG electrodes and HR bracelet and to install the clusters of markers. Before the start of each experimental session, the participants were instructed about the importance of reproducing the technique they normally used in their work. It was stressed to the experts that they were teachers and that the authors wanted to learn from their expertise. It was emphasized that the only way to learn from them was for them to reproduce the technique they normally used at work. During all three sessions, no lifting technique was ever prescribed to the participants and no comments were given about the technique they used.

The experimental session started with the first sub-maximal isometric task (EMG Pre-test). Then, the worker was asked to perform the self-paced transfer of boxes (two round trips). Right after completing the self-paced task, the subject did a second sub-maximal isometric task (EMG Post-test 1) and performed a Borg's assessment (#1) of his overall physical fatigue and back muscle fatigue. This was immediately followed by the imposed-pace task of 9 lifts/min. The rest time between the end of the self-paced and the start of the imposed-pace transfer did not exceed 5 min. This rest was minimized to prevent the workers from cooling down and to measure the effect of cumulative fatigue at the end of the entire sequence. After the last three round trips, the worker did a third sub-maximal isometric task (EMG Post-test 2) and performed his last Borg's assessment (#2) of his overall fatigue and back muscle fatigue.

The participants were instrumented for use of a dynamic 3D linked-segment model to estimate the net moments at L5/S1. This model calculates the net moments on the basis of external forces, the kinematics of body segments, and anthropometric data. It requires the attachment of 12 rigid clusters of markers to each of the following segments: head (1); back at C7 (1); T12 (1) and S1 (1); both arms (2); both forearms (2); both thighs (2); and both feet (2). The segment parameters were estimated by means of Jensen's elliptical method (1978). External forces on the feet were collected from the force platform. All of these input data were then integrated into the segment model to calculate the net moments at L5/S1 expressed in the coordinate system of the pelvis (flexion-extension, lateral bending and torsion moments) using the equations of Hof (1992) (see also Plamondon et al., 1996; Kingma et al., 2006). With the subject in the anatomical position, the longitudinal axis is upward, the sagittal axis is forward and the transverse axis is to the left. The Grood and Suntay (1983) method was used to estimate 3D angular motion. The flexion/extension rotation is about the transverse axis of the pelvis (proximal segment), the torsion rotation is about the longitudinal axis of the trunk (distal segment), and the lateral bending rotation is about the floating axis normal to the two preceding axes.

The magnitude of the EMG signal was measured with a Root Mean Square (RMS) method with a moving average window of 100 ms. The median frequency (MF) of the EMG power spectrum was computed using the middle 3 s of the 5 s EMG signal period captured during the submaximal isometric contractions.

Five transfers (2 self-paced round trips and 3 imposed-pace round trips) were performed by each subject. Considering the large number of data, it was decided to analyze only the last round trip of each pace (2nd of the self-paced and 3rd of the imposed pace). As there are two directions in a round trip, a going and a return, only the results in the going direction are presented here, which represented 1440 samples (30 subjects x 24 boxes x 2 paces). The going direction was broken down into two different phases: a lifting phase (depalletizing) and a deposit phase (palettizing). The lifting phase included a pre-lift (gripping), where the box is brought close to the subject without being lifted, and lifting of the box (take-off). The deposit phase begins after the lifting phase and continues to the deposit of the box until its final destination on the pallet. It should be emphasized that the duration of the flight phase (meaning the time during which the weight of the box was completely supported by the subject) was divided into two equal sections (time/2), such that the first section was an integral part of the lift and the second an integral part of the deposit.

The mean HR and the mean normalized HR were calculated for the two last goings (%HR = HR/HRmax; HRmax = (220-age); ACSM, 2006). EMG fatigue includes the RMS and MF values of the right and left longissimus muscles for the three EMG tests. Three Borg's assessments were recorded, one after each EMG test.

Peak values were calculated in each phase (in the lifting phase and in the deposit phase) for the resultant moment at L5/S1 (i.e., the vector sum of the three moment components) and the asymmetrical moment (i.e., the vector sum of the lateral bending and torsion moment components). Also, at the instant of the peak resultant moment (during the lifting and the deposit phases), the following were calculated: occurrence of the peak resultant moment (interpretation: 0–50% = % of flight time in the lifting phase; 51–100% = % of flight time in the deposit phase), lumbar flexion angle, lumbar lateral bending angle, lumbar torsion angle, lumbar flexion angular velocity, trunk inclination (trunk flexion angle from the vertical calculated from the local coordinate system at T12), horizontal distance of the hands (midpoint of a line joining the joint center of both wrists) from the L5/S1 joints, and the right and left knee flexion angles. The lumbar flexion angle was also transformed to take into account the effect of age (Intolo et al., 2009; Troke et al., 2005). Each subject's lumbar flexion angle was divided by his corresponding predicted maximum flexibility (Intolo et al., 2009) to obtain a lumbar flexibility index (by multiplying by 100, a percentage of the maximum lumbar flexibility is obtained). In addition, several other variables were calculated: task duration, pre-flight time, flight time, post-flight time, path length of the box and the cumulative moment at L5/S1 estimated as the sum of the resultant moment during the flight time. The path length of a box was defined as the distance along which the box moves and was estimated using the midpoint of a line joining the joint center of both wrists. The path length was calculated only during the flight phase.

There are four independent variables: 1) expertise (E) with two levels: experts and novices; 2) height (H) of the boxes with four levels: 1st = 16 cm above the floor, 2nd = 48 cm, 3rd = 80 cm; 4th = 112 cm; 3) horizontal distance (D) of the boxes with two levels: front = box front 0 cm from the edge of the pallet; back = box front 27 cm from the edge; 4) pace (P) with two levels: self-paced and imposed pace. First, a two-way mixed-model ANOVA was applied to measure the effect of expertise and pace on the fatigue parameters: Borg's assessment and heart rate. Second, a two way mixed-model ANOVA was applied to evaluate the same effect (expertise and pace) on back muscle fatigue between the EMG pre-test and the two EMG post-tests.

The lifting phase and the deposit phase were analyzed independently, as the subjects were usually in an upright standing posture before each phase, and as direct transfers of boxes rarely occurred between pallets, limiting the effect of the boxes traveling from/to different vertical heights and horizontal distances. To assess the effect of the four independent variables (E, H
                        lifting, D
                        lifting and P), a four-way mixed-model ANOVA was performed on the biomechanical variables extracted from the lifting phase. The same was done to assess the effect of the four independent variables (E, H
                        deposit, D
                        deposit and P) on the biomechanical variables extracted from the deposit phase. As the task duration, flight time, path length and cumulative loading cover both phases, the vertical height (H) and horizontal distance (D) levels considered were exceptionally those during the lifting phase.

To simplify the results, only these main effects and the most relevant double interactions were interpreted. NCSS software (version: 07.1.14; NCSS, Kaysville, UT, USA) was used to process the statistical data. In order to be able to carry out parametric analyses, the data were transformed based on the fundamental law of probabilities (van Albada and Robinson, 2007) allowing normal distributions to be obtained according to the Wilk–Shapiro test. Also, to offset a violation of sphericity in the mixed-model measurement ANOVAs, the probability threshold was adjusted using the Geisser greenhouse epsilon correction factor. For all statistical tests, a significance level of p < 0.05 was used. Tukey–Kramer multiple pairwise comparisons were performed in case of significant main effects to detect differences between the levels of any independent variables.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The imposed-pace MMH task (mean = 9.5 lifts/min; SD = 0.7) was significantly more demanding than the self-paced task (mean = 8.6 lifts/min; SD = 2.1), which led to a higher HR and a higher perception of overall physical fatigue and back muscle fatigue (Table 3
                        ). There was no significant expertise difference except for the normalized HR (% HRmax), thus revealing that the experts worked at a higher relative level of intensity than the novices. Both an increase in the EMG magnitude and a decrease in the median frequency of the back muscles between the pre-test and the post-tests were observed, but no difference was observed between the two post-tests (Table 4
                        ). This shows that there was some cumulative fatigue for all subjects during the two MMH paces but the imposed pace did not further increase back muscle fatigue.

As expected, the main effects of height (H) and horizontal distance (D) are much more prevalent than the effect of expertise (E) or pace (P) (Table 5
                        ). The H × D interaction was the most frequent interaction, triple interactions rarely occurred, and 4-way interactions occurred only twice.

In both the lifting and deposit phases, the peak resultant moment at L5/S1 was not significantly different between the groups (Fig. 2
                        , Tables 5 and 6
                        ), although the experts had lower values on average than novices at higher heights (significant E × H interaction during lifting shown in Fig. 2). At the time of the peak resultant moment, several variables (mainly posture related) showed significant differences between experts and novices (Tables 5 and 6). Experts exerted smaller lumbar flexion angles (Fig. 3
                        ), lumbar flexibility indices, and trunk inclinations (Table 6) than novices. In addition, the experts bent their knees more but only during the lifting phase when the boxes were near the ground (significant E × H interaction shown in Fig. 4
                        ). Interestingly, the hand to L5/S1 distance was also smaller in the expert group (Fig. 5
                        , Table 6). Both groups showed limited (less than 5° on average) trunk asymmetry (Table 6). The peak asymmetrical moment at L5/S1 (Fig. 6
                        ) did not differ between the two groups, although they were smaller on average in the expert group. The effect of expertise was not significant for the duration variables (task duration, pre-flight time, flight time, post-flight time), path length and cumulative loading.

The effect of box height was important for all the biomechanical variables. The effect of decreasing the lifting height was an increase in the peak L5/S1 resultant moment for both the deposit and lifting phases (Fig. 2). At the instant of the peak L5/S1 resultant moment, as box height decreased, the following variables increased: lumbar flexion angle (Fig. 3), trunk inclination angle (similar pattern as Fig. 3), left (Fig. 4) and right (similar to Fig. 4) knee flexion angles, and hand-L5/S1 horizontal distance (Fig. 5). The lifting height had a significant impact on the peak asymmetrical moment but the pattern was not as clear as the peak resultant moment. The asymmetrical moment was higher in the lifting phase at the top of the pile and lower at the bottom, and it was the opposite in the deposit phase (Fig. 6). Interestingly, the task duration, path length and cumulative loading (Fig. 7
                        ) were all smaller in the middle of the pile (box height 2 and 3 at the origin of the lift), with the boxes at the lowest (1) and highest (4) heights reaching higher magnitudes.

As expected, the peak resultant moment and the peak asymmetrical moment at L5/S1 increased as the boxes were picked from the back row of the pile at a longer distance from the workers (Figs. 2 and 6). This resulted in increased lumbar flexion (Fig. 3) and trunk inclination, particularly at the highest height (3-B and 4-B). The effect of distance on knee flexion was, however, less clear (Fig. 4). The effect of the horizontal distance of the boxes was larger during the pre- and post-flight times. It is worth noting that pre-flight time increased when the boxes were initially in the back-row position (compared to the front-row) but it was the opposite for the post-flight time. The reason for this is that in approximately 80% of the cases (Table 2), the boxes picked at the highest height were placed in the deposit at the lowest height; those at the lowest height, placed at the highest height and those picked in the back row placed in the front row.

The effect of pace was important, particularly for the pre-flight and post-flight times where the imposed pace was significantly shorter in duration than the self-paced, but not for the flight time (Table 7
                        ). The consequence of this was that, at the imposed pace, the total duration of the task was shorter, the cumulative loading was less, the peak resultant moment during the deposit was smaller, and the lumbar flexion and trunk inclination (at the peak resultant moment) were also smaller than in the self-paced rhythm (Table 7).

There were several interactions between lifting height and horizontal distance (H × D) (Table 5). Among the most relevant ones, the impact of the horizontal distance during the lifting phase was greater at higher heights than when the boxes were close to the ground. This effect was observed for the peak resultant moment (Fig. 2), trunk inclination, and hand distance to L5/S1 (Fig. 5). In the deposit phase, the effect of the box horizontal distance was smaller at the lowest and highest heights (compared to the middle heights) for the peak resultant moment (Fig. 2), lumbar flexion (Fig. 3) and trunk inclination. Interestingly, it becomes easier for the workers to be closer to the box as the lifting height increases, especially when the box is in the front-row position (significant H × D for the hand to L5/S1 distance; Fig. 5).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study showed that expert workers differed from novices mostly in the posture-related variables (lumbar flexion angle, trunk inclination, knee flexion) and much less in the back loading ones (peak resultant moment or asymmetrical moment at L5/S1). The uniqueness of this study resides in the fact that the experts were selected on at least three criteria and the novices (contrary to the vast majority of studies) had on average 6 months of experience, which eliminated the recruitment of naivette subjects. In addition, the continuous transfer of boxes from one pallet to another has been rarely studied in the biomechanical literature, and no major constraints were imposed on the subjects during the task except for the imposed-pace condition designed to challenge the MMH skills of the subjects.

Experts as compared to novice workers were expected to show lower back loading, have better postures and be more efficient in reducing the task duration or cumulative loading. In fact, experts did indeed show less back loading but only at higher heights and not when the box was lifted from the bottom of the pallet. Their posture was quite different from the novices at the instant of the peak resultant moment as they bent their trunk and lumbar region less (even when age was accounted for with the lumbar flexibility index). Moreover, their knees were more flexed when the box was lifted from the floor of the pallet. Experts were also closer to the box during both the lifting and the deposit phases. Fig. 8
                         illustrates an example of a representative posture difference between an expert and a novice worker at the time of the peak resultant moment during lifting.

These results are similar to those found in Plamondon et al. (2010), where the task was a transfer of boxes from a conveyor to a hand trolley. In this previous study, the work context was different because the transfer of boxes was not continuous (separated by several periods of rest to avoid fatigue) and no lifting pace was imposed. The more strenuous conditions imposed in the present study were expected to force the experts to use their skills more and to result in larger differences compared with novices. The trunk and lumbar posture results were distinctive but there was only a small effect of expertise on net back loadings. However, one difference was observed: while knee flexion was significantly greater among the experts in Plamondon et al. (2010), a significant difference was found only at the lowest height during lifting in the current study. It is possible that the continuous lifting and imposed pace forced the experts to reduce their knee flexion to save energy but, interestingly, this was not the case at the lowest height. To protect their spine, the experts possibly learned to bend their knees when the load was close to the ground, even at the cost of increased energy expenditure (see the interesting paper by Oliveira et al. (2005)). A detailed internal biomechanical model of the spine has to be used to understand whether this maneuver can effectively unload some lumbar spine structures. This is ongoing work.

Some studies have examined the effect of experience on different biomechanical variables. When there is a direct comparison between groups of experienced and novice workers, the effect of experience is weak or moderate (Gagnon et al., 1996; Marras et al., 2006), especially for the moments at L5/S1 and not necessarily in the direction expected, meaning that the experienced handler would minimize these moments (Granata et al., 1999). However, a recent paper by Lee and Nussbaum (2012) found higher peak kinematic and kinetic measures among the experienced workers, suggesting a higher risk of low back injury. For instance, their experienced workers had a peak extension moment 65 Nm higher than the novices during the lifting of a 7-kg box (approximately). This large difference between the present study and Lee and Nussbaum (2012) could be explained by several reasons. The first is the workers' selection criteria. The Lee and Nussbaum (2012) novices were students with no experience in frequent lifting and, according to the classification of Farrington-Darby and Wilson (2006), should be assigned a level between “naivette” and “novice”. Our novices had on average six months of experience, which places them between “novice” and “apprentice”. Another distinction could increase the contrast between our two studies: the Lee and Nussbaum (2012) novices seems to have been very slow during the 7-kg box lifting, as their peak extension moment (101 Nm at 0°; 86 Nm at 60°) occurred later in the lifting phase and was approximately equal to the sum of the static component of the torso (66 Nm) and the box position (37 Nm) of the experienced workers. A third reason is the box weight (7 kg), which was half the weight of the one used in the present study (15 kg); this could have facilitated the work of their experienced workers, who may likely have been used to working with heavier boxes. A fourth reason is the task itself, because in Lee and Nussbaum (2012) a box had to be lifted and lowered 20 times while being held continuously. This holding had the impact that the peak extension moment was higher among the novices during the deposit phase than during the lifting phase, which did not happen among their experienced workers nor in all our workers and conditions. In other words, it is possible that the Lee and Nussbaum (2012) novices stopped the downward motion of the box during the deposit, which is unusual in experienced or expert workers. The novices being too slow in their task could be considered at risk. Lee and Nussbaum (2013) suggested in a subsequent paper that the higher torso kinematics and kinetics observed among their experienced workers had the advantage of putting them in a better balance maintenance and torso movement stability compared to the novices. These examples illustrate that worker expertise and task specificity are important determining factors of back loading.

In relation with the above comments, Kingma's group published several interesting papers about the effect of lifting techniques on back loading (Faber et al., 2009b; Kingma et al., 2004, 2006
                        2010) and demonstrated that techniques could reduce back loading if the horizontal distance between the L5/S1 joint and the load handled are reduced. However, the effect of lifting techniques on spine loading is generally more important in studies in which precise instructions are given to the subjects. Instructions generally amplify the contrast between experimental conditions in order to create the highest possible impact on the outcome. The same is probably true when the participants' level of expertise ranges from “naivette” to “master” (elite group of experts; Farrington-Darby and Wilson, 2006). Furthermore, experts are generally recognized as having the best techniques, which becomes particularly important as task complexity increases (Farrington-Darby and Wilson, 2006). The choice of task is then a critical issue, as a simple task may be too easy for the experts to use their skills, and a difficult task might be too hard for the novices to attempt. The task investigated in this study cannot be considered a complex one since there was no major body constraint (such as limited space), the physical fatigue was not high, and all the workers were familiar with the type of box transfer because they had some handling experience. Simply put, the experts were probably not in a work situation in which their skills were critical for reducing back loading (external back moment). This, however, demonstrates the limits of expertise in the reduction of spine loading as opposed to lifting height, as will be seen in the next paragraph.

The effect of lifting height was similar to that in other studies reporting greater back loading with lower lifting heights (Allread et al., 2000; Davis and Marras, 2005; Faber et al., 2009a; Hoozemans et al., 2008; Kingma et al., 2004, 2006; Lavender et al., 2003; Marras et al., 2000). As confirmed by other studies (Davis et al., 1998; Marras et al., 1997, 1999), the position from which the worker lifted a box from a pallet had a major effect on spine loading, with the lowest level characterizing the greatest loadings on the spine during lifting or deposit. This is not surprising because as the lifting height decreases, trunk flexion increases, generating an additional gravitational moment contribution due to the upper body mass (Hoozemans et al., 2008; Lavender et al., 2003) as well as an increase in the horizontal distance between the load and L5/S1 (Fig. 5).

A very well-known principle for reducing the external moment at L5/S1 is to minimize the horizontal distance between the load and L5/S1 (Graveling et al., 2003). A box located in the back row of the pallet will produce a higher moment at L5/S1 than a box in the front row due to the longer horizontal distance (Lavender et al., 1999; Schipplein et al., 1995), unless the worker slides the load toward himself before lifting it (Faber et al., 2011). Faber et al. (2011) and Gagnon (2003) demonstrated that, after a training session, novice workers were able to be significantly closer to the box during lifting than before training. On the other hand, the training had no effect on the horizontal distance during the deposit phase (Gagnon, 2003). Our experts were generally closer to the box than novices at the peak resultant moment (PRM) (Fig. 5) but both groups failed to sufficiently slide the back boxes to be as close as those located in the front row, particularly during the deposit phase. The only exception occurred when the boxes were lifted from the ground, probably because it would have been too difficult to lift the box directly from the back-row location or simply because it was easier to slide the boxes toward the subject (H × D interaction). The difficulty in getting closer to the box is often caused by the friction between boxes. However, no subject mentioned this particular problem after the experiment, probably because they were familiar with it. Therefore the back-row location of a box increased the spine loading, and expertise had a small but significant effect on the horizontal distance at PRM.

In general, the effect of lifting pace was small, probably because the difference between the self-paced and the imposed pace was small (less than 1 lift/min) and also because the subjects were working at a rhythm close to their usual working pace. In response to the increase in lifting pace, the subjects simply shortened the pre-lift and post-flight times and exerted less trunk inclination in the deposit phase. There was some cumulative fatigue between the two pace conditions but not to a level that would magnify the differences between experts and novices.

According to Marras et al. (1997) and Hoozemans et al. (2008), the vertical location of the box is a far greater determinant of spine loading than the weight of the box alone. In this study, the effect of height and horizontal distance was very significant on almost all the dependent variables. Plamondon et al. (2012) demonstrated that the variance attributable to lifting height or weight lifted was considerably more important in reducing back loading than the variance attributable to expertise. Large benefits can be derived by elevating the pallet so that the boxes can be transferred from an elevated or adjustable platform such as a lift table (Marras et al., 1999), or a reduction in spinal loading at lower pallet heights can be obtained by the use of handles, which increases the vertical height of the hands and allows the participants to remain more upright when positioning the cases on the pallet (Davis et al., 1998; Marras et al., 1999). This does not mean that training employees in safe lifting techniques is not an important type of intervention. There are large improvements in skills development to expect between “naivette” and “expert” workers, but this has its limits. As mentioned by Graveling (1991), even the best worker will be at risk in a badly designed workplace, and no amount of training will be effective. Furthermore, it is important not to resort to the lifting slogan “Bend your knees not your back” or “lift with your legs not your back.” What was learned from this study is that experts use that strategy, but only in a specific condition when the load is low. Therefore, promoting this slogan widely without any context would be a mistake because work conditions could change and preclude the application of this rule (Graveling, 1991). Finally, the training content should go further than just focusing on handling techniques. An expert handler is not only skillful in handling loads but also very wise in planning his work and avoiding stressful work situations (Lortie, 2002).

The limitations are the same as those discussed in Plamondon et al. (2010). There are many, and two of the most important are the work context (laboratory vs field work) and worker expertise. One of our major concerns was to allow the workers as much freedom as possible to apply their usual working techniques. However, the experts may have modified their usual work technique because they were not familiar with the laboratory conditions or to obtain the investigator's approval (social desirability bias). Moreover, the handling task investigated is one among hundreds of work contexts that exist and represents only a small sample of what can be found in the field. A second important limitation is that the definition of an expert worker is still far from clear, and the criteria used may not correspond to true expert workers. How to define a novice worker can also be discussed, but our criterion (6 months) avoids using subjects having no skill in MMH. A third limitation is that the expert workers are older than the novices. However, because age and expertise are closely related, it is not possible to completely attribute all the effects observed (such as the different lifting postures) to expertise alone. Another limitation is that we cannot exclude the possibility that the present posture-related findings are explained by the healthy-worker effect (HWE). On the other hand, the fact that we recruited novice workers having on average six months of experience should have reduced the potential HWE because they were somewhat apt to do the job for at least some time. Considering individuals who work in the same workplace and go through the same selection process is a well-known strategy to decrease HWE (Li and Sung, 1999). Therefore, the results of this study must be interpreted and used with these limitations in mind.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The results of this experiment confirm those of Plamondon et al. (2010), i.e., the effect of expertise present in the posture-related variables, with experts flexing their lumbar spine less but bending their knees more during lifting, particularly when the box was located at the lowest level. The posture-related variables could have a major impact on the distribution of internal forces on the spine, but expertise had a very small effect on the external back loading variables (peak resultant moment and peak asymmetrical moment at L5/S1), which are important indicators of risk in terms of work-related back injuries. An ergonomic intervention with the aim of reducing external back loading should therefore primarily focus on major factors such as the height and horizontal distance of the load and not just on workers' technique.

All of the authors conceived and designed the study and prepared this manuscript. All of the authors read and approved the final manuscript.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was funded by the Institut de Recherche Robert Sauvé en Santé et en Sécurité du Travail du Québec (IRSST), grants #099-211 and #099-466.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

