@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Exploring positive hospital ward soundscape interventions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The subjective response to hospital ward sound was explored.


                        
                        
                           
                           Laboratory evaluation explored ‘positive’ sound interventions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Natural sound and written sound source information were most effective.


                        
                        
                           
                           Future work can explore if this can contribute to positively experienced environments.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Soundscape

Healthcare

Environment

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Sound is often considered as a negative aspect of an environment that needs mitigating, particularly in hospitals. It is worthwhile however, to consider how subjective responses to hospital sounds can be made more positive. The authors identified natural sound, steady state sound and written sound source information as having the potential to do this. Listening evaluations were conducted with 24 participants who rated their emotional (Relaxation) and cognitive (Interest and Understanding) response to a variety of hospital ward soundscape clips across these three interventions. A repeated measures ANOVA revealed that the ‘Relaxation’ response was significantly affected (n
                     2 = 0.05, p = 0.001) by the interventions with natural sound producing a 10.1% more positive response. Most interestingly, written sound source information produced a 4.7% positive change in response. The authors conclude that exploring different ways to improve the sounds of a hospital offers subjective benefits that move beyond sound level reduction. This is an area for future work to focus upon in an effort to achieve more positively experienced hospital soundscapes and environments.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

It is commonly accepted that the hospital environment affects patients' experiences when they are admitted and treated in these spaces (see Dijkstra et al., 2006). Research on healthcare design and planning has highlighted strong relationships between environmental characteristics and human health (Monti et al., 2012). Sound is one part of the hospital environment. Ergonomics evaluations commonly consider the sound level of spaces, such as offices (Passero and Zannin, 2012) and consider the effect of them in reference to guidelines. Many studies have used this approach for hospitals and documented sound level within acute care hospital spaces (Busch-Vishniac et al., 2005; Okcu et al., 2011; Salandina et al., 2011). Sound levels range from 60 to 70 dB(A) with peaks of around 90 dB(A), equivalent to a busy motorway (Joseph and Ulrich, 2007). These exceed recommendations produced by bodies such as the World Health Organisation (Berglund et al., 2000) or the UK Government (Department of Health, 2008) by around 20–30 dB(A).

Consideration is needed however, of how sound contributes to the feeling of the hospital space as ‘quietness’ is a quality indicator which is associated with a lack of annoying noises rather than the absence of sound itself (Fornara et al., 2006). Although there can be negative health consequences of excessive sound within these spaces (Ulrich, 1992), there is potential for positive benefits in understanding and maintaining the soundscape of the ward; for instance hearing the various occupational sounds, such as tea trolleys, as positive sounds (Mackrill et al., 2013a). A soundscape is defined as the auditory version of a landscape (Schafer, 1976) and considers the complete sound environment rather than focusing on a single source such as the beep of a monitor. As control of hospital sounds should consider positive aspects and move away from sound level measurement (Dawson, 2005) understanding the soundscape offers a new approach, particularly as the sound quality is not simply determined by level but other factors such as physical space (Hignett and Lu, 2010).

Investigating the subjective response to the existing soundscape may create a more feasible way of improving the sound of the spaces, particularly as there is a consistent trend of rising levels since the 1960s (Busch-Vishniac et al., 2005). Therefore, a need to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions aiming to improve the subjective response to a hospital ward soundscape has arisen. Although studies have investigated subjective responses to hospital sounds to a certain degree (Topf, 1985; Akansel and Kaymakci, 2008; Xie and Kang, 2010) none have considered how to create a positive soundscape using interventions which may be of practical benefit.

The aim of this study was to use laboratory listening evaluations to test interventions which might create a more positive emotional-cognitive response to hearing the soundscape of a cardiothoracic (CT) ward. This evaluated the effect of soundscape interventions to understand which may be considered appropriate for investigation within the ward setting. This was the third stage in a four part research project aiming at understanding and improving the perception of a hospital ward soundscape (Fig. 1
                        ). Part 1 aimed to understand the perception of the soundscape and inform the direction of subsequent steps. Part 2 created a framework to measure the response to the soundscape with this being used to understand the effect of soundscape interventions in Part 3, presented here. From this theoretical generalisation Part 4 was carried out in-situ to evaluate the chosen intervention.

The following soundscape interventions were used based on the premise that sound level reduction would not necessary create a more positive soundscape. As a result it was hypothesised that the soundscape would elicit more positive responses when each intervention was applied to the existing sound clips of the CT soundscape.

Natural sound (NS) was selected due to the agreement from literature (Guastavino, 2006; Pheasant et al., 2010; Yang and Kang, 2005a,b) which advocates that natural sounds of birdsong and water are positive soundscape features. Additionally, Mackrill et al. (2013a) found natural sounds to be a positive aspect of the CT ward soundscape when heard through windows overlooking a green space.

Steady state sound (SSS) was chosen as an intervention as masking sounds are a way in which negative sound can be controlled (Bowman, 1974). Defined as the presence of one sound that renders another sound undetectable (Plack, 2005), this has been tested to improve hospital soundscape perception (see Stanchina et al., 2005). When white noise was added to the sounds of an intensive care unit, despite an increase in sound level, subjectively sleep was consolidated and arousal was less frequent (Stanchina et al., 2005). Despite a small sample and a non-significant effect, this shows a change in perception.

Written information detailing the various sound sources of the soundscape was chosen as hospital wards produce a sensory overload of unfamiliar stimuli which bombard patients with experiences they are unaccustomed to (Akansel and Kaymakci, 2008). Understanding hospital sounds however, enables patients to habituate and accept sound (Mackrill et al., 2013a). As complex environmental sounds are processed as meaningful events, providing information about interactions with environment (Guastavino et al., 2005), it may be necessary for patients to understand the sounds of the ward in order to feel comfortable within it. Furthermore, Topf (2000) suggests that personal control is the capacity to regulate stress caused by a negative event. This may be a cognitive approach by having information about the stressor (Topf, 2000). As such, it was proposed that providing information detailing what can be heard in the soundscape may improve the feeling that the soundscape elicits. This is called sound source information (SSI).

@&#METHOD@&#

As there is a challenge for clinicians, designers and researchers to work together using robust high quality research methods (Hignett and Lu, 2010) a laboratory listening evaluation method was chosen to scope the potential of these interventions. This provided the means to facilitate the investigation of the inventions in an easily repeatable and controlled setting.

Evaluations were held in a Sound Room laboratory. This consisted of a 16 speaker system (using KEF iQ70 and HTS3001SE speakers) operated via a PC computer using Nuendo 4 sound editing software. The system played back hospital soundscape recordings through all 16 speakers.

Twelve twenty second soundscape excerpts were presented to participants. These were selected from a database of 32 recordings taken within the CT ward using a Bruel and Kjaer binaural SonoScout recording device. The most salient clips were selected for presentation informed by the analysis of all 32 recordings using the coding procedure developed by Poxon et al. (2009) (Table 1
                        ).

For interventions of NS and SSS, the associated sounds were incorporated into all clips. NS was obtained from the website www.freesoundproject.org [accessed 3rd March 2011] and contained the sound of a blackbird singing and a babbling stream. SSS was obtained from using a short one second recording of a steriliser machine sound present within the CT ward providing a steady non-descript sound. The sound level of these interventions was set so they formed a congruent background feature rather than a dominant foreground sound. These sounds were only played through the ceiling speakers to help achieve this with the researcher judging the sound level at which they were set.

SSI was presented on a response sheet (Table 2
                        ). This information was designed from the sound sources within the 12 soundscape clips. The information was the same for each soundscape clip rather than specifying details of the individual sources within each of the 12 clips. This was to assess if SSI would work in a generic manner. Further, as the hospital soundscape is constantly varying an in-situ SSI intervention would have to be generic in nature to accommodate the majority of features rather than focusing on specific nuances.

Each soundscape clip lasted around 20 s presented sequentially with a 10 s inter stimulus period to discriminate between clips. Participants completed each of the four conditions on separate occasions. Interventions were applied to the 12 soundscape clips during each condition. Evaluations were conducted a minimum of two day apart to avoid demand effects, however this varied according to participant availability. To avoid order effects, participants were split into four groups with the condition sequence order randomised using a Latin square counterbalancing method. In addition, each group started the evaluation on a different soundscape clip, either 1, 2, 3 or 4, to further control for bias.

Responses were recorded on a paper questionnaire using four seven point semantic differential scales. These rating scales were derived from the emotional-cognitive dimensions which the authors established in study 2 (see Mackrill et al., 2013b). The perceptual dimensions were labelled ‘Relaxation’ and ‘Interest and Understanding’.

‘Relaxation’ was measured using the bipolar semantic scales ‘relaxed-stressed’ and ‘comfortable-uncomfortable’. ‘Interest and Understanding’ used the scales ‘curious-uninterested’ and ‘intrigued-bored’. At the end of the questionnaire, basic demographic questions and open questions were asked to provide descriptive data beyond numerical quantification and included:
                           
                              •
                              Were there any sounds that particularly affected you?

How did you feel overall when listening to the recordings?

How does having information on the soundscape make you feel?

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

The reliability of the scales measuring each dimension was tested across conditions to ensure that the results could be justifiably compared. This was carried out using a Cronbach's α test. The main effect was analysed using a repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) and was performed using statistical software SPSS 19 once the normality of the data had been established.

Sample size was calculated using GPower3 software (Faul et al., 2007). Setting a power level of 0.80 with an effect size (eta2) of 0.25 (small) for a repeated measure ANOVA with four conditions and one group, sample size was calculated to be n = 24 (α level set 0.05 resulting in a test power of 0.81, CI 95%). The 24 participants had a mean age of 32 years (S.D. 10.13 yrs), with 13 male and 11 female. The sample included a range of non-expert demographics from within and outside the University community. Recruitment took place using a convenience sampling strategy. Although a sample demographic was obtained that was removed from those specific to the CT ward, the soundscape of a CT ward was chosen due to the variety of sound representative of general hospital spaces. Therefore the sample demographic may experience such soundscapes which supported this strategy. Further this study was used to inform theoretical rather than empirical generalisation: generation of theoretical concepts deemed to be of wider application (Ritchie and Lewis, 2003). The exploration of empirical generalisation was carried out in stage 4 of the research project.
                           1
                           All analysis was performed on the combined mean scores for each dimension i.e. ‘Relaxation’ was measured using the mean scores of scales stressed-relaxed and comfortable-uncomfortable; ‘Interest and Understanding’ using the mean score of scales curious-uninterested and intrigued-bored.
                        
                     

@&#RESULTS@&#

The ‘Relaxation’ dimension recorded high reliability, Cronbach's α = 0.921 across all conditions. Likewise ‘Interest and Understanding’ recorded Cronbach's α = 0.895, suggesting that the scales were consistent in measuring the emotional-cognitive response and thus allowing a valid comparison between conditions.

The results showed a significant difference across all conditions on the ‘Relaxation’ dimension; (F (3,751) = 13.991, p = 0.001). A small overall effect size of 0.05 (partial η
                        2) showed that 5% of the variation in emotional-cognitive response can be accounted for by the differing conditions. A non-significant difference was seen between conditions on the ‘Interest and Understanding’ dimension (F(3,764) = 1.447, p = 0.229) (Fig. 2
                        ).

Pairwise comparisons, with a Bonferroni correction to account for the increase in pairwise comparisons, showed a significant difference between the control and all interventions (Table 3
                        ). NS caused the largest change in response; 10.1%; (mean difference NS = 0.445, p = 0.001), CI (95%) 0.249–0.637). SSS had a smaller difference causing a 3.3% change; (mean difference SSS = 0.208, p = 0.008. CI (95%) 0.038–0.378). Finally, SSI was successful in producing a moderate difference in scores almost half that of natural sound with 4.7%; (mean difference SSI = 0.247, p = 0.001), CI (95%) 0.089–0.406).

Pairwise comparisons for ‘Interest and Understanding’ explored the smaller difference between the control condition and interventions (Table 3). The mean difference of NS = 0.00, p = 1.00 corresponding to a 0.6% change. However, SSS caused a larger non-significant change of 4.7%, mean difference SSS = −0.123, p = 0.338. Finally, SSI produce a small effect mean difference = −0.066, p = 1.00, resulting in a 2% change.

Although the manner of each intervention was not divulged to participants, subjective response to the conditions showed trends in response to positive and negative sounds. Negative sounds included patient and staff conversation, particularly when private. Sounds of monitor alarms were also described as annoying:
                           
                              •
                              Private conversation between patients and nurses I don't feel I should be listening to these. (P12)

The crying lady [sound clip 6, a patient with dementia crying out] was upsetting. (P3)

[I] loath beeping noise. Grates a bit. (P13)

Mixture of boredom and curiosity to generally unpleasant soundscape. (P24)

Fluid bags didn't sound nice when rustling. (P5)

The addition of NS was described as:
                           
                              •
                              Relaxing. (P3)

I find hospital make me feel claustrophobic. The birdsong and water make it feel less so like being next to a window. (P19)

Bought a soothing dimension. (P24)

However, despite positive comments some were negative:
                           
                              •
                              I like the birdsong but it could get too much if ‘piped’ in. (P3)

With birds and conversation I felt life was passing me by. (P18)

Sound of running water didn't fit. (P6)

To be left in quiet all day would drive me just as mad as listening to alarms. (P8)

The result of SSS was considered more negative with no positive free responses obtained:
                           
                              •
                              White noise and beeps don't make me relaxed. (P8)

The hum continuously would sometimes be too much but did provide a level of privacy. (P6)

This may be because SSS is artificial compared to NS. It can also be suggested that although a masking benefit may be had, it possible creates a feeling of tedium reflected in the larger change in ‘Interest and Understanding’.

It was commented that SSI aided contextualisation of the soundscape with few other comments suggesting the soundscape was “no different” (P9):
                           
                              •
                              Gives better understanding of some unexpected sounds. (P5)

[I] can contextualise the sounds more and felt more comfortable knowing what it was. (P18)

More comfortable and relaxed. Not knowing the source of the noise is disconcerting. (P1)

More accepting of noises I haven't come across before. (P19)

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The study successfully revealed that the soundscape interventions were effective in altering the emotional-cognitive response with a small but significant effect seen on the ‘Relaxation’ dimension. It was hypothesised that the soundscape would elicit more positive responses when each intervention was applied to soundscape clips. This was supported on the ‘Relaxation’ dimension with a less clear result was apparent on the ‘Interest and Understanding’ dimension. However, only a small effect size that was reported (partial η
                     2 = 0.05) across the main effect. Encouragingly, the scales reported good reliability (Cronbach's α = ≥0.895) across conditions and the measured emotional-cognitive response was reasonably robust. As it is necessary for sound within hospital environments to be considered beyond that of sound level (Blomkvist et al., 2005) discussion can be formed as to the potential of these soundscape interventions at a theoretical level.

NS had a significant 10.1% effect on perception of the soundscape (p = <0.001). This was unsurprising given the comparable findings urban soundscape work has produced reporting on preference to natural sounds (Guastavino, 2006; Yang and Kang, 2005a,b). Additionally, this was the only intervention to produce a consistent positive effect, shown by positive movement within the perceptual space towards the positive end of the ‘Relaxation’ axis (see Fig. 2).


                     Tsuchiya et al. (2003), who used especially designed natural sounds played to patients undergoing a general anaesthetic, can be used to support this further. The authors found this had a significant calming effect and also improved the perceived acceptability of the anaesthesia experience compared to patients experiencing normal sounds. This goes someway to support the use of natural sounds within the hospital environment due to their relaxing benefit.

During stage 1 of this research project, it was found that patients who were located near windows overlooking green space, and could hear birdsong, has a more positive perception of the soundscape (see Mackrill et al., 2013a). This is not surprising since human interactions with nature have a positive impact on health and wellbeing (Grinde and Patil, 2009). Further to this, NS could be effective in a hospital soundscape as auditory perception is drawn to the sound of temporal variation which lowers the attention to other sounds (De Consel et al., 2011) for example negative beeping or rustling.

Caution is needed however. Comments both presented here and in stage 1 of the project show that such sounds could be too much if “piped in”. Therefore, it remains to be ascertained as to the true effect additional birdsong may have in these settings. Indeed, auditory visual congruence is an important concept for the acceptance of sounds (Pheasant et al., 2010) and so the correct visual surrounding would be needed that may be difficult to provide.

SSS produced a smaller significant effect (p = 0.008) on the ‘Relaxation’ dimension; a 3.3% change. However, some clips also showed a negative movement on the ‘Relaxation’ dimension. Limited comments specifically mentioning this additional sound suggests that it did not evoke a strong conscious appraisal unlike NS and therefore the benefit is more questionable. As discussed, Stanchina et al. (2005) found positive effects for a similar intervention. In consolidating sleep this may be positive, however, for the ‘day’ environment the sound may be appraised as simply an additional occupational sound rather a positive sound. This is somewhat reflected in the comments by participants. A participant did comment regarding a perceived level of privacy that the intervention brought. It is difficult to draw conclusions from this as it should be noted that improvements in patient privacy come from factors including and beyond sound. For example, van de Glind et al. (2007) report patients perceived significantly less auditory and visual privacy in treatment areas with curtains, compared with a room with solid walls. As a result SSS may be complex to introduce into the soundscape.


                     Reuter (2011) reported on a case study within a medical office building where due to the close proximity of workstations, waiting and checkout areas verbal privacy was poor. However, when considering masking to improve the situation the level required to achieve this would be detrimental to user comfort. Therefore, SSS might be perceived negatively: “I can imagine after an hour like this I may be extremely bored which is bad (P8).
                  

The most novel intervention was SSI. SSI was used to act as information about the stressor (Topf, 2000), the soundscape, with the view that this would aid understanding and thus a more positive response. Emotional focused coping (Folkman and Lazarus, 1988) like this can help generate a reappraisal of a person-environment encounter to be more positive. This intervention proved to have a significant overall effect on the ‘Relaxation’ element of the soundscape and caused a 4.7% positive change in perception.

Considering this, some participants suggested they did not sense the benefit of having information: “doesn't affect feeling (P24)”. The effect of SSI may not be obvious to the individual as it is not perceptually tangible, unlike an additional sound, but may actually influence response nevertheless. The non-significant effect seen on the ‘Interest and Understanding’ dimension was unexpected as it was thought that SSI would facilitate understanding based on the initial rationale for the intervention. Nonetheless, this provides an interesting concept to explore as patient naturally experience a certain degree of habituation to hospital sounds when exposed over longer periods as discussed in Mackrill et al. (2013a). Therefore, SSI provides an opportunity to positively influence the perception of sound in hospital environments because mental processes such as previous knowledge greatly impact auditory perception (Snyder et al., 2012). As such SSI may offer potential to paediatric patients to become familiar and comfortable with the soundscape of their hospital surroundings. Simply explaining the origin, occurrence, and ways to mitigate certain everyday sounds could reduce the frustration they cause children (Dellve et al., 2013).

SSI requires a comprehensive assessment within the ward space as perception will be influenced during exposure to the context of the hospital ward environment the mediating factors of the soundscape (e.g. physical factors, patient interaction, behaviour) (Mackrill et al., 2013a). More development is now needed and has been initially explored as a direct result of the presented experimental findings (see Mackrill et al., 2013c) showing supportive results.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Perhaps the greatest limitation was that the sample selected was not representative of a patient demographic within a CT ward – normally elderly patients. Using healthcare spaces for such work does present pragmatic problems in terms of installing equipment and impacting upon the daily duties within these spaces. Further to this, it can be difficult to recruit participants along with ethical questions raised about exposing patients to experimental interventions such as these that have not had a degree of testing. As a result, members of the public were recruited for the presented study.

Being a patient in hospital is a stressful experience, coupled with medication and pain. These are factors that may influence the subjective appraisal of the ward soundscape. As the listening evaluation participants were healthy this mediating factor cannot be accounted for in the results. As a consequence, the findings might not be truly representative. However, from a philosophical view, everyone has the chance to become a patient so individuals' views on the soundscape are important. Indeed the UK Department of Health (2009) comment when promoting patient and public involvement within the National Health Service development (NHS) that: “we will all, at some point, use an NHS service, so we all have a unique perspective that could help make care better” (p4). Despite the fact the size and direction of effects from healthcare environment alterations is highly dependent on the patient population (Dijkstra et al., 2006) this does not stop such work being of value and contributing to the field in an effort to create positive hospital environments.

Capturing the emotional-cognitive response on semantic scales poses problems. Questions can be raised as to how individuals govern their judgements about soundscape perception and how these can be measured when individual differences vary so greatly (Hall et al., 2011). Here this may be more apparent when trying to quantify a complex psychological process such as an emotional-cognitive response and relate it to theory. As a result the use of statistics is arguably questionable for inferring effects. Nevertheless, the method provides a barometer as to positive changes to the soundscape which could be developed in practice.

Visual cues were not provided to ensure that responses were made solely to the soundscape clips. One participant commented that visual recognition of the sounds would influence feeling. Indeed, this may be the case as context is important in soundscape perception (Brown et al., 2011) and as such this is acknowledged as a limitation.

Music has been advocated to create healing spaces within hospitals (Dijkstra et al., 2006). For example, Thorgaard et al. (2005) performed a multicentre study in five post anaesthesia care units in Denmark. The questionnaire study investigated patient (n = 325) and staff (n = 91) opinion of a specially designed music environment through ceiling mounted speakers. Eighty three per cent of patients found the environment pleasant or very pleasing, 6% unpleasant and 11% had no opinion. However, musical tastes differ among patients, staff, and elderly patients along with sounds such as the radio (Liu and Tan, 2000; Mackrill et al., 2013a). Due to this subjectivity music was not considered here.

@&#FUTURE WORK@&#

As sound is somewhat ‘intangible’ in comparison to say colour or physical shape, it is possible it can be overlooked in the design of hospital spaces, certainly in the sense of ‘designing’ sound for the user. The authors suggest that a more formal evaluation of the soundscape within a hospital ward should now be considered utilising the measurement scales here and appraising the influence of the mediating factors of the soundscape. This would allow a systems type (Wilson, 2013) appraisal looking at how a soundscape intervention interacts with staff and patients, their subjective responses, sound levels, broader environmental characteristics and work practices. It is only when individuals are exposed to the whole ‘integrated’ environment (Parsons, 2000) with all elements (sound, light, temperature etc.) interacting that an environment can be adequately appraised. The authors have begun to explore this (see, Mackrill et al., 2013c) by testing SSI in-situ within a CT ward to start to a certain the empirical generalisation (Ritchie and Lewis, 2003) of the research. Building upon this, research now needs to fully investigate if SSI is a positive addition to the hospital environment: improving the experience of the hospital soundscape for patients. Furthermore, understanding which patient groups (e.g. paediatrics, geriatrics) may benefit most from such an intervention should also be considered.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

It was found that natural sound and written sound source information were the most effective intervention at altering the emotional-cognitive response to individuals hearing soundscape clips of a CT ward. Potentially, these interventions could improve the perception of the soundscape and the feeling of being in the hospital space. It is SSI that offers an interesting and simple way to enable individuals to potentially understand the soundscape of a hospital ward. Future work can now be done to look at this in-situ to assess if this simple intervention can be of benefit to patients within hospital environments. It is hoped that the discussion here may bring the concept of the soundscape to the ergonomics arena, which may be integrated into holistic environmental evaluations.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank University Hospital, Coventry, UK for their cooperation on the project. This research was funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, United Kingdom through the Warwick Innovative Manufacturing Research Centre at WMG, University of Warwick (grant number EP/G049971/1). This study was given ethical approval by the BioMedical and Scientific Research Ethics Committee at the University of Warwick.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

