@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#More than meets the eye: Using cognitive work analysis to identify design requirements for future rail level crossing systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Future transport systems will be more diverse and complex.


                        
                        
                           
                           Rail level crossings are a key safety issue that will likely degenerate.


                        
                        
                           
                           We used cognitive work analysis to analyse rail level crossings.


                        
                        
                           
                           Key flaws and design requirements for future systems were identified.


                        
                        
                           
                           Modifications outside of rail level crossings are also required.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Rail level crossings

Cognitive work analysis

Systems analysis

Road safety

Rail safety

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  An increasing intensity of operations means that the longstanding safety issue of rail level crossings is likely to become worse in the transport systems of the future. It has been suggested that the failure to prevent collisions may be, in part, due to a lack of systems thinking during design, crash analysis, and countermeasure development. This paper presents a systems analysis of current active rail level crossing systems in Victoria, Australia that was undertaken to identify design requirements to improve safety in future rail level crossing environments. Cognitive work analysis was used to analyse rail level crossing systems using data derived from a range of activities. Overall the analysis identified a range of instances where modification or redesign in line with systems thinking could potentially improve behaviour and safety. A notable finding is that there are opportunities for redesign outside of the physical rail level crossing infrastructure, including improved data systems, in-vehicle warnings and modifications to design processes, standards and guidelines. The implications for future rail level crossing systems are discussed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the future, surface transport systems will be more complex, technology driven, and will experience a higher intensity of operations. The continuing failure to control safety in today's systems raises critical questions, many of which centre around how transport system design processes can be modified to produce safer environments. A key requirement is the use of appropriate design and evaluation methodologies that fully consider the complex sociotechnical nature of transport systems. Without such approaches, longstanding transport safety issues will get worse, not better. This paper argues that approaches from the realm of systems thinking provide appropriate methods for developing the safe and efficient transport systems of the future.

One intractable surface transportation issue is that of collisions at Rail Level Crossings (RLXs). RLX are ‘at grade’ intersections comprising rail vehicles and their infrastructure, and other travel modes, usually roads. In most cases the train has priority and other types of traffic have to be deconflicted with the train's movement. This is achieved by inducing other non-rail traffic to stop and wait until the train has passed. In engineering terms achieving this deconfliction is a simple problem. In many situations, particularly those appearing as high risk (such as busy roads or urban areas) numerous engineering countermeasures including signs, road markings, warning lights and barriers are in place. Despite this, system defences are often defeated leading to accidents that continue to occur at an unacceptable rate. Indeed, as other sources of risk on the railway have been successfully tackled the problem of RLXs has become increasingly exposed. In many jurisdictions it is now one of the foremost risks affecting the rail network (e.g. Office and Rail and Road, 2015; RISSB, 2009; Transport Safety Committee, 2014).

The accidents statistics make for sobering reading (e.g. Evans, 2011; Hao and Daniel, 2014). In Australia, for example, between 2000 and 2009 there were almost 700 collisions between road vehicles and trains at RLXs, leading to nearly 100 fatalities (Independent Transport Safety Regulator, 2011). Despite a range of safety initiatives being introduced, including educational campaigns, increased enforcement, and the upgrade of selected crossings to full active protection (e.g. flashing lights and boom gates), in 2011 there were 49 collisions between trains and road vehicles at Australian RLXs, leading to 33 fatalities (ATSB, 2012). The problem is not limited to collisions between trains and vehicles; between 2002 and 2012 there were 92 collisions between trains and pedestrians at RLXs (ATSB, 2012). In 2010, the annual cost of RLX incidents was estimated at just over one hundred million dollars, taking into account human and property damage costs and other costs such as emergency service attendance, delays, investigation and insurance (Tooth and Balmford, 2010).

Researchers have recently pointed to a lack of understanding of behaviour at RLXs and, more specifically, the interactions between people and the RLX infrastructure which give rise to unsafe behaviours (Edquist et al., 2009). Interactions like these are best understood using a systems approach (Salmon and Lenné, 2015). Such an approach is not common in level crossing design and safety (e.g. Read et al., 2013; Salmon et al., 2013; Wilson and Norris, 2005) but given the consequences and costs accruing from accidents and fatalities, there is clearly a need to pursue a different, and potentially more effective, line of enquiry. The alternative is to continue focussing on RLX components in isolation. This type of engineering based approach not only examines component parts (such as road users, warnings, or individual pieces of equipment) in isolation, but artificially splits the entire rail and road infrastructure, with each considered under a different jurisdiction in many cases. The outcome of this has been progress in solving the problems to which an engineering solution is effective, but severe difficulty dealing effectively with the prominent behavioural component of the problem.

The current approach, therefore, has tended to lead to incremental design changes that have only marginal effects. This ‘fix the broken component’ mentality, has received broader criticism. A deterministic focus, in which the problem is broken down and analysed at a component level, drives the outcomes towards fairly narrow solutions and is a limited approach to safety management (Dekker, 2011). It is also acknowledged to be an inappropriate approach to improving safety within complex sociotechnical systems, of which RLX are an example (Salmon and Lenné, 2015). This is because the interactions that occur within sociotechnical systems are not fully captured.

Developing appropriate reforms for RLXs that are in line with systems thinking requires first that an in-depth understanding of the RLX system be developed. Although this is seemingly an obvious requirement, such an understanding does not currently exist (Read et al., 2013). Indeed, despite repeated calls, a systems thinking approach to RLX safety is yet to materialise (Read et al., 2013). This article is a direct response to this knowledge gap and provides the first systems analysis of RLX systems in Victoria, Australia. Specifically, the outputs of a four phase Cognitive Work Analysis (CWA; Vicente, 1999) of actively controlled RLXs are presented. The aim is to synthesise and communicate the findings from each analysis phase and to generate a series of design requirements for future RLX systems.

CWA (Vicente, 1999) is a systems analysis and design framework that has previously been used both to analyse complex sociotechnical systems and to inform system design or redesign activities (e.g. Cornelissen et al., 2015; Jenkins et al., 2011; Rechard et al., 2015; Stanton and Bessell, 2014). An important feature of the framework is a focus on identifying the constraints imposed on behaviour within the system (Stanton et al., 2013). As a result, the design recommendations generated often centre on making constraints more explicit to users, removing constraints on behaviour or better exploiting existing constraints to support behaviour (Stanton et al., 2013).

The framework comprises five analysis phases (Vicente, 1999). In the present study the first four of these phases were used. The fifth phase, worker competencies analysis, was not applied in this case because it was felt that the analysis outputs from the first four phases provided a sufficiently in-depth account of RLX behaviour to support identification of areas for redesign. A brief description of each of the phases employed is given below along with a table showing example related RLX outputs (see Table 1
                     ).

The first phase, WDA, is used to provide an event and actor independent description of the system under analysis: in this case the RLX ‘system’. The aim is to describe the purposes of the system and the constraints imposed on the actions of any actor performing activities within that system (Vicente, 1999). This is achieved by describing systems at the following five conceptual levels using the abstraction hierarchy method:
                           
                              1.
                              Functional purpose – The overall purposes of the system and the external constraints imposed on its operation;

Values and priority measures – The criteria that organisations use for measuring progress towards the functional purposes;

Generalized functions – The general functions of the system that are necessary for achieving the functional purposes;

Physical functions – The functional capabilities and limitations of the physical objects within the system that enable the generalised functions; and

Physical objects – The physical objects within the system that are used to undertake the generalised functions.

The output is a detailed description of the system under analysis in terms of the constraints influencing behaviour and the physical objects (and their affordances) and functions that enable the system to achieve its functional purpose. Importantly, the abstraction hierarchy model uses means-ends relationships to link nodes across the five levels of abstraction.

The second phase, Control Task Analysis (ConTA), is used to examine the specific tasks that are undertaken to achieve the purposes, priorities and functions of a particular work domain (Naikar et al., 2006). Rasmussen's decision ladder (Rasmussen, 1976; cited in Vicente, 1999) and Naikar et al.'s (2006) Contextual Activity Template (CAT) are used for the ConTA phase. The decision ladder is used to describe the decision making processes that can be adopted during different tasks along with the short cuts through this process that can be made by users with differing levels of expertise. The CAT is used to map functions and affordances across different contexts and locations in terms of where they are currently undertaken and where they could potentially be undertaken given the existing system constraints.

The strategies analysis phase is used to identify all of the different ways or strategies through which the control tasks can be undertaken. The Strategies Analysis Diagram (SAD; Cornelissen et al., 2013) is one approach that can be used to conduct the strategies analysis phase. This builds on the WDA outputs by adding verbs and criteria to examine the range of strategies available within a given system based on the means-ends links between physical objects, affordances, and functions.

The SOCA phase is used to identify how the control tasks and associated strategies are distributed amongst actors (both human and technological) within the system, and also how these actors could potentially communicate and cooperate (Vicente, 1999). The aim is to determine an optimum allocation of functions for the system in question. SOCA looks at who currently does what, and who could do what, given the constraints of the system. The important point being, that the ‘who’ can be both humans and non-humans (e.g. technologies, artefacts).

The four phases were used to analyse the current RLX system in Victoria, Australia. The aim was to generate an in-depth understanding of the RLX system in order to inform the generation of design requirements for enhancing safety. The research was undertaken as part of a wider research program that aims to develop and test new designs for both active and passive RLXs in Victoria, Australia. The analysis presented focusses on active RLXs in both urban and regional settings. Active RLXs have both ‘active’ warning devices that provide a warning of an approaching train, such as flashing lights, boom gates and warning bells, along with ‘passive’ warnings that also provide a warning of the RLX itself (e.g. static signs and road markings). There are currently around 8800 RLXs in Australia, with approximately a third being active crossings and two thirds being passive (i.e. having no ‘active’ warnings) (Australian Transport Council, 2003). The rationale for focussing on active crossings in this paper is provided by rail safety data that shows that there are more collisions and fatalities at active crossings compared to passive crossing (ITSR, 2011).

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

Multiple analysts with significant experience in applying CWA in a range of areas (e.g. defence, road and rail transport, aviation, maritime) were involved in conducting the CWA. The data used by the analysts to inform the CWA was gathered during the various data collection activities described below. All activities were granted full ethics approved by the Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee.

Two on-road studies of driver behaviour at RLXs were undertaken. One focussed on active crossings in an urban environment and one focussed on both active and passive crossings in a rural environment. Both studies involved participants driving a pre-defined route incorporating RLXs whilst providing ‘think aloud’ verbal protocols. The urban study was undertaken in the South–East suburbs of Melbourne and involved 29 drivers aged 18–55 years (M = 30.5, SD = 11.1) negotiating a route incorporating nine active RLXs. The rural study was undertaken in Greater Bendigo, Victoria, Australia and involved 22 drivers aged 19–55 years (M = 32.2, SD = 14.2) negotiating a route incorporating ten RLXs (six were active with five having flashing lights and boom gates and one having flashing lights only, and four were passive RLXs with three having a stop sign only and one having with a give way sign only).

The on-road studies described above also involved a post-drive cognitive task analysis interview using the Critical Decision Method (CDM; Klein and Armstrong, 2005). The interviews focussed on each participant's decision making at two of the RLXs encountered on the route and involved using a series of cognitive probes to interrogate the road users' decision making process when negotiating the RLXs.

Data derived from a diary study of behaviour at RLXs in Victoria, Australia, was also used. Participants, including drivers, pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists, completed a daily ‘diary’ of all RLX that they encountered during a two-week period. They were asked to record the number and types of crossings encountered, whether a train was approaching, and the types of warnings in use at each crossing. In situations where a train was approaching and/or the active warnings were operational (i.e. flashing lights, boom barriers), participants were asked to record the details of one crossing encounter per day, where applicable. 144 participants, aged 18–71 years (M = 39.9, SD = 12.9), reported encountering a train at an active crossing during the study. For these participants, a series of questions based on the CDM cognitive task analysis interview (Klein and Armstrong, 2005) was used to capture information regarding participants' decision making processes, including whether and why they stopped or proceeded through the crossing and the types of information they used to inform their decision.

Discussions were held with two train drivers and one rail subject matter expert to gather information regarding train driver behaviour at RLXs along with information regarding their perceptions of other road users’ behaviour at RLXs. The drivers were asked to describe their behaviour on approach to RLX along with the constraints influencing behaviour. In addition, three of the co-authors participated in train cab rides through urban and regional areas to gain familiarisation with the train-driving task and to understand the train driver perspective on approach to RLXs.

A subject matter expert workshop was conducted to review and refine the draft WDA output. This involved 11 stakeholders from rail and road safety organisations (including representatives from the state road authority, the rail regulator, relevant state government departments, train service providers and transport safety investigators). An active WDA was presented to the group, following which stakeholders were given the opportunity to review and refine them to ensure their accuracy and completeness.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A summary of the active rail level crossing WDA is presented in Fig. 1
                        .

At the functional purpose level, six different functional purposes were identified. These included ‘provide access across rail line’, ‘maintain priority access for rail traffic’, ‘protect road users’, ‘protect rail users’, ‘minimise delays to rail network’ and ‘minimise delays to road network’. Notable here is the competing nature of some of the functional purposes identified. For example, maintaining priority access for rail traffic whilst minimising delays to the road network is difficult to achieve, especially on busy rail lines where warnings may remain active for extended periods of time while multiple trains traverse a crossing. This conflict occurs in a climate where both train frequency and traffic volumes are increasing.

The values and priority measures level of the WDA show the criteria that can be used to assess the system's progress towards achieving its functional purposes. Seven core values and priority measures were identified, including minimising collisions, injury and fatalities, risk, and road rule violations, maximising efficiency and reliability of the crossing, and achieving conformity with design standards. It is questionable whether any of these values and priority measures are currently being satisfactorily achieved in Australia (and indeed worldwide). A key issue lies in the extent to which road and rail organisations collect accurate data and understand RLXs system performance around the values and priority measures specified. For example, it is debateable whether the road and rail sectors possess accurate data on the level of risk associated with different RLXs, with existing risk assessment processes attracting criticism in the literature (e.g. Salmon et al., 2013). Similarly, there are challenges in gaining an accurate picture of the number of road rule violations and near misses at RLX. Although near miss data are collected from train drivers; road users and pedestrians typically do not have a usable mechanism to report near misses, violations or delays. The implication is that road and rail organisations currently do not fully understand the extent to which RLXs are meeting key values and priorities.

The generalised functions level shows the functions that need to be achieved for safe and efficient RLX performance. Here it becomes clear that the system is predicated on the notion that road users stop for trains. A number of the functions relate specifically to the road users (i.e. alerting them to the RLX and the presence of a train, ensuring that they behave appropriately for the environment), while other functions are associated with the separation of road and rail users, maintaining traffic flow, and designing, monitoring and maintaining the RLX environment.

A key feature of this level is that various combinations of failed functions can lead to RLX collisions; there are many ways in which collisions can occur. For example, the system failing to alert the road user to the presence of a train represents one failed function that can cause a collision. On the other hand, many functions could also fail in a way that leads to a collision. For example, poor maintenance could lead to the active warnings not working and road users not being warned of the approaching train.

A second important feature of this level is that it shows how functions away from the RLX itself have a bearing on behaviour and safety at the crossing. For example, functions such as ‘system design’ and ‘performance monitoring and education’ can conceivably play a role in creating or indeed preventing RLX collisions even though the particular activity might occur or fail to occur days, weeks, months, or even years before an incident (Salmon et al., 2013). These features are characteristic of the resident pathogens described by Reason (1990).

Finally, the failure of current RLX systems to achieve functions at this level is apparent. For example, as discussed above, performance monitoring and education is not well supported, and the maintenance of traffic flow is not well supported in urban environments. Similarly, recent incidents such as the Kerang collision provide clear evidence that road users are not always alerted to the presence of a train. The Kerang incident involved the driver of a loaded semi-trailer truck proceeding toward the RLX apparently unaware that a passenger train was also approaching, despite scanning the RLX and flashing light assembly. The resulting collision killed 11 train passengers and injured a further 15 people, including the truck driver.

The lower two levels of the WDA show the physical objects that the system comprises along with their affordances. At the bottom level, physical objects were grouped into the following categories: road and road infrastructure (e.g. the road, kerb, lane markings), rail and RLX infrastructure (e.g. tracks, whistleboard, train detection systems), RLX warning devices (e.g. flashing lights, early warning signage, RLX markers), vehicles (e.g. cars, trucks, trains), other infrastructure (e.g. buildings), standards, guidelines and rules (e.g. road rules, road and RLX design standards), risk assessment tools (e.g. RLX risk assessment tools), procedures (e.g. safety and maintenance procedures), and the natural environment (e.g. vegetation, weather conditions).

The ConTA phase analyses the control tasks that need to be performed for the system to meet its functional purposes. When users negotiate RLXs the key control tasks are underpinned by the stop or go decision, which in this case is defined as instances where users decide whether they should proceed through the crossing or stop at the crossing and wait for an approaching train to pass. Despite the importance of this decision, little is known regarding the information users employ to inform it or how the decision making process differs across different road users (e.g. drivers versus pedestrians). The ConTA phase involved applying the decision ladder to understand the stop or go decision from the point of view of different users, including drivers, pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcyclists. In addition, CATs were developed to explore where affordances were achieved across different situations (although these are not reported in the current paper due to space limitations).

The decision ladder analysis used the data derived from the multi-road user diary study of RLX behaviour. 144 participants provided data surrounding 457 encounters with a train and/or activated warnings. The majority of encounters (92%) occurred in metropolitan Melbourne at active crossings and only these results are presented. This included 429 encounters at 80 different crossings by 135 participants: 40 drivers (133 encounters); 33 pedestrians (128 encounters); 31 motorcyclists (86 encounters) and 31 cyclists (82 encounters).

Initially, a generic decision ladder for the ‘stop or go’ decision was populated based on the data (see Fig. 2
                        ). This involved taking data from the diary study and mapping them onto the appropriate sections of the decision ladder. For example, responses to the question ‘what information did you use to make your decision?’ were added to the ‘Information’ component of the decision ladder. The decision ladder presented in Fig. 2 therefore represents an overview of the possible decision making processes adopted by participants during the 429 encounters with a train.

The decision ladder shows that there are many sources of information that road users and pedestrians reported using to become aware that they were approaching a RLX (the alert component in Fig. 2) and to inform their stop or go decision (the information and system state components in Fig. 2). In addition to expected sources of information, such as signage, flashing lights, boom gates and the train itself, other pieces of information reportedly used included the behaviour of other road users, judgements about own behaviour (such as ‘what is my current speed?’), and personal triggering features such as vegetation or a house.

When asked what the most important piece of information was in determining whether to stop or go, participants described a range of sources including the boom gates, the behaviour of other road users, flashing lights, traffic lights, where the train is, ringing bells, RLX warning sign, and seeing or hearing the train. The options identified by participants as available to them on approach to the crossings included to proceed through, stop at the crossing, or change path and the goals influencing behaviour were safety, efficiency, compliance, getting to desired destination, or ‘just to get through’. The remainder of the decision ladder depicts the procedures available to cross and participants' choice of procedure. The procedures available included: to stop, to proceed through, to change path (in order to avoid the crossing), to go around the boom gates, to go around the pedestrian gates, or to pass through the traffic lights and then the crossing.

The generic decision ladder was used to explore differences in users’ decision making processes by overlaying the behaviour of different types of road users onto it. For the purposes of this paper, an interesting comparison is that of compliant and non-compliant users. A compliant decision represented one where the road user decided to stop or go in compliance with the RLX warnings. A non-compliant decision represented one where the road user proceeded through the crossing after the active warnings had commenced operation.

Out of all recorded crossing interactions, 398 were compliant (130 traverses by 39 drivers, 108 traverses by 33 pedestrians, 84 traverses by 31 motorcyclists, and 76 traverses by 28 cyclists). In the compliant group the primary goal of motorcyclists and pedestrians was safety (39% in both cases) whereas the primary goal of cyclists and drivers was compliance (42% and 38.5%).

At the alert level of the decision ladder, about half of all available information sources were reported to be used by all road user groups (flashing lights, booms, bells, traffic queueing, seeing a train, and road markings). Notable differences were that pedestrians (3.8%) also reported using the pedestrian gates as their alert, whilst both pedestrians (1.9%) and cyclists (2.6%) reported using other pedestrians and cyclists queueing at the pedestrian gates as an alert to the presence of the crossings. The majority of motorcyclists (57.1%) and drivers (51.5%) reported using flashing lights, whilst pedestrians and cyclists relied more on the auditory warnings (44.3%, 42.1%).

At the information level (information sought by users to determine the state of the system), participants across all groups reported using most information sources from the generic decision ladder to inform their decision making; however, motorcyclists and drivers were more likely to use the flashing lights than anything else (91.7%, 79.3%) whilst pedestrians and cyclists relied more on the bells (81%, 67.1%).

A total of 31 traverses, made by 20 participants, fell into the non-compliant category (20 traverses by 11 pedestrians, 6 traverses by 5 cyclists, 3 traverses by 3 drivers and 2 traverses by 1 motorcyclist). In this data set, pedestrians reported a higher non-compliant behaviour rate than other road users. For the non-compliant participants, efficiency was reported as the most important goal by 66.7% of drivers and 45% of pedestrians. Of the motorcyclists, 50% reported efficiency as the most important goal and 50% reported getting to the destination as most important. Safety, efficiency and getting to the destination were reported to be most important by cyclists (33.3% each). None of the non-compliant motorcyclists cited safety as a goal.

There were interesting differences in the alerts reported by the non-compliant participants. The motorised users described using the flashing lights only, whilst cyclists and pedestrians referred to more cues, including auditory warnings (50% and 45%), seeing the train (16.7% and 15%), boom gates (16.7% and 5%). In addition, 5% of pedestrians also reported using the flashing lights, seeing the boom gates, hearing the train, noticing pedestrians queueing, seeing the warning signs, and seeing road markings.

At the information level, a similar pattern was found. Here motorised road users were more likely to report using the flashing lights and booms, whereas pedestrians relied on a much wider range of information than others, including bells (65%), gates (25%), see a train (40%), hear a train (20%), other vehicles (10%), other pedestrians and cyclists (40%), warning signs (5%), road markings (5%) and advanced warning signs (5%), and how far they could see along the tracks (30%). Cyclists relied on the same information elements as pedestrians, excluding other road users’ behaviour.

The strategies analysis component of the CWA followed Cornelissen et al.'s (2013) Strategies Analysis Diagram (SAD) methodology, whereby verbs (e.g. drive, ride, walk, queue, anticipate) and criteria (e.g. weather, visibility, distraction, impairment) are added to the WDA in order to identify the range of strategies possible for different road users in RLX environments. The strategies were identified both from the on-road study VPAs, CDMs, and diary study responses and from constructing pathways in the WDA itself. Examples of the verbs and criteria used are overlayed onto the WDA in Fig. 3
                        .

The SAD generated a number of key insights. First, multiple strategies were identified for each type of road user. An important element of this was the use of multiple objects to support the functions engaged in. For example, drivers can receive a warning of an approaching train from multiple sources, including the train itself, the level crossing warning devices, and the behaviour of other road users. This points to a high level of redundancy within the system and also the multiple roles of objects.

Second, warnings of the RLX itself (as opposed to warnings of an approaching train) seem less relevant and do not appear to be heavily used to inform decision making. This finding questions their use within RLX environments – particularly warning signage that is situated well before RLXs.

Third, a key omission identified through the SAD is a failure to provide specific information regarding the approaching train. Rather, the information currently provided is mainly generic information in the form of barriers and warnings (i.e. ‘a train is coming’). The SAD suggests that a number of the strategies adopted would be better informed through the provision of more specific information, such as time to arrival, number of trains approaching, and time that user will be delayed at the crossing. Indeed, other strategies are employed by users to attempt to seek this information, such as pedestrians looking down the track and attempting to predict time to arrival.

Fourth, the SAD revealed the problem of potential conflicts between users adopting different strategies whilst negotiating RLXs. For example, strategies adopted by one form of user (e.g. pedestrians crossing via the road) can impede or prevent a strategy for another form of user (e.g. drivers attempting to traverse the RLX).

Fifth and finally, the physical use of infrastructure by non-motorised road users was an interesting facet of the strategies identified. For example, cyclists use of fencing or the boom gates to support their balance. Interestingly there are no dedicated facilities to support non-motorised users in tasks such as maintaining balance and sheltering from rain. This lack of support for comfort may encourage users to continue through the crossing as it becomes active with an approaching train.

The SOCA involved mapping different human and non-human actors onto the WDA, decision ladder, and contextual activity template to identify how functions, affordances, decisions and strategies are currently allocated across actors, and also to identify how they could be allocated in order to identify potential redesign recommendations. The actors were categorised into two levels – sub-systems and actors – to assist in conducting differing layers of analysis. The actors considered in the SOCA phase are presented in Table 2
                        .

An extract of the WDA SOCA for existing RLX systems is presented in Table 3
                        . This shows which of the actors identified currently contribute to the functional purposes and functions identified in the WDA. For example, ‘Road user’ (road), ‘Detection and alert systems’ (warnings), and ‘Infrastructure providers’ (road and rail infrastructure owners) currently contribute to the functional purpose ‘Provide access across rail line’. For the function, ‘Alert to presence of RLX’ the following actors currently contribute: detection and alert systems (e.g. RLX signage), regulators/authorities (through providing road and rail infrastructure) and physical infrastructure (the RLX itself).

The formative WDA SOCA for RLX systems is included in Table 3 via those actors presented in bold text. This shows which of the actors identified could potentially contribute to the functional purposes and functions following system redesign. For example, for the function, ‘Alert to presence of RLX’ the ‘road user’ group has been added since an in-vehicle display or GPS system could potentially provide a warning of an upcoming RLX. Similarly, for the ‘system performance monitoring and education’ functions rail and road users, pedestrians and detection and alert systems have been added since actors in each group could conceivably collect and report information regarding how RLX systems are functioning (e.g. incidents and near misses, failed components).

Taken together SOCA outputs show that there are various opportunities for reallocating functions within RLX systems and for adding redundancy by increasing the number of actors performing key functions. A noteworthy finding is the heavy reliance on non-human and RLX-related actors to achieve functions (e.g. signage, warnings, barriers, trains), leaving road users such as drivers and vehicles under-utilised.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The aim of this article was to present the findings derived from a four phase CWA of RLXs, and to identify the key design requirements for improved safety at RLXs in Victoria, Australia. The analysis represents the first CWA of RLXs from the perspective of multiple road users and provides a detailed description of the system itself (WDA), how decisions are made at RLXs (decision ladder), the different strategies that are available for different users (strategies analysis), and how different functions, decisions, and tasks are allocated across human and non-human actors (SOCA). This discussion now turns to the implications for future RLX design. In addition, the extent to which a systems approach sheds new light on opportunities to improve RLX safety is examined.

From the WDA it is clear that RLX systems in Victoria are complex with multiple competing purposes, many values and priorities, and multiple pathways to failure. Importantly, despite clear values and priorities, current systems do not appear to possess the means to understand performance and the extent to which values and priorities are being realised.

The implication of the WDA is that change may not only be required at the RLX itself (e.g. introducing new ways of alerting road users to the presence of a train); but also that fundamental changes may be required at the functional purpose level. The presence of competing functional purposes, for example, represents a barrier to implementing designs focussed purely on improving safety as they may adversely impact other functional purposes such as those related to efficiency. For example, designs in which trains slow or stop at RLXs are used in Europe and appear to have a safety benefit; however, with a strong focus on efficiency it is questionable whether such systems would be considered or indeed practical. This demonstrates the need to consider the RLX system not just as the intersection of the road and rail transport systems, but as a part of an overall transport system that itself contributes to wider social, economic and environmental goals. There is a need to consider this meta-system to optimise functioning of the overall transport system to meet societal goals. Further analysis at this higher level may be required prior to making recommendations about priority. Potentially, a RLX which controls traffic movement based on dynamic priority and taking into account the state of the overall transport system would be optimum.

The WDA also suggests that new mechanisms for the collection and analysis of data would be beneficial to enable stakeholders to understand and monitor whether or not values and priority measures are being met. This might require new data systems or at least integration of existing data systems. For example, incident and near miss reporting systems integrated with audit systems would allow a better understanding of whether values and priority measures such as minimising violations, risk and achieving conformity with standards and guidelines are being met. Whilst these do exist, different systems are often used by different stakeholders (e.g. rail service providers versus rail authorities). Given the number of agencies with different responsibilities in relation to RLX safety, historically, there have been barriers to sharing of data such as different data collection systems, classification frameworks, organisational priorities (e.g. safety versus reliability) and resourcing. Interestingly, there is no one agency in Victoria that is responsible for collecting and disseminating data about RLX performance and safety. Clearly the responsibility for RLX safety across organisations needs to be examined.

The overriding finding from the ConTA and strategies analyses is that, despite aiming to achieve the same end goal, different users negotiate RLXs in a range of different ways and use different features in the environment. These differences occur both across user groups (e.g. drivers versus pedestrians) and within user groups (e.g. drivers) and relate to the sources of information used, the goals pursued, and the courses of action employed. For example, the high reliance on visual cues by drivers compared with the high use of audible warnings by pedestrians and cyclists represents a key difference in the way in which the users seek information regarding approaching trains. This means that solutions need to be tailored to all user groups in a manner that is compatible and does not cause conflict or competition in the features.

The ConTA also showed the extent to which users, particularly pedestrians, seek additional information to help determine whether to traverse the RLX when the warnings are activated. It showed, for example, how non-compliant users (mainly pedestrians in this sample) reported using a wider range of information sources, including the train itself and its current location when deciding whether to proceed through. On top of this, the strategies analysis highlighted the fact that much of the RLX warning infrastructure does not provide specific information about approaching trains (e.g. time to arrival, speed, and the number of trains approaching).

Both findings have design implications, painting a picture of a system that attempts to restrict the information given to its users, but still provides them with the flexibility to seek further information that might lead to them violating crossing warnings. In relation to design, this raises the difficult issue of flexibility and the level of information that is provided to users; that is, should new designs aim to reduce flexibility and constrain users in how they can negotiate RLXs? Or should they provide users with more information that may better support decision making, but could at the same time increase risky behaviour (i.e. by telling users how long the train will take to arrive do designers inadvertently help them decide that they can still beat the train?). Whilst systems thinking would argue strongly to provide flexibility and high levels of information, it is apparent that this flexibility may lie at the root of RLX incidents (as users have a high latitude for behaviour). It may be, however, that this flexibility can be exploited by providing decision support systems to ensure appropriate outcomes.

The analysis suggests that there is not a ‘one size fits all’ solution that will cover all types of users. Despite being seemingly obvious, a failure to consider all forms of road user has been identified as key issue in road design efforts (e.g. Cornelissen et al., 2013). Integrated RLX design processes, standards and guidelines that consider different road users together and throughout the design process are required. In addition, the impact on all road users of introducing new systems, as opposed to one group alone, needs to be assessed. It is worth noting that these recommendations hint at the requirement for change outside of the RLXs themselves (e.g. modification of design processes, standards and guidelines).

Finally, the strategies analysis and SOCA demonstrate that there is scope for a more sophisticated allocation of tasks and functions within RLX environments. The responsibility for RLX safety should not be placed solely on the crossing and its infrastructure; there are parts of the RLX system that could be doing more to improve behaviour, such as road vehicles and in-vehicle systems and the infrastructure surrounding RLXs. In addition, the current under-utilisation of users was emphasised; humans, despite being highly adaptive and capable decision makers, are restricted rather than exploited. Finally, the introduction of new objects away from the RLX itself was emphasised. New RLX designs could exploit existing objects in the system such as vehicles (e.g. in-vehicle warnings of crossings and trains), mobile phones, and GPS systems. In addition, new objects not related to the RLX itself may provide benefits; for example, shelter and ticket machines for pedestrians close to RLXs may increase the likelihood that they will wait for a train to pass rather than attempt to cross when the warnings are activated.

An increasing number of researchers are arguing for a systems approach to be taken when attempting to improve RLX safety (e.g. Read et al., 2013; Salmon et al., 2013; Wilson and Norris, 2005). As discussed, previous work has predominantly taken an engineering based approach to safety, primarily focussing on warning devices and providing important information regarding their likely effectiveness upon implementation (e.g. Lenné et al., 2011; Tey et al., 2014). Clarifying the contribution of systems thinking approaches over and above the engineering approach will facilitate systems thinking applications.

A strength of the systems approach is its explanatory power when examining behaviour and accidents. Similar to Salmon et al. (2013), the present analysis describes factors outside of the users and RLXs that play a role in safety. For example, the present analysis highlighted the need to reconsider the functional purposes that drive RLX design and operation along with the need for better data systems. These are not factors that would be identified by focussing on warning devices or indeed just users and RLXs. Examining the system constraints explicitly has revealed that the evolution of design has inadvertently produced incompatible behaviours to those desired. Stanton et al. (2013) delineated between soft constraints (i.e., rule and procedural constraints) and hard constraints (i.e., physical and technological constraints). In order to change the behaviour of transport users, both soft and hard constraints can be removed. It is proposed that design interventions should consider both hard and soft constraints.

Another strength lies in highlighting new parts of the system that could be better utilised to achieve safer performance, providing avenues outside of traditional warning devices. In this case, for example, the potential use of vehicles in performing functions that the RLX currently performs was highlighted.

Finally, and perhaps its major strength, the systems approach enables the behaviour of all users to be understood, as opposed to individual user groups alone. Most RLX studies have focussed on user groups in isolation, such as drivers (e.g. Lenné et al., 2011) or heavy vehicle drivers (Davey et al., 2008), whereas a systems approach such as CWA describes the behaviour of multiple user groups – in this case drivers, pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcyclists and non-human actors. In turn, this encourages the development and evaluation of designs that cater for all users, not just one user group alone.

It is also worth discussing some notable strengths and weaknesses of the CWA framework when applied in the RLX context. The main strengths relate to the multi-perspectives that it provides on behaviour (e.g. system constraints, decision making, strategies, allocation of functions), its ability to consider the overall RLX system as opposed to only parts of it, and its formative nature, which enables analysts to explore how activity could be undertaken given design modifications. Some pertinent weakness encountered in the present study include the high level of resources required to collect appropriate data and undertake each of the phases (in particular the CAT and SAD were resource intensive in this case), the absence of software support for some of the analysis methods used (e.g. SAD), and initial difficulties in explaining the framework and associated terminology to rail safety stakeholders. Overall though the utility of the outputs produced in this case justify the high level of resources invested.

In closing, it is recommended that further systems analysis and design applications be undertaken in the RLX context and also across all transportation areas. Whilst analytical applications are emerging (e.g. Cornelissen et al., 2013), a key challenge is to embed systems analysis and design methodologies within sociotechnical system design processes (Eason, 2014). To this end, articles describing applications involving systems thinking-based design studies are recommended. Following this, empirical testing of designs developed through such studies are required. The next phase of the research program from which this work derives involves the use of driving simulation to test new RLX design concepts developed based on the analysis presented.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was funded through an Australian Research Council Linkage Grant (ARC, LP100200387) to the University of Sunshine Coast, Monash University, and the University of Southampton, in partnership with the following organisations: the Victorian Rail Track Corporation, Transport Safety Victoria, Public Transport Victoria, Transport Accident Commission, Roads Corporation (VicRoads) and V/Line Passenger Pty Ltd.Professor Paul Salmon’s contribution to this article was funded through his Australian Research Council Future Fellowship (FT140100681).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

