@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Concentration on performance with P300-based BCI systems: A matter of interface features

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The user's capacity to concentrate can affect his/her performance with a P300-based speller.


                        
                        
                           
                           This study was to test this hypothesis using three different interfaces.


                        
                        
                           
                           The d2 test was applied to assess attention and concentration.


                        
                        
                           
                           The performance of users with lower concentration level can be improved by providing BCIs with more interactive interfaces.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Brain–computer interfaces

P300

Speller

Concentration

Attention

Word predictor

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  People who suffer from severe motor disabilities have difficulties to communicate with others or to interact with their environment using natural, i.e., muscular channels. These limitations can be overcome to some extent by using brain–computer interfaces (BCIs), because such systems allow users to communicate on the basis of their brain activity only. Among the several types of BCIs for spelling purposes, those that rely on the P300 event related potential—P300-based spellers—are chosen preferentially due to their high reliability. However, they demand from the user to sustain his/her attention to the desired character over a relatively long period of time. Therefore, the user's capacity to concentrate can affect his/her performance with a P300-based speller. The aim of this study was to test this hypothesis using three different interfaces: one based on the classic P300 speller paradigm, another also based on that speller but including a word predictor, and a third one that was based on the T9 interface developed for mobile phones. User performance was assessed by measuring the time to complete a spelling task and the accuracy of character selection. The d2 test was applied to assess attention and concentration. Sample (N = 14) was divided into two groups basing on of concentration scores. As a result, performance was better with the predictor-enriched interfaces: less time was needed to solve the task and participants made fewer errors (p < .05). There were also significant effects of concentration (p < .05) on performance with the standard P300 speller. In conclusion, the performance of those users with lower concentration level can be improved by providing BCIs with more interactive interfaces. These findings provide substantial evidence in order to highlight the impact of psychological features on BCI performance and should be taken into account for future assistive technology systems.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A brain–computer interface (BCI) system provides a non-muscular channel of communication and interaction by transforming brain signals into computer commands. These systems have been traditionally developed to assist people who, due to different disorders, are in a locked-in state, that is, unable to move despite retaining their cognitive abilities. A paradigmatic example of such patients are people that suffer from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Locked-in patients are therefore totally dependent on others, so the use of BCI systems can provide them with greater autonomy and quality of life. The usability of BCI systems has been supported by a wide variety of studies among the general population as well as people who are affected by a motor disability (Donchin et al., 2000; Sellers and Donchin, 2006; Silvoni et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2005) and, indeed, there is evidence that the use of such systems improves ALS patients' communication and interaction with their environment (Birbaumer, 2006; Wolpaw et al., 2002).

Currently, the most commonly used BCI systems are those based on electroencephalographic (EEG) signals, mainly because they can be recorded in a non-invasive manner and show adequate temporal resolution. Among them, those based on the P300 event-related potential (ERP) are very common due to easiness with which this ERP can be elicited. Specifically, the P300 is a positive deflection in voltage occurring about 300 ms after an infrequent or significant stimulus is perceived (Wolpaw et al., 2002; Woodman, 2010). P300 wave amplitude is typically between 2 μV and 5 μV and is symmetrically distributed around central scalp areas, showing greater amplitude in occipital rather than frontal regions (Krusienski et al., 2008).

When used for the purpose of communication, P300-based BCIs—called P300-based spellers—generally display a keyboard-like alphanumeric matrix in a computer screen. The rows and columns of this matrix are randomly flashed a number of times. To write a character, the user focuses his/her attention to it by mentally counting the number of times that its row and its column is flashed. The perception of each relevant flash produces a change in the EEG, which, on average, will elicit the P300 and, thus, allow the system to identify the row and column of the desired character.

Despite P300-based spellers have shown high levels of daily usability (Sellers et al., 2010), their communication rate is still lower than other alternative assistive technologies, such as eye tracking systems, and there is still room for improving their usability. In this regard, recent studies have attempted to increase user performance and BCI manageability by optimizing EEG signal acquisition (Krusienski et al., 2006), by examining the impact of the properties of the stimuli (Serby et al., 2005), by refining signal processing methods (Krusienski et al., 2008), and by analyzing different display paradigms (Martens et al., 2009; Townsend et al., 2010).

The influence of several psychological characteristics in user performance and usability of P300-based spellers has also been taken into account due to their impact on the amplitude and latency of the P300 component (for a review, see Polich and Kok, 1995). For instance, some empirical studies have highlighted the role of various psychological factors, namely use-induced mental fatigue (Kececi et al., 2006; Murata et al., 2005); sustained attention (Mangun and Buck, 1998); user motivation (Kleih et al., 2010; Nijboer et al., 2010); anxiety (Silva-Sauer et al., 2011) and frustration arising from performance errors (Kleih et al., 2013; Reuderink et al., 2009). With respect to attention, it is important to point out that temporary slips—due to dispersion, mental overload, or task difficulty—can negatively affect task performance (Smallwood and Schooler, 2006) as P300 amplitude modulations have been related to these factors (Wickens et al., 1984, 1983; Gavett et al., 2012; Martens et al., 2009; Townsend et al., 2010). On the other hand, the temporal and spatial characteristics of the interface can influence user's attention and, in turn, his/her performance (Lu et al., 2013; McFarland et al., 2011).

These and other different findings suggest that when attention or concentration levels are diminished, BCI user performance would tend to be lower. Conversely, conditions or interventions that promote higher levels of concentration or sustained attention may lead to better accuracy or shorter completion time on BCI-mediated tasks. The study by Lakey et al. (2011) illustrates this point. These authors examined the effects of an attention-induction procedure—mindfulness-based meditation—on user performance on a BCI speller task and found that participants who received the induction procedure showed more accurate character selection and faster task completion times than control participants.

The current work aims at contributing to these lines of research by verifying the effects of user concentration on performance in a spelling task using three different P300-based BCI systems. First, a P300-based speller with a 7 × 6 symbol matrix—hereafter referred to as Spellermod—that was based on the one proposed by Farwell and Donchin (1988), which has been studied intensively (Bianchi et al., 2010; Krusienski et al., 2008; Sellers et al., 2006); second, a Spellermod provided with a word predictor—hereafter referred to as SpellermodPred—; and third, a P300-based speller showing a reduced 4 × 3 symbol matrix, resembling the T9 interface developed for mobile phones (Grover et al., 1998). This matrix, hereafter referred to as SpellerT9, has been proposed by Ron-Angevin et al., 2015. As using text predictors within a classic speller makes spelling faster (Dunlop and Crossan, 2000) we expected that using the SpellermodPred or the SpellerT9 would be less tiresome than using the Spellermod and thus prevent lapses of concentration due to fatigue. On the other hand, since the SpellerT9 presented a reduced matrixes compared with the SpellermodPred's, spelling with the former would be faster than with the later, but maybe more complicated due to the operation of the T9 system. Thus, we hypothesized that the benefits of having a reduced matrix size might be balanced out by the drawbacks of cognitive overload during the spelling task.

In the following sections we will describe the experimental procedure and analyze and discuss the obtained results.

@&#METHODS@&#

14 healthy volunteers (60% male), with a mean age of 25.50 years (SD = 2.6 years) participated in the study. None of them had been diagnosed of any neurological or motor disease nor had any prior experience using BCI systems. All participants provided their informed consent.

We used a questionnaire that was expressly developed for this study. This questionnaire, called Perceived Sense of BCI Usability Questionnaire, consisted of 10 items that have to be answered by means of a score on a five-point Likert-type scale. Each item was developed to measure factors related to BCI usability, namely, perceived performance duration, clarity of display, confusion when using the interface; use-derived motivation and frustration, sense of control and ease of use.

The user's level of attention was assessed by means of the d2 test (Brickenkamp, 2002). This test, which has been widely used, consists of fourteen lines of ds and ps marked with one, two, three or four dashes. The person taking the test is required to cross out all occurrences of the letter d with two dashes, spending no longer than 20 s on each line. From this we assessed the subject's selective attention by computing the concentration performance score as the number of correctly processed items minus the number of errors of commission. The d2 test has shown adequate levels of reliability (α > .90) and good test-retest reliability. Buttner (cited in Brickenkamp, 2002) studied a sample of 110 college students, and found high levels of test-retest association (r = 0.87), even though the d2 retest occurred after a six months interval.

EEG was recorded using gold electrodes placed at positions P3/4, PO7/8, Fz, Cz, Pz, and Oz, according to the 10/20 international system. All channels were referenced to the left earlobe and grounded to position Fpz. The EEG was amplified through a 16 channel biosignal g.BSamp (Guger Technologies, Graz Austria). The amplifier settings were 0.5 and 1000 Hz for the band-pass filter, the notch filter (50 Hz) was on, and the sensitivity was 500 μV. The EEG was then digitized at a rate of 256 Hz by a 12-bit resolution NI USB-6210 data acquisition card (National Instruments Corp.).

The three P300-based spellers were implemented through the BCI2000 platform (Schalk et al., 2004). The values of the temporal parameters for all the spellers were based on those used by Donchin et al., 2000. Specifically, each row and column was randomly flashed 10 times, so each key was intensified 20 times. The identification of the attended key was thus based on averaging 10 EEG traces per row and column to reveal the P300 waveform.

The duration of each flash was 125 ms and the interstimulus interval (ISI) between flashes was also 125 ms. There was a pause of 2 s after each sequence of flashes (i.e., after a character had been selected) and also in the beginning of each trial. It is important to notice that the duration of a sequence of flashes depended on the size matrix, so that bigger matrices entailed longer sequences.

The main features of the three interfaces are described below.

The SpellerT9 presented the user a 4 × 3 virtual keyboard (see Fig. 1
                           a), in which only eight keys—the ones corresponding to the numbers 2 to 9—were used for spelling. Each of those keys corresponded to three to four letters.

To disambiguate key sequences, we implemented a modified version of the T9 predictive text system, which worked as follows. Given a certain sequence, the system computed the corresponding textonyms, that is, all the possible combinations of letters with lexical meaning that could be formed with those contained on the selected keys. These textonyms were then ordered according to their lexical frequency in the Spanish language (Real Academia Española, 2013). The system regarded the most frequently used one as the word the user was trying to type and accordingly displayed it in the text box below the keyboard (see Fig. 1a). If that was indeed the desired word, the user accepted it by selecting the key 0 (i.e., selecting the command espacio), which simply added a blank space afterwards. Otherwise, he/she could personally disambiguate the key sequence by selecting the key C (i.e., select the command cambiar) to switch to a new keyboard that displayed the four most frequently used textonyms in row-major order. We chose to show four instead of nine textonyms in order to make it easier for the user to find the desired word.

For example, given the key sequence 2272, the word casa would be displayed in the text box below the keyboard. If the user selected the key C, then the textonyms casa, cara, capa, and basa would be displayed on the new keyboard (see Fig. 1b). The user could then select one of those textonyms, in which case the word plus an additional blank space were displayed in the mentioned text box. Alternatively, he/she could go back to the previous keyboard by selecting the left arrow key (i.e., selecting the command volver).

Following we added a word predictor to the SpellerT9 in order to further increase the user's communication rate. In this case, given a certain key sequence of at least one element, the predictor computed the lexical frequency of all the words starting with any of all the possible combinations of letters contained on the selected keys, that is, not only textonyms—as in the implemented T9 predictive text system—but also combinations with no lexical meaning. The predictor then regarded the most frequently used one as the word the user was trying to type and displayed it in a text box to the left of the keyboard (see Fig. 1a). If that was indeed the desired word, the user could validate it by selecting the key 1 (i.e., selecting the command validar). As a consequence, the word plus an addition blank space were written in the text box below the keyboard. Again, given the key sequence 2272, the predicted word would have been barcelona. Therefore, whereas the word predictor could suggest the user words of more letters than the number of keys selected, the T9 predictive text system only computed words of as many letters as selected keys.

To delete characters the user had to select the key X (i.e., select the command borrar). To write digits, he/she had to select the key C just after a blank space had been introduced, either to validate a textonym or because of having accepted the word retrieved by the word predictor. The user could then type the digits from 0 to 9 just by selecting the corresponding keys. Once the desired sequence digits was written, the user had to select the key C again to continue writing words. This selection automatically added a blank space to the numeric sequence.

As the SpellerT9 displayed a 4 × 3 keyboard, the time needed to select a key was 19.5 s—the initial 2 s pause plus the time needed to flash four rows and three columns 10 times each.

The modified version of the T9 predictive text system as well as the word predictor were implemented using MATLAB 2010b (The Mathworks Inc., Massachusetts, USA). The corresponding functions were called from BCI2000.

The Spellermod presented the user a 7 × 6 virtual keyboard, shown in Fig. 1c. The last row contained only two command keys—BORRAR and ESPACIO—for deleting the last inserted character and introducing a blank space, respectively. The characters typed by the user were displayed inside a text box below the keyboard.

Therefore, the Spellermod was essentially the same as the speller studied in Donchin et al. (2000), which indeed was an improved version of the classic proposal of Farwell and Donchin (1988). So, the Spellermod served us as a benchmark for comparing the proposed SpellerT9.

According to the aforementioned temporal parameters, the time needed to select a key of the Spellermod interface was 34.5 s—the initial 2 s pause plus the time needed to flash seven rows and six columns 10 times each—, that is, almost twice the time needed to select a key from the SpellerT9.

As we had implemented a word predictor in the SpellerT9 to make typing faster, we decided to add that feature to the Spellermod to control its influence on user performance. Thus, we developed the SpellermodPred, which presented a 7 × 6 virtual keyboard that included the command key VALIDAR (see Fig. 1d). The time needed to select a key using the SpellermodPred was 34.5 s, like in the Spellermod.

The typed characters were displayed in a text box below the keyboard and fed into the word predictor. The suggested word was displayed in an additional text box to the left of the former (see Fig. 1d). In case that word were the one the user wanted to write, he/she could do it by selecting the command key VALIDAR. As in the SpellerT9, that selection implied writing the suggested word and adding a blank space afterwards.

The word predictor was implemented in the same way as the predictor of the SpellerT9.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

All participants completed the d2 attentional test before using any of the three aforementioned spellers. These were tested through a within-subjects design. Specifically, each speller was tested by each participant on a different day or session, and the time lapse between the three resultant sessions lasted between three and five days, inclusive. The order in which the spellers were tested was counterbalanced over participants in order to control the potential effects of experience. The features of the interfaces are described below in more detail. The d2 test was only administered in the first session, because its scores are considered stable over periods of up to six days (Brickenkamp, 2002).

Each BCI session was split into three phases: calibration, training and assessment. Each phase lasted about 15 min, depending on the participant's ability with the corresponding speller.

During the calibration phase participants performed the spelling task without receiving any feedback. The aim of this phase was to characterize the participant's P300 event-related potentials, including his/her electrophysiological features. Specifically, the calibration phase for the Spellermod and the SpellermodPred consisted of spelling five short commonly used Spanish words, namely, “hoy” (today), “sin” (without), “casa” (house), “remo” (oar) and “tus” (your). As for the SpellerT9, it consisted of spelling five sequences, namely, “159”, “357”, “1xc3”, “4796”, and “258”. Data from spelling the first calibration word or sequence were discarded for corresponding to the user's very first experience with the BCI system.

After calibration, the participants proceeded with a training phase, in which they were asked to the corresponding BCI speller freely and spell whatever message they wanted. They were reminded that in order to spell a certain character they have to gaze at it on the virtual keyboard while mentally counting the number of times its row or column was flashed. This task was requested in order to make the participant sustain his/her attention on the desired character. This training phase made it possible for participants to gain confidence in using the system and also to explore its different functions.

The last part of each session was the assessment phase. In this phase the participants had to complete a spelling task, which consisted of writing the target sentence “experiencia bci en la universidad de malaga” (bci experience at the university of malaga).

At the end of each session the participant completed the Perceived Sense of BCI Usability Questionnaire.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The performance results of the sample of participants from copy-spelling the target sentence are reported in Table 1
                        , along with their scores on the d2 test. Mean values are shown in Fig. 2
                        . Performance was measured in terms of the time needed to complete the sentence (in seconds) and the number of incorrectly selected characters (i.e., errors) during spelling.

We conducted a multivariate analysis of variance to assess potential differences in performance when using each spellers. The concentration level, based on the score on the d2 test, was considered as a between-subjects factor. In this way, we divided the participants into two groups according to their score on the d2 test, using the median (207.5) as the cut-off point. The used speller was a within-subjects factor.

The analysis revealed a main effect of the used speller, F (2, 24) = 116.32, p < .01, 
                           
                              
                                 η
                                 p
                                 2
                              
                           
                         = .91. Participants wrote the target sentence with the SpellerT9 (M = 650.46 s, SD = 223.43 s) in less time than with the SpellermodPred (M = 1118.78 s, SD = 286.64 s) or the Spellermod (M = 1779.21 s, SD = 349.40 s). No other main effects nor interaction effects were found.

Regarding the selection errors, the interaction between the within- and between-subjects factor was significant, F (2, 24) = 4.12, p < .03, 
                           
                              
                                 η
                                 p
                                 2
                              
                           
                         = .25. While there were fairly similar errors in both groups when using the SpellerT9 (M = 3.14 s, SD = 3.86 s) and the SpellermodPred (M = 3.07 s, SD = 4.27 s), the number of errors when using the Spellermod was significantly higher in the low concentration level group (M = 7.88, SD = 6.46) with respect to the high concentration level group (M = 1.57, SD = 3.73). Fig. 3
                         shows this differential effect of concentration level as a function of the used speller.

Different linear explanatory models were tested to determine the magnitude of the effect of concentration levels on performance in each interface. The time to complete the task and selection errors were the criteria for these models. Thus, independent models were tested for each interface. To consider introducing a factor within a model the assumption that this has to be associated with the criterion, must be satisfied. Explanatory models were carried out using the stepwise procedure.

As a result, it should be highlighted that no significant explanatory models were found when performance in the Spellermod session was considered. Otherwise, a significant model was found for the completion time model, F (1, 12) = 7.51; p < .05. This model showed significant explanatory power (R2COR = 0.33). Concentration level was the only variable included in this model (β = −0.62; t = −2.74, p < .02). Another linear model was conducted to explain selection errors with Spellermod. This model was significant, F (1, 12) = 6.36, p < .05; and explained 29.20% of the variance criterion. Concentration level was again the only factor included in this model (β = −0.59; t = −2.52, p < .03).


                        Fig. 4
                         displays the grand averaged P300 waveforms elicited in the sample of healthy subjects when they used each of the three tested spellers to write both the target sentence and their personal sentence.

The visible differences in the P300 waveform between the SpellerT9 and the other two spellers agree with the findings from previous studies (Allison and Pineda, 2003). Nevertheless, they did not affect the use of the SpellerT9 in terms of classification rate according to the reported performance results.

The participants' average response to the items of the Perceived Sense of BCI Usability Questionnaire after having used each speller are shown in Table 2
                        . The answers indicate the participants degree of agreement with a given statement (i.e., item) by means of a five-point Likert-type scale (1 = strongly disagree; 2 = disagree 3 = neutral; 4 = agree; 5 = strongly agree).

We analyzed the answers by a series of Friedman's tests. These tests revealed that the answers were significantly different across spellers for two items, specifically the statement “I found the session long”, χ2 (2, N = 14) = 19.69, p = .001, and the statement “I found using the speller tiresome”, χ2 (2, N = 14) = 9.50, p = .009. A series of three Wilcoxon's matched-pairs tests revealed that participants agreed more with finding the Spellermod session long (M = 3.86) than with finding the SpellermodPred session long (M = 3.07), Z = −2.209, p = .027, and also than with finding the SpellerT9 session long (M = 1.86), Z = −3.208, p = .001. Regarding these two spellers, they agreed more with finding the SpellermodPred session long than with finding the SpellerT9 long, Z = −2.846, p = .004.

We conducted another series of three Wilcoxon's tests to compare the scores in the item related to the fatigue experimented with each speller. These tests revealed that participants tended to agree more with finding the Spellermod tiresome (M = 3.71) than with finding the SpellermodPred tiresome (M = 3.29), Z = −2.121, p = .034, and also than with finding the SpellerT9 tiresome (M = 2.14), Z = −2.703, p = .007. Moreover, the SpellerT9 was found less tiresome than the SpellermodPred, Z = −2.430, p = .015. According to these results, both the SpellerT9 and the SpellermodPred were perceived as more user-friendly and less exhausting spellers. This result may be explained by the fact that the implemented word predictor made it possible to reduce the spelling time and, in turn, the attentional workload of the participants. As for the rest of the statements, we did not find any significant difference regarding the participants' responses.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION@&#

The current study had a twofold goal. On the one hand we aimed at analyzing the effect on user performance of modifying some features of the classical P300-based speller proposed by Farwell and Donchin (1988). These modification consisted of substituting the 7 × 6 virtual keyboard display with a 4 × 3 display resembling the T9 system originally developed for mobile phones, which we called SpellerT9. On the other hand we wanted to test the impact of the user's concentration level on his/her performance with this type of BCI-based communication systems.

The results of this study showed that the SpellerT9's characteristics contributed to improve user performance by reducing the time needed to spell a relatively long target sentence with respect to the use of two other, more conventional spellers. Importantly, the highest number of errors corresponded to participants with lowest concentration levels when they used the classical 7 × 6 BCI speller without a word predictor (i.e., the Spellermod). Therefore, our study indicates that, while reducing the matrix size per se did not lead to an increase of selections errors, the difficulty to focus one's attention on the task at hand did increase the errors when the used speller lacked dynamism, as it occurred with the Spellermod, which was regarded by the participants as more boring and less attractive. Conversely, the SpellerT9 was found to be the least tiresome of the three. As a consequence, dynamic interfaces that add engaging features such as the word predictor that used both the SpellerT9 and SpellermodPred may help users to maintain their attention during the interaction through the BCI system. In other words, we could conclude that the less dynamic the interface is, the more focused the user has to be in order to achieve a given level of performance.

Our study thus contributes to the line of research that tackles the importance of attention levels and concentration in BCI usability (Hammer et al., 2012; Mangun and Buck, 1998; Tan et al., 2009). For instance, in an outstanding study, Lakey et al. (2011) concluded that the training that both enhances attentional resources and diminishes the tendency to become distracted—in that case, mindfulness-based training—might improve user performance when interacting through BCI systems. Indeed, our results show that BCI users with low concentration levels made more selection errors than users with high concentration levels but only when using the Spellermod, a less interactive BCI than the SpellermodPred or the SpellerT9. On the contrary, when a more dynamic BCI was used—the SpellerT9 or the SpellermodPred—, individuals with lower concentration levels were nevertheless able to maintain their attention enough to interact effectively with the speller.

As a limitation, this study assesses performance tests through virtual interfaces with some features (e.g., relatively small dimensions, velocity by which a character is typed) that may lead to distorted results since it is easier for healthy individuals with intact cognitive ability. It is important to mention that some studies show cognitive impairment associated with ALS patients (Woolley et al., 2010; Watermeyer et al., 2015), who are main users of this type of interface. The prolonged use of these high mental effort required interfaces may cause confusion in patients with cognitive deficits.

However, initial evidence has existed already that it shows satisfying performance in ALS patients using small-size matrix (Ron-Angevin et al., 2015). In his work Ron-Angevin et al. (2015) showed encouraging results, but the limit is, the study is not a long-term study and only one patient participated. Future research should focus on testing performance and interaction using these interfaces with larger samples of healthy individuals as well as cognitively impaired individuals.

The results of our study are therefore relevant because they point out of the importance of human factors, specifically attention and concentration, in the performance of BCI users. They also suggest that those training procedures that enhance these psychological factors could improve the effectiveness of such systems.

Future research should therefore aim at developing more dynamic and interactive interfaces, which could help users with low levels of attention to maintain adequate performance. Such interfaces, like the proposed SpellerT9 or the SpellermodPred, could thus improve communication and interaction with the environment for people with motor disabilities. The use of larger samples in longitudinal studies would help to confirm this impact of human factors on BCI performance.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was partially funding by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation, project TEC 2011-26395; and by the European Fund ERDF. The research team would like to thank all the volunteers who participated in this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

