@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Using event related potentials to identify a user's behavioural intention aroused by product form design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Product form designs can evoke diverse user experience.


                        
                        
                           
                           No neural research on behavioural intention aroused by product form design has been done.


                        
                        
                           
                           Product form designs with an ability to arouse subjects' behavioural intention can evoke enhanced N300 and LPP.


                        
                        
                           
                           The proposed method leads to the development of user experience measurement and product evaluation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Behavioural intention

User experience

Event related potentials

N300

Late positive potential

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The capacity of product form to arouse user's behavioural intention plays a decisive role in further user experience, even in purchase decision, while traditional methods rarely give a fully understanding of user experience evoked by product form, especially the feeling of anticipated use of product. Behavioural intention aroused by product form designs has not yet been investigated electrophysiologically. Hence event related potentials (ERPs) were applied to explore the process of behavioural intention when users browsed different smart phone form designs with brand and price not taken into account for mainly studying the brain activity evoked by variety of product forms. Smart phone pictures with different anticipated user experience were displayed with equiprobability randomly. Participants were asked to click the left mouse button when certain picture gave them a feeling of behavioural intention to interact with. The brain signal of each participant was recorded by Curry 7.0. The results show that pictures with an ability to arouse participants' behavioural intention for further experience can evoke enhanced N300 and LPPs (late positive potentials) in central-parietal, parietal and occipital regions. The scalp topography shows that central-parietal, parietal and occipital regions are more activated. The results indicate that the discrepancy of ERPs can reflect the neural activities of behavioural intention formed or not. Moreover, amplitude of ERPs occurred in corresponding brain areas can be used to measure user experience. The exploring of neural correlated with behavioural intention provide an accurate measurement method of user's perception and help marketers to know which product can arouse users' behavioural intention, maybe taken as an evaluating indicator of product design.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Industry never stops research on new and improved products from user's aspects. Users face a vast number of diverse products which are similar in forms or even interactions. Products that sell well in the market implicate a consideration of user experience (e.g. emotion, meanings, and positive actions) into product design (Seva et al., 2007; María-Jesús and Margarita, 2014). Product design should not only satisfy user's needs from usability (Kuijk et al., 2015) but the ability to grasp user's attention at the first sight, and finally trigger the feeling of anticipated use of product (i.e. behavioural intention). As Norman (2004) pointed out that only if a product arousal user's intention or positive feelings will “what is it?” and then “how much is it” happen. Recently, user's needs of experiential aspects such as emotion, aesthetic experience, desire to use, positive feelings and so on has been a focus in product design (Seva et al., 2011; Hassenzahl and Tractinsky, 2006; Law et al., 2014; María-Jesús and Margarita, 2014).

The process of user experience can be divided into using and anticipated use processes based on the definition of “perceptions and responses resulting from the anticipated use and/or use of a product” (ISO 9241-210, 2010). While most of the researches focused on the using process, the anticipated use process has received limited attention. If a product cannot arouse a user's behavioural intention, further interaction with product would not go ahead. Behavioural intention is the sole determinant of actual behaviours occurring (Davis, 1989), namely earlier perception of product attributes will colour later evaluations of other characteristics (Mugge and Schoormans, 2012).

Behavioural intention has been researched for decades. TRA (theory of reasoned action) (Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975) and TAM (technology acceptance model) (Davis, 1989) are best-known researches of behavioural intention. Lots of researchers investigated the factors effecting behavioural intention. Venkatesh and Davis (2000) studied the processes of before using, first introduced and three months after using of product. Questionnaires were used to obtain user's perception and feeling, they found that social influence processes and cognitive instrumental processes significantly influenced user's behavioural intention. Venkatesh et al. (2012) promoted a united theory of acceptance and use of technology according to TAM, and found factors affecting user's behavioural attention by questionnaires such as price, habit, hedonic, etc. These studies explored the relationships between behavioural intention and evaluation of products. However, there is a substantial lack of researches studying the neural mechanism of behavioural intention aroused by product forms (Céline, 2013). Moreover the subjective methods and survey cannot completely reflect a user's real feeling, in addition, numerous factors motivate participants to distort the reporting of their feelings (e.g. time pressure, memory ability and incentive) (Morin, 2011). Unfortunately, there exists bias in the results for the assumption that people are actually able to describe their cognitive process. The results totally depend on users' willingness and competency to describe how they feel when they are exposed to a product (Ariely and Berns, 2010; Calvert and Brammer, 2012; Guo et al., 2015). Generally, behavioural intention is a potential and intuitive feeling, or even without rational reasoning and hard to describe with words. Hence, more accurate methods are needed to measure user's inner intention even unconsciously formed.

In this challenging context, brain imaging has offered promising methodological alternatives. There are several techniques for collecting brain activity data, in which electroencephalography (EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) are the most used methods (Sylcott et al., 2013; Daliri et al., 2013). As one of the well established non-invasive methods for measuring and mapping brain activity, EEG is more appropriate for brain data collection for lower cost of experiment design and at very high temporal resolution (Daliri et al., 2013; Daliri, 2013; Morin, 2011). In the experiment, electrodes are placed on the scalp of a participant by using an EEG cap. Then event related potentials (ERPs) can be obtained through subsequent processing which can reflect people's psychological activities (Luck, 2014), are the sum of electrical responses of EEGs in response to some cognitive events with three key parameters: Amplitude, latency, and distribution over the scalp (Daliri et al., 2013). Studies pointed out that visual attention-related brain activities evoked by stimulus could reflect user's cognition even with a low level of attention (Kawasaki and Yamaguchi, 2012) and can be regarded as the signature of detection and identification of objects (Daliri et al., 2013; Behroozi et al., 2015; Taghizadeh-Sarabi et al., 2015).

And with the development of neurophysiology and mature of measurement techniques, there are more researches to investigate consumer's behaviours and decisions from brain cognition in product design (Morin, 2011). For example, Handy et al. (2008) explored the human neurocognitive systems of commercial branding images evaluation by ERPs. They found that hedonic evaluations of everyday images are rapid and implicit, and the images disliked appear to stand out. Sylcott et al. (2013) used fMRI to determine what parts of the brain are primarily involved with a given trade-off between form and function. In the past, ERPs has been used to investigate how product characteristics such as brand, price and packaging affect consumer decision (Sylcott et al., 2013). Whereas these studies focus on the judgment process of users, in the current study we focus on whether product form designs can arouse user's behavioural intention or not.

This research seeks to investigate the neural responses in the perception of product form design, namely features can give users good first impression (Lin et al., 2007) or arouse their behavioural intention (Davis, 1989), on which users choose a product mostly depend. In this study, ERPs and behavioural data were combined to inform designers the forming process of user's behavioural intention. Participants were asked to pick out the smart phone pictures that could arouse their behavioural intention and click the left mouse button. At the same time, the EEG signal of each participant was collected. Finally, ERPs obtained in two conditions (intended and no response) were compared. This study did not consider the influence of price and brand because the objective is to investigate the brain activity evoked by product form designs.

The understanding of sex differences in processing of visual information (Kret and De Gelder, 2012) is beyond our aim and is a topic for future study, so eleven healthy right-handed males (aging from 21 to 26 years, mean age of 23.8, SD = 2.14) from Northeastern University majoring in management science and engineering with a background of ergonomic were recruited as participants. They were all with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and without history of neurological or psychiatric disorders. They all signed written consent forms to participate before the experiment and received a gift as compensation.

The stimuli were designed by Pro/ENGINEER Wildfire 5.0 (PTC). Finally four smart phone pictures with differences in the whole feeling were selected and another five were picked from websites. The Adobe Photoshop® 7.0 was used to eliminate the brand loyalty. The resolutions of pictures were set to 700 × 460 pixel, which made the smart phones more realistic-looking. The pictures were browsed with the same angle.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants sat in front of a computer screen comfortably in a quiet and soft light room and they were asked to focus on the central of the screen. The participants viewed the stimuli from a distance of 70 cm and had a visual angel of 11.4° × 5.9°. The task was programmed and presented using E-Prime professional (vision2.0, Psychology Software Tools). Stimuli were displayed randomly, and manual responses to the target were made by pressing the left mouse button when a smart phone picture can give him a behavioural intention for further user experience. Each picture was repeated 40 times, and the task paradigm of experiment was shown as Fig. 1
                        . The representation time of smart phone pictures was 800 ms, and 1000–1200 ms for blank screen. There were four times of rest. The entire experiment lasted about 35 min, including electrode placement and instructions.

The EEG signals were continuously recorded using Neuroscan EEG system (Neurosoft Labs Inc) with 21 Ag/AgCl electrodes (Fig. 2
                        ). The electrodes location was based on an expanded version of the international 10–20 electrode placement system. A reference electrode was placed on the left mastoid with the midpoint of FPZ and FZ location as the ground. Vertical and horizontal electro-oculographic activity (EOG) was recorded with additional electrodes located 1.5 cm above and below the left eye and 1.5 cm outside the outer canthi of both eyes. All EEG electrode impedances were maintained below 5 kΩ. The EEG signals were filtered with a band pass of 0.05–100 Hz and digitized at a rate of 1000 Hz through Curry 7.0 (Neurosoft Labs Inc).

Offline data was processed by applying Curry 7.0 SBA (Neurosoft Labs Inc). EEG signals were computed using EEG epochs that started from 200 ms before stimuli onset to 800 ms after stimuli onset. Moreover, each epoch was baseline corrected using the signal during 200 ms that preceded the onset of the stimulus. Eye movement artifacts were rejected and epochs with amplitude greater than 50 μV were automatically rejected. Event related potentials were then averaged separately for each channel and stimulus type. The averages per channel were low-pass filtered at 1–30 Hz. The event related potentials analyses were conducted on the mean amplitude values for specific sets of electrodes within predefined time windows. The single-subject ERPs were then used to derive the grand averaged waveforms for display and analysis. The principle of ERPs recording and analyzing is shown as Fig. 3
                        .

@&#RESULTS@&#

Each stimulus was displayed 40 times randomly. When a participant had an intention to use the stimulus, then he clicked the left mouse button, else no response was occurred. The behavioural data (Table 1
                        ) was collected by E-Prime 2.0. For example, stimulus 2 was displayed 40 times totally, and participant 1 had clicked the left mouse button 28 times, so the number of times he had the intention to use this stimulus is 28. Moreover, the average response time was 542 msec (SD = 104.35 msec). The evoked ERPs waveforms by stimuli can be obtained after at least to 20–30 trails of the same event, even to 1000 trails in some psychological experiments (Luck, 2014). In addition, the participants may click the mouse with a mistake, so the number of times each smart phone picture was selected as anticipated use by each participant should be more than 30 times to obtain ERPs. If the times are less than 5, then the participant had no behavioural intention. The stimuli were divided into two groups based on the behavioural results (intended and no response) in Table 1, which could ensure the comparisons between similar stimuli.

Grand averaged ERPs waveforms for intended and no response are shown in Fig. 4
                        , and topographic maps for each time window are shown as Fig. 5
                        . Mean amplitudes across scalp locations and conditions are reported in Table 2
                         with two-sample paired t-test. The ERPs analyses were conducted on the mean amplitude values for specific sets of electrodes within predefined time windows by within-subject repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), corrected with Greenhouse–Geisser correction. An alpha level of 0.05 was used for statistical tests. The 21 electrodes are divided into five subgroups: a frontal group (F3, Fz, F4), a central group (C3, Cz, C4), a central-parietal group (CP3, CPz, CP4), a parietal group (P3, Pz, P4), and an occipital group (O1, Oz, and O2) according to Cona et al. (2015). The repeat ANOVAs were run on each of two poststimuli time windows: a 260–340 msec window capturing the frontal/central N200 and capturing the central-parietal/parietal/occipital N300, a 400–600 msec window capturing the frontal/central P300 and capturing the central-parietal/parietal/occipital LPP (late positive potential).

For N200 (260–340 msec), the interaction Condition × Sites[F(1,10) = 5.578, p = 0.040, η2 = 0.358] is significant. The simple main effect revealed that on frontal sites pictures which can arouse user's behavioural intention elicited larger N200 than no response pictures (p = 0.014).

The interaction Condition × Sites [F(1,10) = 7.598, p = 0.020, η2 = 0.432] is significant for P300 (400–600 msec). The simple main effect revealed that on frontal sites pictures which can arouse user's behavioural intention elicited larger P300 than no response pictures (p = 0.014).

There was significant main effect of condition on central-parietal, parietal and occipital sites, [F(1,10) = 7.958, p = 0.018, η2 = 0.443] and sites [F(2,20) = 25.977, p = 0.000, η2 = 0.722], but without interactions Condition × Sites [F(2,20) = 2.711, p = 0.101, η2 = 0.213] for N300 (260–340 msec). And pictures that can arouse participants' behavioural intention evoked larger N300 than no response.

For LPP (400–600 msec) occurring on central-parietal, parietal and occipital sites, there was significant main effect of condition[F(1,10) = 5.394, p = 0.043, η2 = 0.350] and sites [F(2,20) = 28.884, p = 0.000, η2 = 0.743], but without interaction Condition × Sites [F(2,20) = 1.532, p = 0.240, η2 = 0.133]. And pictures that can arouse participants' behavioural intention evoked larger LPP than no response.

Consistent with the outcomes of statistics (Table 2), the peak potential of N200 and P300 were distributed on the frontal and central scalp areas, and they were stronger in frontal–central area in the condition of no response. The peak potential of N300 and LPP were distributed on the central-parietal, parietal and occipital scalp areas and they were stronger in central-parietal and parietal area in the condition of intended (Fig. 4).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

To arouse user's behavioural intention for further user experience is a key factor in marketing. If a product cannot evoke user's behavioural intention, then further experience would not proceed, which may lead to lower sales. ERPs were used to explore the neural activities of the subjective behavioural intention for visually presented smart phone pictures. The results highlight that larger N200 and P300 were evoked by no response pictures than intended ones on frontal and central scalp areas. However, larger N300 and LPP were evoked by intended pictures than no response ones on central-parietal, parietal and occipital scalp areas.

As the statistical results shown, there was main effect of intended pictures on frontal and central scalp areas for N200. Previous researches show that N200 related to people's cognition emphasizes its role in stimulus orienting which is typically found at frontal electrode locations and is an endogenous effected by physical features of stimuli (Folstein and Van Petten, 2008). Enhanced N200 evoked by no response pictures in frontal and central area indicates that higher order cognitive process and judgment are formed, and it's suggested as a neural indicator of response inhibition (Ernst et al., 2013; Li et al., 2013; Daliri et al., 2013). In the experiment, participants were required to find out the smart phones they anticipated to use, which is a process of object detection and classification (Li et al., 2013; Daliri et al., 2013). That is to say that N200 will be enhanced when participants did no response or they didn't prefer the object even there was no response inhibition task (Handy et al., 2008). Enhanced N200 is related to mismatch between the stimuli and perception (Wu et al., 2010), so no response smart phones mean larger mismatch between displayed and what they intended, the result is more enhanced N200 evoked.

There was main effect of condition on central-parietal, parietal and occipital cites for N300 peaking around 300 msec, and enhanced N300 evoked by intended pictures. N300 is thought to be sensitive to emotional stimuli, and enhanced when positive stimuli were displayed, particularly pronounced over parietal regions (Cona et al., 2015). In this view, smart phone pictures which have the ability to arouse participants' intention of anticipated use can elicit positive feelings, so enhanced N300 was evoked by intended group. The task required the participants to found out the cue (i.e. intended smart phones) and click the mouse button, which is a process of cue detection (West, 2011). And N300 was enhanced when participants found out the intended pictures which may be more match with their anticipation (Hamm et al., 2002).

Generally, P300 is thought to reflect the allocation of attention towards task-relevant stimuli such as target stimuli (Polich, 2007; Daliri, 2013) and will be enhanced by non-target stimuli on frontaltocentral area. Similarly, when non intended pictures (non-target) are displayed, enhanced P300 was evoked. The larger amplitude of P300 means response inhibition and is related to object detection and judgment or object recognition (Daliri, 2013). In this case, namely pictures evoked enhanced P300 to inhibit the button clicking when participants have no behavioural intention. Pick out the intended pictures and click the mouse button is a task requiring greater amount of attentional resources or similar to object recognition (Daliri, 2013), so P300 amplitude is smaller (Polich, 2007).

As the repeated-measures ANOVA results show that intended pictures evoked enhanced LPP than no response ones on central-parietal, parietal and occipital cites in time window 400–600 msec. Parietal P300/LPP is associated with higher order cognition, sensitive to intrinsic factor, and related to the reaction or intention to respond (Polich, 2007; Daliri, 2013), and might be especially important in the preparation of regulation action or intention to respond (Bamford et al., 2015; Daliri, 2013), and memory processing (West et al., 2001; Cona et al., 2015). Following the instruction “press the left mouse button when you have a behavioural intention to use this smart phone”, participants were task-driven, and this top-down cognition controls them to make preparation for button press (Vetter and Newen, 2014). This process can be explained by target recognition, when participant found out their intended smart phones, they clicked the left mouse button or had intention to respond (Daliri, 2013). The result is that enhanced LPP when intended pictures displayed.

This study investigated participants' neural activity when finding out the product they had intention to use with ERPs. People find out the products they have intention to use is a process of object recognition (Daliri, 2013), the neural activity generates rich encoded information. How to decode the stimuli from brain signals is yet to be well-discovered (Taghizadeh-Sarabi et al., 2015; Behroozi et al., 2015). Hence methods for EEG Classification and signal processing (Daliri, 2013) will help us investigate user's brain more accurate, which should be taken into consideration.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

ERPs was used to explore user's behavioural intention formed in the earlier stage of user perception (i.e. not real using process) when the user forms a behavioural intention for further user experience. ERPs offer real-time temporal resolution of neural processes, permitting a precise analysis of the time course of neural events when behavioural intention is forming. The investigation of underpinning neural activities evoked by smart phones whether arouse user's behavioural intention can provides basis for discovering the process of cognition and decision when users perceive product design and provide help for designer to grasp user's attention. Moreover, the collection and analysis of consumer's brain signal can help marketers to discern consumer's real thought and to recommend more suitable products.

The results reveal the neural mechanism at the early stage of user experience (i.e. the forming process of anticipated use). The brain activities from pictures displaying to finding out the intended ones can be divided into three stages: (1) The first stage is preliminary visual perception. Participants perceive and detect stimuli's physical attributes and compare with their cognition. Then make a rapid evaluation on the degree that product mesh with their cognition, and some extent of tendency and behavioural intention is shown consciously or unconsciously. The process is reflected on smaller N200 when intended stimuli are displayed. (2) The second is a process of judgment, evaluation and regulation of preparation actions. With the task driven in mind, participants allocate more attention to stimuli and evaluate the intensity of behavioural intention the stimuli evoked. The process reflects on smaller P300 and enhanced N300 when intended stimuli are displayed. (3) Finally cognition is formed and pressing mouse button occurs. With the repetition of stimuli input, they are stored in participants' brain and the cognition of stimuli tends to be stable. Intended stimuli elicit enhanced LPP and the brain regulates the response action.

A final consideration is that the present study was limited to the first impression or visual perception of products, the touch and real interaction process of smartphones should be considered in future research. The prices, brand and functional parameters should be considered. And there exist significant discrepancies between males and females, so different brain activities from males and females should be taken into account for pertinence design. Although product designs can evoke different behavioural intention and be reflected on neural activities, a further issue could be to explore which product features affect user's user experience and how.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 71171041, 71471033). We thank all the participants for carrying out the experiments. Further, we thank the editor and anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and advice.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

