@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Worker evaluation of a macroergonomic intervention in a Brazilian footwear company

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Problems and solutions were effectively identified by participative ergonomics.


                        
                        
                           
                           Participative ergonomics facilitated the implementation of changes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Better work organization improves worker satisfaction.


                        
                        
                           
                           Worker empowerment influenced the positive outcomes of the intervention.


                        
                        
                           
                           A flexible work organization is more suitable for shoe manufacturing.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Participatory ergonomics

Footwear industry

Workers point of view

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This article presents a macroergonomic intervention in a Brazilian footwear company and its evaluation by the workers. Using participatory ergonomics, the traditional Taylor/Ford production system was transformed into a socio-technical one and tested by 100 volunteers working during 3.5 years in a pilot production line. Multiskilling and teamwork were the major changes promoted to enlarge and enrich work and make it more flexible. The workers' evaluation pre- and post-intervention showed an increase in overall satisfaction with the work and more commitment to the results and company targets.
               
               
                  Statement of relevance
                  This study showed that problems and solutions can be identified through participatory ergonomics, that it is easier to involve workers than the managerial staff, and that a macroergonomic intervention, mainly focusing on work organization, led to positive personnel, health and production outcomes, despite management’s resistance to changes.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Footwear manufacturing is an important sector in the Brazilian economy. Brazil is the third largest shoe manufacturer in the world (after China and India) producing 893,900 pairs of shoes per year (mainly for the North American market) in 8200 companies by 348,700 people (Abicalçados, 2011a), representing 4.4% of the 7,885,702 employees in the industrial sector in 2010 (Brasil, 2011). The state of Rio Grande Sul, considered the most important footwear cluster in the world (Abicalçados, 2011b), is responsible for 37% of employment (in 3400 companies) of the Brazilian shoe manufacturing industry (Abicalçados, 2011a).

Despite its importance, the Brazilian footwear manufacturing system is not as modern as it should be: productivity is low (Piccinini, 1990; Ruas, 1992), production is highly dependent on manual work done by minimally skilled (or unskilled) labor (Piccinini, 1990; Prochnick, 1992; Gorini and Siqueira, 1999), as is to be expected from the Taylor/Ford production system (Friedman, 1967; Dejours, 1980; Braverman, 1998) adopted in most shoe manufacturing companies. Environmental conditions are often dangerous (due to the high risk of chemicals used like glue and solvents) and workstations are risky (due to unsafe conditions of the low technology machines and equipment). Work organization where workers work on repetitive, monotonous and fragmented tasks leads to high risk of work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSD) (Renner, 2002, 2007), high rate of accidents (Renner, 2007; Renner et al., 2008; Guimarães et al., 2012), as well as high rate of turnover and absenteeism (Piccinini, 1992; Ruas, 1992; Renner, 2007; Guimarães et al., 2012b).

Ergonomic studies focusing on WMSD risk in shoe manufacturing have been conducted in Japan (Amano et al., 1988); Mexico (Serratos-Perez and Mendiola-Anda, 1993); Italy (Agnesi et al., 1993; Del Bianco et al., 1993); USA (Drury and Wick, 1984; Wick, 1991; Center for Workplace Health Information, 1995; Burton et al., 1996); France (Roquelaure et al., 2002); Brazil (Renner, 2002); Romania (Croitoru et al., 2007); and Cuba (Herrera and Huatuco, 2011). Ahasan et al. (2002) evaluated the satisfaction with shiftwork and work in a shoe components manufacturer in Bangladesh. Few studies focused on noise (Herbert and Miles, 1991) and on the exposure to chemicals (Decouflé and Walrath, 1983; Garabrant and Wegman, 1984; Pippard and Acheson, 1985; Walker et al., 1993; Roquelaure et al., 1994; Fuh et al., 1996; Mayan et al., 1999; Jockel et al., 2000; Davila et al., 2005; Croitoru et al., 2007).

Most studies concentrate on the evaluation of environmental, tools and workstation conditions (i.e. microergonomics). The studies at the Red Wing Shoes (Center for Workplace Health Information, 1995) at the Hanover Shoe Company (Burton et al., 1996) and in a Cuban shoe manufacturer (Herrera and Huatuco, 2011) were the only studies reporting an ergonomic intervention and evaluation of the work organization (i.e. macroergonomics), which included workstation redesign, job rotation and teamwork, exercise and conditioning program, and special training on ergonomics. However, they did not propose a complete modification of the work conditions, did not detail the intervention and did not report the level of worker participation.

This article presents a participatory, macroergonomic intervention in a Brazilian shoe manufacturing company that aimed to enhance the social, technical, and work design sub-systems of the company's socio-technical system and improve workers' quality of life, as well as productivity and product quality. The study can be considered a special case in the Brazilian shoe-manufacturing sector, which is very traditional and often resistant to change. Actually, promoting changes by ergonomic interventions is not easy (Vink et al., 2008); but in developing countries where most footwear companies are located, it might be even more difficult. Most factories are in developing countries because shoe manufacturing is labor intensive, competition is frequently based on price and the low wages paid in these countries are one of the ways to reduce production costs (ABDI, 2008).


                     Ahasan et al. (2001) stressed the differences between ergonomic interventions in developing and developed countries such as the conditions of health, safety, and wellbeing of industrial workers, climate, work culture and organizational structure. While many businesses in developing countries wish to make a quick return on their investment, capital and machinery (sometimes leading to excessive working hours to increase production under unhealthy and unsafe conditions), union leaders may want to pursue the goals of the labor union organization rather than reducing the difficulties of work (Ahasan et al., 2001). Brazil is not an exception in this scenario. One of the characteristics of Brazilian trade unions is to fight for (small) increases to wages and to pay less attention to labor conditions. The country has a specific regulation on Ergonomics, named NR17 (Brasil, 1978a); the inspection of the quality of working conditions is under responsibility of the Ministry of Labor through their regional branches but there is not enough trained staff to audit all companies.

Participatory ergonomics was used in the study considering that participation by both workers and managers in identifying and implementing change (e.g., Vink et al., 2008) is an essential component of a macroergonomic intervention. Macroergonomic interventions are complex and have multiple components (Neumann et al., 2010), but the participatory approach has the ability to address both physical and organizational aspects of the work system design (Brown, 1990, 1993; Nagamachi, 1995; Lanoie and Tavenas, 1996; Wilson and Haines, 1997; St-Vincent et al., 1998; Wilson, 1995; Imada, 2000; Haines et al., 2002) leading to increased levels of job communication and improved work content, which has been associated with reduced pain (Rivilis et al., 2006) as well as increase in productivity (Vink et al., 2008).

Although top and middle management are usually involved in participatory interventions in developed countries (Vink et al., 2008), they are often a stumbling block in interventions in developing countries (Scott, 2009): in general they are not interested in changing established operational routines to adjust to worker needs, desires and wants. In Brazil, the participatory approach is not well accepted by some who understand that the change might actually be imposed on workers (Dwyer, 2000), which jeopardizes the democratic value of the intervention. There are questions about whether participatory management in Brazilian enterprises is a tool for worker participation or worker domination, or in more direct terms, whether it is a managerial strategy for worker manipulation (Martins, 2000), whether the workers are satisfied with participatory management, and whether they want a different approach (Fensterseifer, 1995).

The study presented in this paper was possible due to its three-party character: besides the University, there was a governmental grant and participation of the Ministry of Labor, and the company’s industrial director who supported the research despite resistance by other directors, top and middle management as well as union officials. Since 1994, the Brazilian shoe-manufacturing sector has been experiencing a crisis due to the opening of the commercial trade and the valorization of the Brazilian Real currency in relation to the American Dollar: this made it more difficult for the Brazilian industry to compete with low-priced Chinese shoes (ABDI, 2008). Therefore, the company's industrial director understood that the traditional production system was precarious and that the labor force was not sufficiently skilled to compete at a world level. He foresaw that improving the socio-technical system could make a difference to increase the company's competitiveness in the world market, and also that the company could become a model for the Brazilian footwear manufacturing sector.

The following sections describe the participatory research method, the macroergonomic intervention and its evaluation by 100 workers of the study pilot production line and their managerial staff. The validation based on social/health/safety and production results have been already reported (Guimarães et al., 2012b).

@&#METHOD@&#

The study is a longitudinal, multifactor intervention in a single shoe factory. It was conducted from May 2002 to August 2005 in one of the eight plants of the sixth largest footwear factory in Brazil, located in the Paranhana Valley, state of Rio Grande do Sul. It had 1800 employees on average during the study period and manufactured about 22,000 pairs of shoes per month, under a Taylor/Ford production model.

The study has an action-research character based on the participatory, socio-technical approach of the Macroergonomic Work Analysis (MA) (Guimarães, 1999). MA encompasses the steps of a participatory ergonomics process (Vink et al., 2008): introduction (stage (0) named launching in MA), analysis (encompassing stage (1) appraisal and (2) diagnosis in MA), idea generation, selection, prototyping, testing and adjustments (all in stage (3) proposal of solutions in MA), implementation, and evaluation (stage (4) validation in MA), with feedback loops provided by discussion forums in between stages.

The forums are a means of keeping the participants engaged and aware of the intervention process. During the 3.5 years of the intervention there were (a) four meetings of 1-h duration with the 100 workers of the pilot production line, the company's Ergonomics Committee (COERGO), the managerial staff and the ergonomics team; and (b) thirty 30-min meetings with the COERGO.

MA stages are detailed below. Stages 0, 1, 3 and 4 involve workers, management, HRD, Safety and Health Department (SHD) and union representatives in addition to the ergonomists. Stage 2 is mainly developed by the ergonomists.

The objectives of stage 0 (launching) are to (1) introduce the ergonomics team; (2) discuss the objectives and intervention method with the managerial and non-managerial staff; and (3) engage workers in the study.

The ergonomics team was composed of three ergonomists from the University, one of them being also an employee of the Ministry of Labor, with background in medicine, physical therapy, industrial design and industrial engineering. The integration of company's staff in the ergonomics process is often mediated by the COERGO. The studied company's COERGO is composed of one worker representative, the safety technician, the Human Resources Department (HRD) representative; the physician; an external consultant expert in shoe manufacturing, and the ergonomist with a physical therapy background.

A total of 800 workers participated in the two launching meetings (at the end of the morning shift and beginning of the evening shift) held at the company’s cafeteria. They were asked to discuss the research proposal with their colleagues not present at the meeting and were invited to volunteer for the study. One week later, the researchers received a list of 100 names of people willing to participate more directly in the study as workers of the pilot line. Although this represents a sample of convenience, it is similar to the overall worker population since it covers the ranges of age, gender, education and training of the work force.

The details of the new production model and worker training were discussed with the 100 volunteers in another meeting.

Appraisal is the stage with greater company's involvement because it is when problems to be addressed are raised and prioritized in a participatory way. Direct participation of workers and managerial staff takes place in meetings. Surveys are done in two steps as set out in the Macroergonomic Design or MD tool (Guimarães and Fogliatto, 2000): (1) interviews (of a qualitative nature); and (2) questionnaires (of a quantitative nature). The semi-structured interviews are conducted with a representative sample (in general 30%) of the worker population, and based on generic questions such as: what do you think about your work? What is good? What could be better? What suggestions for improvement do you have? The interviews complemented by the knowledge of the ergonomists and their observations are the first step for identifying the ergonomic demand items (EDIs) that should be addressed in the intervention.

The questionnaire filled out by the whole population measures employee satisfaction with and/or importance given to each EDI. The questions are related to the four sub-systems (personnel, technological, work design, and external environment) of the socio-technical system. Additional questions are related to the work content and the level of pain/discomfort in some body parts. Measurement is done on a 15-cm continuous assessment scale (Stone et al., 1974) with two anchors (not satisfied/satisfied and/or not at all/very much); the participant marks his/her perception about the EDI on the scale. As the scale is 15-cm long, each response may vary between 0 (low) and 15 (high). The weight of each EDI is generated by the arithmetic mean of the results from all respondents.

On July 2002 (while work was still taking place under the traditional system), 44 workers (24 women from the stitching sector and 20 men from the assembly sector) were interviewed by two ergonomists, individually, in a private room. Based on their comments and the ergonomists' knowledge, a questionnaire was built and used by one ergonomist with 31 workers from the pilot flow line: 16 workers (all women) originally from the stitching sector (which encompasses preparation and sewing/stitching) and 15 workers (60% being male) from the assembly sector (which encompasses assembly and finishing). MA prescribes that the entire population (in the case, the 100 workers of the pilot line) should answer the questionnaire; but in this case, due to low schooling level, the workers needed individual assistance for answering the questionnaire; therefore, it had to be applied to a sample and distributed to each individual worker.

Ergonomic analysis was developed by the ergonomists, taking into consideration data fromworkers' opinion obtained in the Appraisal stage, the ergonomists' observations, and the evaluation of the environmental conditions done by the Safety and Health Department (SHD). Other data on worker health conditions were obtained from the SHD database: number of absences due to accidents and illness, absence from work for medical consultation and WMSD rate. Other data were absenteeism and turnover rates obtained from the Human Resources Department (HRD).Data on production (i.e. productivity, rate of rework and waste) were gathered by the ergonomists with the help of the company's COERGO during five months (from May to September 2002) before any improvements were implemented.

Based on these data, the work conditions were evaluated and solutions for improving micro ergonomic (physical environment, workstations and equipment) and macroergonomic (work design) conditions were proposed.

The 3.5-year intervention aimed to change the work organization and improve the environmental and workstations conditions according to the socio-technical approach that encompasses four sub-systems (Hendrick and Kleiner, 2001): the personnel, the external environment, the technological and the work design. Each of the four sub-systems impacts the others; but in the case of developing countries, like Brazil, it can be assumed that the external environment is the sub-system that most influences the others.

The proposed solutions for each sub-system were discussed and implemented with the COERGO and the managerial and non-managerial staff. They are described in Section 3.Improvements in work organization applied only to the pilot line. Therefore, with the exception of the education for multiskilling and teamwork, the pilot line had the same characteristics of the other nine lines: the 100 pilot workers shared the same space in the plant, and used the same tools to produce the same types of shoes.

In order to evaluate the impact of the intervention on workers, in August 2005,the same questionnaire, answered three years earlier (in the appraisal stage) was answered by 32 pilot line workers (16 women and 16 men). Because participation in the survey was voluntary, the 32 workers were not the same as in 2002; therefore, the evaluation before and after the macroergonomic intervention could not be tested using paired tests. The two means (before and after the intervention) of each IDE were compared by the Student t-test for two independent samples assuming equivalent variance. The questionnaires showed good internal consistency: Cronbach's alpha scores of 0.71 in the first survey and 0.74 in the second survey. The participants, all volunteers, signed a Term of Free and Informed Consent, and a copy was handed back to the interviewee and another left with the interviewer.

Managerial staff did not want to answer any questionnaire. Therefore, their evaluation of the project was obtained from interviews with three managers (plant general manager, sewing sector and assembly sector managers), two immediate supervisors (from the sewing and assembly sectors) and four production auxiliary (two from the sewing sector and two from the assembly sector) who help the supervisors They were interviewed separately by the same interviewer (ergonomist) who asked the following questions: How do you evaluate the project? Which were the positive aspects? Which were the negative aspects? Which were the difficulties? Do you have any suggestions for the implementation of the project in the whole plant?


                     Table 1
                      presents a timetable of actions taken to promote the improvements during the project and the actors involved. The improvements in work organization were the only one that applied only to the pilot line until 2005. Afterward, the improvements were implemented in three lines and, in 2006, to all lines of the plant.

The external environment deals with the survival of the company, being related to its degree of adaptability, i.e. to the environment in which it is inserted (Hendrick and Kleiner 2001). Footwear industry is highly dependent on the international market, Brazilian competitiveness relying solely upon the low price of shoes because of the industry’s low wages (Mody et al., 1991). However, human costs accounts for only 19% (or less) of the footwear costs; therefore, the solution for competitiveness is to compete by quality, promoting a skilled workforce for producing higher value shoes (IHU, 2011).

Another issue is the seasonality of the product: during the periods of low production (December/January and May/June when new collections are developed), many companies lay off workers en masse and the opposite happens during high-production periods of sales and orders. The “normal” shoe-manufacturing scenario is one of peaks of high lay off and others with high hiring rates due to the necessity to adjust the number of workers to the amount of sold products.

To override the impact of the external environment on the stability of the workforce, the company focuses more on the internal market, therefore being less dependent on the external market.

The personnel sub-system basically deals with the demographic characteristics, the degree of professionalism and the psychosocial aspects related to the studied population (Hendrick and Kleiner 2001).The pilot line was composed of 100 employees, 52 of them women from the stitching sector and 48 (28 being male) from the assembly sector. The predominance of women (72%) among workers is characteristic of footwear factories in the region: the tasks assigned to the mare usually the ones of the stitching sector while men are generally responsible for assembly tasks. As the stitching tasks involve the greatest number of operations over practically all models manufactured, the staff of footwear companies mostly consists of women. The level of education is predominantly that of elementary/primary school uncompleted (59%), thus confirming the characteristic of the footwear industry to hire staff with low levels of education and minimally skilled (or unskilled) labor that end up having to accept low wages. The level of professionalism (measured by worker experience in shoe manufacturing) varied from 6 months to 5 years (mean=2.5 years of experience) in the company.

The reason for keeping workers in the same workstation performing a singletask in which they are specialized is the lack of training for multiskilling. Increasing a worker’s knowledge for other operations is considered a factor of high investment and a waste of time by some (Ruas,1992; Antunes, 1993). The most common practice is on-the-job training on a specific simple single task undertaken with support of the immediate supervisor.

However, making shoes is more of a craft than mass production, since the quality of a piece of leather or of a shoe depends on calculations and adjustments that the worker makes while producing it (Piccinini, 1992). Shoe making requires skills from the worker to determine the shape, external appearance and tactile quality of the product. Therefore the Taylor/Ford model, which does not value multiskilled workers, cannot support the manufacturing of competitive, high-quality shoes.

Personnel professionalism was improved by training workers (as described in the work design sub-system) and maintaining their jobs. None of the 100 workers from the pilot production line was dismissed during the study period.

The technological sub-system is the technology of the work system (Hendrick and Kleiner 2001). However, as this technology has a direct connection with the work organization, in this study what falls within this sub-system are the characteristics of the physical environment, workstations, tools, machines and equipment; the type of production process and its characteristics are descriptive of the work process, and fits into the work design sub-system.

The most important problems identified in the appraisal stage was the noise from the machines (mainly the punching and sewing machines), the risk imposed by machines/equipment due to their maintenance conditions, and the toxic chemicals in the glue. In the diagnosis stage, noise evaluation with the HSD sound level metershowed that close to the punching machines, noise was as high as 93dB(A), exceeding the 80dB(A) limit for workday exposure. Besides the risk of hearing impairment, noise is annoying and may increase the risk of accidents. Therefore, starting in March 2003, noise was gradually reduced by removing some machines that were no longer necessary in the production process. The HSD initiated a machine maintenance program to reduce noise and the risk of accidents. A similar noise control program (Herbert and Miles, 1991) obtained reduction between 4 and 10dB(A) in a footwear industry where noise exceeded 90dB(A). Although Brazilian regulation NR15 (Brasil, 1978b) prescribes the use of individual protection when noise is higher than 85dB(A),earplugs became mandatory for workers working nearby the points of the plant where noise was higher than 80dB(A) but could not be reduced.

The most difficult technical solution to implement was the substitution of solvent-based glue for water-based glue (free of harmful to health chemicals) because it takes longer to dry therefore impacting the production flow. Only by 2005, a solution was found and the company introduced a water-based glue. The literature concentrates on the negative impact of harmful chemicals in the leather, glue and solvents on worker health. However, the impact on the environment is also a relevant issue when pursuing sustainable production systems, as discussed with the participants many times during the project.

To improve the workstations' design, 800 seats (one for two workers) were made available for allowing workers to switch between standing and sitting postures, therefore also attending regulation NR17 (Brasil, 1978a). The layout, however, continued as a straight line because of the plant’s restricted space, which did not favor arranging a more appropriate layout. Compact layouts such as a U shape or circle, as proposed by Black (1991), would permit greater proximity among operators, thus facilitating exchange of communication, information and materials.

The work design sub-system deals with the complexity (i.e. level of formalization and centralization) of the company (Hendrick and Kleiner 2001). In this study, this sub-system encompasses the schedule of working hours and how work is organized considering: (a) how production takes place, i.e. the technology of production; (b) the action of individuals on an object in order to modify it, i.e. the technology of knowledge; and (c) the degree of automation, rigidity of the work flow and specific aspects of tasks or integration of workflow.

Depending on the world competition, the company under study produces more intensively either for the internal or the external market. The demand for the internal market is often for small lots (30–50 pairs) while demand for the external market is for large lots (3000–5000 pairs of shoes in each lot) of a wide range of models, thus leading to production by batch. The shoe models in production may change five to ten times during a working day, which means there is a need to set up quickly to minimize waste of production time. In accordance with the model to be produced, changes occur in layout and alteration or addition of workstations, even though workers continue carrying out the same task at the same workstation during the entire work day.

Although the footwear sector adopts the Taylor/Ford production model, demand for increasingly varied lots of products is better supported by more dynamic and flexible systems, such as the socio-technical model (Berggren, 1992) and lean production (LP) (Shingo, 1981; Ohno, 1988). Therefore, the proposed model followed the precepts of the socio-technical teamwork organization, as applied in the automotive Volvo plants at Kalmar and Udevalla in Sweden (Berggren, 1992), but it also considered LP principles of Toyota Japan, such as process uniformity and clear procedures for reaching production targets and product quality. The importance of procedures to meet production demand, widely covered by LP theorists (Shingo, 1981; Ohno, 1988), is a gap in the Volvo production model (Berggren, 1992).

Because workers lacked the necessary skills to adjust to the variability and complexity of an integrated production flow, the 100 volunteers of the pilot line were trained for multiskilling and teamwork. After March 2003, they were trained to work in all workstations for manufacturing any type of shoes at anytime. They worked in teams of 6–8 people that were responsible for the quality of both production and products of their cells. Groups of tasks were formed by proximity in the line as per Fig. 1
                            and Table 2
                            in the assembly sector, and Fig. 2
                            and Table 3
                            in the stitching sector. Initially, workers changed tasks every 2h, as suggested by the immediate supervisors, until the team members took upon themselves the autonomy to decide when to rotate. Most workers change tasks at least four times during the working day, and rotation happens between the first and third hour of the work shift.

Despite the traditional belief that it would be very difficult to train workers to perform different tasks, a study of their learning curve (Guimarães et al., 2012a) showed that they were able to learn all required tasks within a month. After four months, workers started getting more comfortable with the new system and most of them were handling 20 tasks. It is interesting to note that a 4-month period to get used to a new system was also reported in studies at the Mitsubishi Electric's Fukuyama Plant (Nagamachi, 1996) and at a Brazilian electricity meter assembly plant (Guimarães, 2009). Some workers can master, in the long run, more than 150 operations of a more complex type of shoe (like a boot, for example).

Employees work 8.8h per day (for a 9.3-h work day), 44h per week, 22 days per month. When the project started, work was done in two shifts: shift 1 from 5:00 AM to 2:48 PM, and shift 2 from 2:48 PM to 00:17 AM, a schedule set to accommodate about the double of the number of employees. Because the company was no longer employing so many people, and shift 1 started at dawn, the schedule was analyzed using July 2002 evaluation of the physiological conditions and the quality of sleep of a sample of 44 volunteer workers (the same 24 women from the stitching sector and 20 men from the assembly who were interviewed) from shift 1 of the plant.

The physiological evaluation was done by the HSD using data on plasmatic glucose level, blood pressure and heart frequency. Blood sample was obtained at the beginning of shift 1 from a drop of blood collected with a finger stick. Results showed that 82% of workers do not eat breakfast and their glycemic level was 70mg/dL, lower (t
                           =1.845; p
                           =0.072) than the group that eats breakfast (glycemic level=79.88mg/dL). No statistical difference was found for heart frequency (mean=81 beats/min) and blood pressure (mean=115×75mmHg) between the two groups.

Because the company was not convinced of the need to change the work schedule, in July 2003, 153 workers (about 10% of the plant population at the time), i.e. 80 workers from shift 1 and 73 from shift 2, answered a questionnaire on the quality of sleep, satisfaction with the traditional schedule, and the best working hours for a new schedule. The questionnaire showed that 85% of the respondents were morning type people, preferring to work during the day as long as a daycare center was made available so the parents could work in only one shift. In August 2003, the results were presented to the majority of the plant’s population (8 meetings with about 100 workers each) and a new work schedule was defined.

In January 2004, the schedule was changed from two shifts to one shift: Monday to Thursday from 6:30 AM to 5:15 PM (with a lunch break from 11:30 AM to12: 30 PM); and Friday from 6:30 AM to 11:30 AM. In April 2004, to meet an increase in production demand and also because the daycare was not operating, the schedule turned back to two shifts. As evaluated by the production manager, the change to the traditional schedule had a negative impact on productivity during the months of April to July. Therefore, in August 2004, taking the opportunity of another downsizing to adjust the number of employees because of a decrease in production demand, the daycare started to operate again and the one-shift schedule, voted by all employees, was definitely set from 7:00 AM to 4:48 PM from Monday to Friday (with a lunch break from 11:30 AM to 12:30 PM). Lunch has been always provided by the company.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Table 4
                      presents the results on worker satisfaction with the physical environment, workstation, work design and company, and worker perceptions of work content and pain/discomfort before and after the implementation of the improvements.

The elimination of some machines and maintenance improvement did reduce noise (t-test=6.006, p-value<0.01), while satisfaction with temperature and lighting did not change, as expected, since no improvements were made in these conditions. The increase in satisfaction with work postures (t-test=5.443, p-value<0.01) is probably related to improvements of the workstation (t-test=2.511, p-value=0.01); in particular, the seats allowed workers to alternate between sitting and standing positions.

Satisfaction with the work schedule before the intervention (two shifts) and after the intervention (one shift) could not be assessed by the pre- and post-questionnaires. The first questionnaire measured worker demands, and schedule was not identified as an IDE at that time. Despite being of interest to ergonomists, by the time the first questionnaire was created (August 2002), there was no indication that working hours could be changed; therefore, there was no question on work schedule. Assessment of work schedule was done in a separate questionnaire, a year later, and was answered by a sample of the population plant, not the workers on the pilot line. Adjustments for the new schedule were discussed in meetings with workers and the final schedule was approved by the majority of them and in agreement with the company's management. During the August 2004 meeting, workers indicatedthat they were satisfied with the one-shift schedule and with the daycare center.

The EDIs related to work organization showed the most improvements in relation to the intervention. Before the intervention, the EDIs that had been considered the most unsatisfactory were those of “being lent” to another production line (i.e. being transferred from the original line to help balance another line) and “being accountable for flaws in the shoe”. These managerial strategies are considered critical by workers in the shoe-manufacturing sector, but are common in most industries. Satisfaction with “being lent” doubled after the intervention (t-test=4.103, p-value<0.01): only a few (about 12) workers were “lent” from the pilot line to “help” balancing the traditional lines (line balance can be achieved by employing more skilled and faster workers). Satisfaction with the EDI “being accountable for flaws in the shoe” also almost doubled after the intervention (t-test=5.492, p-value<0.01). Before the intervention, this responsibility resulted in embarrassment for the worker :using control devices in the process, it was possible to identify the person who had generated the flaw. The intervention diluted this responsibility among workers in the team who enjoyed being responsible for “quality control” (t-test=2.640, p-value=0.01). Besides, multiskilling and teamwork improved the quality of products: rework was reduced by 85% and spoilage by 69%. The EDIs “relationship with supervisors” (t-test=2.228, p-value=0.03), “support from the worker (‘Joker’) who helps/substitutes another if necessary” (t-test=2.850, p-value<0.01) and “access to material supplies” (t-test=3.597, p-value<0.01) showed improvement, as a result of improved communication and interaction achieved by teamwork and the participatory ergonomics process. The results for “pace of the conveyor belt”, “training/skills of the staff “, and “relationship with colleagues” did not show improvement.

In relation to employee satisfaction with the company, three EDIs showed improvement. Before the intervention, workers needed to stay out of the building, even under the rain, waiting for the gate to open. When the company learned about the problem, the time for opening the gate during rainy days was changed to earlier hours; this initiative was welcomed by employees (t-test=8.292, p-value<0.01). The quality of lunch also improved (t-test=4.129, p-value<0.01), and some effort was put into encouraging people to increase their level of schooling by attending free classes after work (t-test=2.205, p-value=0.03). The company had always supported a school program at the site, but attendance was usually low because most workers do not like to stay at the plant longer hours and some even feel too old to attend classes.

No changes were made in relation to the EDI “outpatient clinic” that was always considered good and the salary did not increase, therefore satisfaction with wage remained at the same low level. It is important to note that, during the intervention, wage was always discussed with the managerial staff, the research team pointing out the importance of adjusting salaries since the pilot line workers became multiskilled. At the end of the study, workers started to be paid according to their skill levels.

The EDIs related to the work content were the most significant in terms of value added to work. After the intervention, work was perceived as more stimulating (t-test=2.120, p-value=0.04), more creative (t-test=4.569, p-value<0.01) and more dynamic (t-test=3.970, p-value<0.01), due to reduction in repetitiveness (t-test=−5.318, p-value<0.01) and tasks being more diversified (t-test=4.850, p-value<0.01). Frustration decreased (t-test=−3.069, p-value<0.01) and workers reported more autonomy in their work (t-test=3.162, p-value<0.01). These positive results were expected as a result of the work enlargement and enrichment provided by the new production model. Perceived risk decreased (t-test=−2.811, p-value<0.01); this can be explained by the elimination of toxic glue and improvement in equipment maintenance.

However, improvements in work organization did not alter worker perception of physical and mental effort, monotony and limitation of the work, which remained at the same medium level. Although work became more stimulating and dynamic, workers understand that producing footwear only is monotonous and limiting.

Results show that training and empowerment conferred to workers and teams have no effect on EDIs related to the stress imposed by production demand. Although the relationship with managers (mainly with top managers) improved, production goals have to be met, therefore workers continue to feel the same level of pressure, nervousness and responsibility for performing work efficiently.

Overall satisfaction increased (t-test=4.105, p-value<0.01) and workers prefer to work in more than a single workstation (t-test=−3.203, p-value<0.01). This supports the value of the new work organization focusing on multiskilling, job enlargement and enrichment. It is worth noting that despite the problems of the old traditional manufacturing system, workers have always felt valued by the company and like to work in the shoe-manufacturing sector.

Results on perception of discomfort and pain show low level of pain in the head and moderate pain in the back (in accordance to Wick, 1991; Serratos-Perez and Mendiola-Anda, 1993; and Burton et al., 1996) and neck (in accordance to Wick, 1991). Pain in these body parts can be related to the need for trunk flexion and for head leaning forward for better visual control of the work in nearly all operations of footwear manufacturing. In general, the pieces are small and many shoes have small elements, such as decoration and small rivets. Pain in the legs was also evaluated as moderate, but pain in the feet that was high before the intervention showed a reduction (t-test=3.513, p-value<0.01) after the intervention. Pain in legs and feet is often attributed to prolonged static standing up position (Renner, 2002), therefore reduction of pain/discomfort in the feet might be explained by workers switching between standing and sitting postures after the introduction of seats.

For management, the positive result of the project was that multiskilled workers were able to balance production set up and workflow, and to control product quality. Greater knowledge and flexibility of the pilot line workers were recognized as fundamental to respond faster and more accurate to the demand of the production mix in the footwear sector. The negative aspect is related to the difficulty in dealing with skilled workers since they no longer accept what is imposed without questioning. Mainly the immediate supervisors were intimidated by worker empowerment (i.e. by their greater autonomy and knowledge of the process as a whole). It became evident that the teams could not follow supervisors' orders and still meet production targets. Managers did not make any suggestions for the implementation of the project in the whole plant.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

From 2002 to 2005, improvements in work environment, workstations and work schedule implemented in the plant affected about 1800 workers. However, only 100 volunteer workers, representatives of the population, were trained to work in teams to perform a variety of tasks and became responsible for the quality of both production and final product.

The intervention might be considered successful: multiskilling and teamwork granted more flexibility and autonomy to the pilot line workers, which were key elements for reducing human costs and improving the quality of both process and products. Work content improved and the pilot line workers better understood the whole production system: they became key partners in the company since they were the only multiskilled workers who were apt to quickly perform multiple tasks in the diversified mix of daily production.

The introduction of seats made it possible for alternating between sitting and standing postures, therefore reducing pain in the feet. Although the workstations improvements did not reduce pain in upper limbs and back, work enlargement and enrichment enabled the use of different muscles, made work more interesting, eliminating WMSD and illnesses from the pilot line. The literature (Carayon et al., 1999; Rivilis et al., 2006) emphasizes the positive impact of better work design and content on the reduction of WMSD risk. Based on data collected between May and September 2002, and data reported by the HSD in 2005, WMSD, medical consultations and turnover were eliminated in the pilot line and accidents were reduced by 80% in comparison to the other lines that operated under the traditional system (Guimarães et al., 2012b). Besides, as discussed by Guimarães et al. (2012b), absenteeism was reduced by 46%, productivity increased by 3%, and the rates of defect and rework were reduced to less than 1%. The benefit-to-cost ratio of the intervention was 7.2, confirming the economic benefits of macroergonomics. Other macroergonomic interventions in the footwear industry also demonstrated their value due to their positive impact on production (Herrera and Huatuco, 2011) and on quality of work life (Center for Workplace Health Information, 1995; Burton et al., 1996; Herrera and Huatuco, 2011), although some ergonomic risk factors may persist, particularly for the upper extremities (Burton et al., 1996).

The implemented changes also improved relationship and communication in the shop-floor. Despite the special situation of the pilot workers, no problems were raised between them and the workers from other lines. They were comfortable dealing with the researchers, the COERGO representatives and even with top managers, expressing their points of view, suggestions and complaints. However, their empowerment resulted in many conflicts with the immediate supervisors who did not know how to deal with the numerous changes. The pilot line workers were aware that they were a special group: besides getting more experienced and empowered as compared with their colleagues from other lines, they became key actors of a project that was the driver for a radical change in the company.

It is worth noting that confounding variables, such as change in behavior, were not controlled for in the study. Hawthorne effect, besides being ambiguous and disputable (Adair, 1984; Jones, 1992; Wickström and Bendix, 2000; Holden 2001) is difficult to evaluate in this study. Although the pilot line workers became a special group in the company, the Hawthorne effect might not have had an impact on the outcomes given the long duration of the study. Besides, based on data from the HRD and HSD, and the opinion of the industrial manager, the human-related and production results of the other lines were better in 2005 than in 2002, suggesting that the improvements in the environment, workstations and the change in work schedule had a positive effect on the whole plant. Therefore, the improved results in the pilot line in comparison to other lines might be attributable to improvements in the work organization, which were implemented only in this line.

Due to the success of the new production model, the 100 workers started to teach the other 1700 employees in the company how to work under the new model. As of November 2005, three other lines had been set up for multiskilling and teamwork and, by 2006, the model was implemented in the whole Paranhana plant. Some of the workers of the pilot line are, nowadays, production supervisors.

Some final comments should be made on the method and development of the intervention. The participatory nature of the method was useful for identifying important issues to address (for example, the time of gate opening) that otherwise would not have been considered by the ergonomists. Most important, the participatory method engaged workers very easily. Meetings made it easier to proceed with more appropriate interventions since tacit knowledge was embedded in the project.

Although the macroergonomic approach is another strength of the intervention process, it imposed some limitations to the study. Many changes were made at the same time in accordance to the company's interest and/or budget schedule; this made it difficult to evaluate the impact of each improvement separately. For example, the new work schedule might have impacted considerably the results since it increased time for sleep and workers were able to have breakfast before leaving for work. However, it was not possible to assess the separate impact of the new schedule on worker and production outcomes.

Another limitation of the macroergonomic approach is the difficulty for carrying out the research, which was only possible due to the interest of the industrial director and the Brazilian Ministry of Labor as well as the governmental grant support. Although workers were very enthusiastic about the project, the project was perceived as a threat by supervisors and middle managers. They raised some problems in the pilot line, some improvements took longer to be implemented, and important information for the study (such as production outcomes) could not be easily accessed. This problem with the managerial staff has been reported in other studies (Guimarães, 2009), and is not particular to this company. It might be attributed to the difficulty of implementing ergonomics in Brazilian companies. Macroergonomics is difficult to implement (Vink et al., 2008) even in developed countries.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study discussed the experience of a 3.5-year macroergonomic intervention and its assessment by 100 pilot line workers and managerial staff of a large footwear factory in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

Work schedule changed from two shifts (morning and evening) to one shift (morning), and a daycare was implemented so parents could work in only one shift. The removal of some machines along with an equipment/machines maintenance program reduced noise level. Harmful chemicals were gradually eliminated from the plant. Workers could alternate postures after the introduction of seats. Improvements in workstations reduced discomfort and pain in the feet.

However, the most influential elements of the intervention are related to improvements in work organization and content in the pilot line. The aspects most valued by pilot line workers were increase in creativity, work being more dynamic and tasks being more diversified. Autonomy increased and frustration decreased; illnesses and WMSD risk were eliminated from the pilot production line. These outcomes are related to work enlargement and enrichment. Teamwork and participatory ergonomics empowered workers, increased communication, satisfaction with work and commitment with results and company targets, reflecting on improved relationship with top managers.

However, if from the point of view of workers the implementation of the socio-technical system was positive, their immediate supervisors and middle managers were very resistant to the intervention. Despite their resistance, the project can be considered successful: the industrial director was receptive and improvements made in the Paranhana plant were implemented in six other plants owned by the company under the supervision of one of the ergonomists that nowadays acts as a consultant and is part of the COERGO.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research had the support of the Brazilian Foundation for Research Support at Rio Grande do Sul (FAPERGS), the Capes Foundation/Ministry of Education (CAPES) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development/Ministry of Science and Technology (CNPq). The authors are grateful to the Ergonomics Committee (COERGO) representatives, the workers and directors of the Company, in particular the pilot line workers and the industrial director, for their commitment to this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

