@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Designers' and users' roles in participatory design: What is actually co-designed by participants?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We explore the actual forms of participation in a participatory design process.


                        
                        
                           
                           Actual roles and profiles are analyzed in relation to levels of abstraction.


                        
                        
                           
                           The artifact and its concept are shown to be co-designed by users and designers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Certain roles and profiles are shown to be key to this co-design.


                        
                        
                           
                           This gives clues to improve the teaching and practice of participatory design.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Participatory design

Sustainable agriculture

Roles

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This research deals with an analysis of forms of participation in a participatory design (PD) process of a software that assesses the sustainability of agricultural cropping systems. We explore the actual forms of participation of designers and users by adapting an Actual Role Analysis in Design approach (Barcellini et al., 2013) to capture the levels of abstraction (conceptual, functional and operational) of participants' discussions. We show that: (1) the process does not only concern the design of the artifact itself, but also the design of the concept of sustainability; (2) all participants (users & designers) have a role in co-designing the concept (in our case, sustainability); (3) some roles and profiles are key to this co-design. We discuss our contributions to both the research and the practices of participatory design. These contributions deal with the production of a method and related knowledge about actual activities in participatory design situations. They may support the development of relevant training programs regarding participatory situations, or be reflexive activities that can help those who are involved in designing and leading in participatory situations, to make improvements.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Our research is focused on a participatory design process involving agricultural scientists of the French National Institute for Agricultural Research (INRA) who were designing software to support the assessment of cropping system sustainability. Developing sustainable agriculture is currently a strong challenge in the agricultural world since the productive model of agriculture has been linked to a depletion of natural resources (energy, soil, bio-diversity) with severe degradation of the environment (water and air mainly) (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005). The tool these scientists designed – MASC©, for Multi Attribute Sustainability Cropping systems – was a decision tree that broke the sustainability assessment decisional problem down into simpler units (environmental safety, economic viability, and social equity, usually acknowledged as the three pillars of sustainability). It thus generated elementary criteria to rate the sustainable potential of cropping systems (Sadok et al., 2009). The designers' aim was to make the concept of sustainability more tangible and easier to challenge by those involved in the assessment of current or new cropping systems. These targeted users were mostly scientists working on innovative cropping systems and advisors who accompanied farmers in examining their practices. Individual farmers were not directly targeted as use of the tool required large amounts of data which were not available on the scale of a farm. The designers' group therefore set up a participatory design process for MASC and asked us afterwards to assist them in understanding and transforming this participatory design situation. In this sense, our approach was to characterize the actual forms of participation in design meetings.

To do so, we grounded our work in research in ergonomics, investigating collaborative
                        2
                     
                     
                        2
                        Collaboration is coordinated, synchronous activity that is the result of a continued attempt to construct and maintain a shared conception of the design problem (Roschelle and Teasley, 1995).
                      design – or co-design – activities occurring in design meetings and participatory design situations (e.g. Darses et al., 2001; Détienne, 2006; Visser, 2006, 2009). Here, design is viewed as a socio-cognitive activity, which is analyzed through verbal interactions between participants in meetings. These interactions are seen as the traces of the participants' activities in these meetings. This approach reveals how the negotiation of various perspectives involved in collaborative design processes (Bucciarelli, 1998; Détienne et al., 2005; Baker, 2009) contributes to building design solutions (their generation, exploration, comparison, and selection). Analyzing the exchanges that result from the confrontation of perspectives is particularly relevant in participatory forms of design. In line with participatory ergonomics proposals (Haines et al., 2002; Rocha et al., 2015), ergonomists focusing on design activities have often emphasized the need to involve the potential users of the artifact under design (whether it be software or work organization) in the design processes. While there are rich discussions in the ergonomics literature about the objectives and methods of participation in design processes (see for instance Broberg et al., 2011), fewer studies have focused on the content of the interactions in participatory design meetings (e.g. Darses et al., 2001; Béguin, 2003; Engeström and Toivainen, 2011). This parallels some current challenges of Participatory Design research (Greenbaum and Loi, 2012). Participatory Design has been defined as “a strong commitment to understanding practice, guided by the recognition that designing the technologies people use in their everyday activities shapes, in crucial ways, how those activities might be done” (Robertson and Simonsen, 2012). In this trend, the users occupy a very specific and demanding place in the design process, as co-designers, which goes beyond the way they are usually considered in design meetings (Nelson et al., 2013). But what exactly do they contribute to design? What content is shared among users and designers in such processes? The epistemic content of the design interactions is thus the subject of interest. This paper follows this line of investigation of participatory design meetings. Our objective is to investigate the actual content of participatory design meetings and to establish whether the participants discuss the operational dimensions of the tool under design or its conceptual dimensions. In other words, do all the participants (and which participants?) design the MASC tool/and/or the concept of sustainability which is implemented in this tool? We assume that this understanding is of particular interest to researchers, teachers and practitioners in ergonomics involved in the development of accurate participatory design processes. This objective requires us to develop interactionist and developmental methodologies, using a fine-grained qualitative approach. One of them is the “Actual Role Analysis in Design” (ARAD) approach proposed by Barcellini et al. (2013) to study participation in Open Source Software (OSS) design (see Section 2.1). We have adapted the ARAD approach to capture the roles of participants regarding the actual content of their discussions, and to identify key-participants fostering participatory design processes by performing specific combinations of roles (called profiles). In the following sections we first set out the theoretical approach that we built by adapting the ARAD approach. We then describe and explain how our data were collected and processed, before presenting and discussing our results. We finally discuss the contribution of our research to the development of methodologies for studying actual participation in participatory design.

The ARAD approach proposed by Baker et al. (2009), Détienne et al. (2012b) and Barcellini et al. (2013) has been designed to capture actual collaborative design activities, i.e. that are not predefined but are effectively performed by participants, and that emerge from actual interactions between participants. It identifies roles that correspond to distinctive and regular individual behaviors emerging in the interaction. Four types of role are considered to embrace different facets of participation (Table 1
                        ). They are characterized on the basis of the structure of the interactions during design meetings (interactive role), as well as according to the orientation of the interactions amongst the participants engaged in discussions (group-oriented or task-oriented), and by quoting the direct actions undertaken to modify the artifact (production role).

Applying this approach to the specific concern of this paper requires us to adapt the characterization of the four roles proposed by Barcellini et al. (2013). These roles were defined to study participation among participants interacting “online” (e.g. through mailing-lists) – and not in a “face-to-face” context. We therefore had to adapt the characterization of interactive and group-oriented roles to a “face-to-face” context. Moreover, the original task model was focused on the way design solutions were collaboratively developed, whereas in this paper we wanted to ascertain whether the participants discussed operational or conceptual dimensions of MASC. We therefore based our task-oriented role analysis on the themes addressed by participants, rather than on their contribution to collaborative design activities (e.g. proposition or evaluation of design solutions) as in Barcellini et al. (2013) (in bold in Table 1). To do so, we categorized interactions according to the “levels of abstraction” characterizing the participants' input (Pols, 2012; Rasmussen, 1986; Visser, 2006). The notion of “level of abstraction” models the evolving representations of artifacts during the phases of the design process, from more abstract representations to more physical-concrete ones, and helps in considering how the participants progress throughout levels of abstraction (Visser, 2006). We choose to refer to a specific abstraction hierarchy adapted to our case study. Thus, MASC©, which is dedicated to the assessment of the sustainability of cropping systems, can be considered as a management instrument, i.e., an “apparatus conceived by organizations to lead the objects that they comprise and individuals towards determined ends” (Moisdon, 2006 in Labatut et al., 2009). From this perspective, three abstraction levels must be considered in the design process: the tool as a tangible object (operational level), its use in an organization for defined purposes (functional level), and a level related to the goals to be reached, linked to the managerial philosophy which is embedded in the design of the tool (philosophical or conceptual level) (Labatut et al., 2009). In our case study, the conceptual level is linked to the concept of sustainability: the managerial philosophy is reflected by the choice to represent the contribution of cropping systems to sustainability by means of a decision tree, criteria, their weighting, and aggregation rules. The functional level relevant for MASC© is related with the function of the tool, that is to say, the assessment of cropping systems, which also needs to be framed and clarified. And the operational level is the level where the operating of MASC© is discussed.

The notion of profile – as an aggregation of these four roles – is proposed to capture the variety of roles performed by participants in different situations (for instance different in time or in problems addressed by participants). Thus, profiles describe a participant in terms of his/her behavior, compared to other participants (Baker et al., 2009). It is particularly useful to understand the function of key-participants fostering a given design process, in our case a participatory design process. In this sense, these profiles can be discussed with forms of participation presented as essential to software design performance: champions, boundary spanners, leaders and super-experts (e.g. Curtis et al., 1988; Sonnentag, 1998; Sonnenwald, 1996), in relation to roles. Table 2
                         presents the definition of these potential profiles in relation to the roles of participants, as studied in Open Source Software design by Barcellini et al. (2008, 2009, 2013).

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Our methodology combines a monitoring of the MASC© design process; the coding of the content of design meetings for the purpose of identifying the level of abstraction addressed and the roles and profiles of the participants in the discussions; and finally interviews with MASC© designers to contextualize our results.

A first prototype of MASC© (MASC© 1.0) was produced in 2008 (Sadok et al., 2009) by seven agricultural scientists. In 2009 it was handed over to several users to assess contrasting cropping systems within diverse professional contexts (farmers' advisors, engineers and scientists from farmers' owned applied research institutes and from agronomic public research). The decision was made to develop a second version of MASC© and a junior agronomist was hired to support the initial 7-researcher design team. Our empirical data deals with the design process of this second version, which lasted from March to November 2010 and which involved the team of designers, called “the MASC© group” (eight people, see Table 3
                        ) and users. This MASC© 2.0 design sequence was opened and closed by meetings with users (UM1 in March 2010, involving all the users of the first version of MASC©, and UM2 in November 2010, with three volunteer representative users: a scientist for INRA, an agronomist from an applied research institute and an advisor). Between these two meetings the designers worked together to process all the comments made by the users (DM 1, 2, 3) (Table 4
                        ). Our data were collected during these five meetings and were audio-recorded and transcribed.

The content of the design meetings was divided into 137 thematic sequences (709 min) defined according to the different themes addressed by participants (Darses et al., 2001) (excluding those concerning the overall organization of the design process). For each sequence, we noted who introduced the themes, who successively took part in the discussion, the number of turns of each participant, the length of the sequence, and the themes addressed in relation to the level of abstraction. The rationale used to link the themes addressed and the level of abstraction is described in Table 5
                        .

Roles are characterized by analyzing the content of meetings on the basis of the approach described in Section 2. Profiles have been constructed by aggregating the specific roles performed by each participant (each member of the MASC© group and “users”) in relation to the activities of other participants in meetings (for this step of our analysis we do not consider UM1 because the project facilitator was not yet involved in the project).

These comparisons between participants supposed certain types of metrics to characterize the role performed, i.e. what characterizes a participant within the group (Table 6
                           ). Two were used to construct participants' profile: position in the distribution of actions and tendency to talk at one or another level of abstraction compared to others.

For production, interactive, and group-oriented roles, we consider the intensity of participation and characterize the role of the participant (high, low, mean) regarding his/her position in the distribution of actions (i.e. last quartile Q4 or first quartile Q1). For instance, the interactive role of a participant is qualified as “high” if the number of turns she/he is responsible for is in the fourth quartile of the distribution of all turns (superior to Q3).

For the task-oriented role, we use the tendency of each participant to talk at one or another level of abstraction compared to the other participants. For example, if one participant talks more at a conceptual level than all participants on average, he/she will be characterized as high for this level. Following Barcellini et al. (2013), this metric was preferred to an evaluation of intensity of performance of a given level, because roles are aimed at characterizing the specificity of some participants compared to the others. The tendency is evaluated on the basis of relative deviation (RD), a descriptive statistic used for Contingency Tables, which highlights how each modality of a categorical variable in a column is associated with each modality of another categorical variable in a row (Bernard, 2003). By convention, there is a high positive (respectively negative) association between a participant and a theme when the absolute RD value is ≥0.2 (respectively <0.2), that is to say, that a participant tends to address this theme noticeably more (respectively less) than do the others.

With this research strategy developed to characterized roles and profiles, a question about the participants, to be considered in the analysis, may arise. We have chosen to distinguish between the way we analyze the designers–agronomists' contributions, on the one hand, and the users' contributions, on the other. We have examined the contributions of each designer independently, with the idea of analyzing their individual contributions and roles, irrespective of their status. By contrast, we have presented the users' contributions collectively, for two reasons. One is methodological: the number of users in UM1 and UM2 was unbalanced, and the users involved were not the same. We could have chosen to analyze only the contributions made in UM2 by the three users present but we did not want to ignore the richness and diversity of all the other contributions of UM1. However, it was not possible to track the 44–53 users that took part in UM1 and present their individual data. The second reason stems from the fact that many designers still need to be convinced that “users” may be valuable in a design process. We therefore thought that it would be more convincing to analyze them as an entity, even if the next step would be to show that, like the designers' contribution, that of the users is much more diverse than their user status suggests.

To complement the observations made during the meetings, we conducted semi-structured interviews with each member of the MASC© group (the seven agricultural scientists and the junior agronomist in charge of the project) in 2011. Four topics were addressed: the limits of the first and second versions of the tool; the way each member of the group judged the design process of both versions; the roles taken by everyone – including the users – in the process, and the future of the tool. These eight interviews lasted from 1 to 2 h, and were audio-recorded and transcribed.

@&#RESULTS@&#

According to the aggregation by level of abstraction, the conceptual (or philosophical) level predominates in the discussions and especially in the design meetings. The operational and functional levels are almost exclusively discussed when the users are present. The conceptual level is however also present when the users take part in the meetings (see Fig. 1
                        ).

Why do we observe such centrality of the conceptual level in all the discussions? First, it is consistent with the nature of the MASC© group. As scientists, the members of this group are more likely to question the concepts embedded in the software. The very concept of the tool is new enough to be questioned, and the concept of sustainability is sufficiently controversial to trigger these conceptual discussions. Secondly, the conceptual level is also consistent with what the group had imagined about the role of the participants who use the software. From the interviews that we conducted with them, it appears that the members of the group thought that discussions about the use of the tool would help them to question the concept underlying it. The intensity of the discussions on the conceptual level, particularly within the MASC© group, may be a good sign that they question the concept of their tool on the basis of what they learned from the users. Thirdly, discussion at conceptual level may favor a better understanding among all the participants and facilitate the establishment of common ground between participants (Clark and Brennan, 1991). Indeed, it has been shown in more classical participatory design situations (design of a mechanical product in industrial context) that the choices of themes addressed in meetings can integrate or exclude the users (Cahour, 2002). In our case, users are actually involved in the conceptual level of abstraction, which seems favorable for the group and for the enrichment of the design discussions, notably because this involvement intensifies cross discussions between the different levels of abstraction.


                           Fig. 2
                            represents the distribution of turn-taking in design (gray) and use (black) meetings, used to determine the interactive roles of participants. Fig. 3
                            represents the distribution of participants in opening and ending positions in discussions, used to reveal group-oriented roles.

Analyzing these figures reveals the specific roles of D, the junior project leader, and T, the initiator of the project. Fig. 2 shows that half of the turns taken by participants in all discussions (design and use meetings) (50% or 513 turns out of 1025: 513/1025) are by T and D. Fig. 3 shows that D is the participant who opens or closes a sequence in discussions more frequently (45% or 93 out of 207 turns in opening and ending positions, in both UM and DM: 93/207).

All the other ‘designers’ (L, B, F, C, R) contribute at the same level in discussions (from 8% to 12%, that is, 81/1025 to 127/1025) (Fig. 2). Only one participant (J) appears to participate less in discussions (fewer than 1% of interactions, 10/1025). Among them only L, B and F have a group-oriented role as they sometimes appear in beginning/ending positions in discussions, particularly in use meetings for F (Fig. 3). This may reveal some specialization of those participants during discussions, which can be clarified by the analyses presented below.

Finally, the ‘users’ are also prolific contributors as they account for 40% (175/433) of the interactions during the use meetings (Fig. 2), and are quite often in beginning/ending positions in discussions (40%, 38 beginning or ending positions of the total of 97 positions in UM) (Fig. 3). This shows that they have an active role in the regulation of the group and the task.


                           Fig. 4
                            represents the distribution of turns referring to one or another level of abstraction in discussions for each participant. It is used to define the task-oriented role.


                           Fig. 4 reveals that all participants (except J) addressed themes in references to all three levels of abstraction. This means that the ‘users’ did also participate in interactions on the concept and not only in interactions on the operational level. In fact, the ‘users’ have a distributed style of interaction as 42% (153 users' turns out of 360: 153/360) discuss the conceptual level, 34% (121/360) the operational level, and 24% (86/360) the functional level. In line with results discussed in the previous section, the scientists (D, T, B, L, C, R, F) contributed more or less at the same level of abstraction and in equivalent proportions, with an over-representation of interactions on the concept (72–77% of all their interactions), except for J who participated less than the others and only at the operational level.


                           Fig. 5
                            represents an analysis of each participant's profile. It is based on the rules described in Table 6. “Black” is used for a high level of participation in a role, “gray” for a mean level of participation, and “white” for low level of participation.

This analysis of profiles helps in clarifying five profiles of participation that support co-design within this PD process.


                           The first profile is that of D (the junior project leader): he has strong group-oriented and interactive roles and is the only one who has a production role (by coding the software). Another specificity of his profile is that he tends to contribute less to the operational level of abstraction of the task-oriented role than do the other participants. This reveals a role-complementarity as this part of the task-oriented role is taken on by users C and J. D also appears to have a strongly group-oriented role through his coordination action in discussions. In this sense, he was a facilitator of discussions supporting the design process. His profile is similar to that of a champion (Barcellini et al., 2008; Sonnenwald, 1996), for his presence seems crucial to the performance of the design process. The main difference is that D is formally employed for this task, whereas champions in OSS are the promoters of their ideas and attribute the facilitation of the process related to that idea to themselves (Barcellini et al., 2008; Crowston et al., 2007). This may be one explanation for D's mean position regarding the levels of abstraction: he is not a large contributor to the various levels of abstraction since he may not be as invested in the promotion of the software as he would have been if it had been “his” idea.


                           The second profile is that of T who appears to second D in his task. T has a similar profile (highly interactive and group-oriented roles), but he does not contribute to the code. This profile is indeed very similar to that of ‘project leader’ or ‘initiator’ in OSS, i.e. participants who are strongly present in discussions and have a strategic position, dealing with major design orientation choices, but delegating some parts of the design to other participants (mostly super-experts and champions) (Barcellini et al., 2008).


                           The third and fourth profiles are those of a super-expert group (L, F, R, B, C, J) which may be split into two sub-groups. These experts' inclination for one or another profile is explained by their experience or position regarding the design of MASC©, on which we obtained complementary information through the individual interviews:
                              
                                 −
                                 L, F, R and B have mean but complementary profiles. B talks more than other super-experts at the operational level as he is the only agronomist who has actually used the software. L is more focused (than B) on the functional level as she is very concerned about the way sustainability can be estimated (as is R). Both B and F transfer operational issues to the design group, but F does so in the use meeting whereas B does so in design meetings only.

C and J have a profile marked by a strong emphasis on a specific level of abstraction. C tends to contribute more to the operational level than do the others: he had a strong impact in discussing the use field of the tool, but mainly in design meetings. J also has a very specific profile as he is a large contributor to the operational level, whereas he participates in few sequences of design meetings. Actually, he is the expert in sensitivity analysis in the MASC© group: he is the one who studied how the tool reacted to changes in the elementary criteria or in the aggregation weights. He therefore intervenes mostly at the operational level, which relates to changes that users can make in the structure of the tool.

Finally, a last profile is that of the “users”. They have a high group-oriented role (as they open and close sequences during discussions), which gives them a strong coordination position. Regarding their task oriented role, they contribute more than others to the functional and operational levels. It is also interesting to note that they contribute as much as the others to the conceptual level of discussions, which confirms that they are important in co-designing not only the artifact but also its concept. In this position, their profile is similar to that of boundary spanners in so far as they relay ‘operational’ or ‘functional knowledge’ in discussions with designers, and are in a specific coordination position (e.g. Barcellini et al., 2008). This boundary spanner profile shows that the MASC© has succeeded in attributing a stronger contribution to users in the design process than they are often shown to have (e.g. Barcellini et al., 2008). They nevertheless remain in an in-between position, still not at the very heart of the design process.

The research proposed in this article offers methodological and epistemic contributions dealing with actual activities and roles of participants in participatory design meetings (Section 5.1), but we assume that it also has some practical contributions. These we explicitly reveal in Section 5.2, in line with the proposals of Chung and Shorrock (2011) to bridge the research-practice gap.

This study provides some guidelines on a methodological way of studying and formalizing actual activities occurring in participatory design. It provides a new example of use of the Actual Role Analysis in Design, already tested in architectural design (Baker et al., 2009), OSS design (Barcellini et al., 2013; Détienne et al., 2012b), and the design of Wikipedia (Détienne et al., 2012b; Fréard et al., 2010). This research opens an alternative way of characterizing participation in design, by focusing explicitly on the level of abstraction in which the participants are engaged regarding the design artifact. We believe that the approach has proved not only its generic interest for analyzing actual design activities in real-world design practice, but also its flexibility as it can be adapted to answer questions specific to different PD research contexts.

The present study examines the actual activities of participants (users and designers) in a participatory design process, with the idea of more specifically investigating how the concept of design is discussed and stabilized and by whom. The importance of the conceptual level of discussion was demonstrated in other design situations as well, such as in Online Epistemic Communities. In their work on collaborative design of an article related to Astronomy, on the French Wikipedia, Détienne et al. (2012b, in revision) reveal that over and above the sharing of different types of knowledge, a real issue is the way one conceptualizes the encyclopedia: a resource for everyone or a resource bringing together the most accurate, precise and recent knowledge? This leads to conflicts between the types of knowledge to be reflected by an article: astronomical knowledge contributed by scientists, and everyday knowledge contributed by enlightened amateurs. In the MASC© case we reveal that, by setting up a PD process, the agronomists–designers create a situation which allows users and designers collaboratively to design the concept ‘sustainability of agricultural systems’ at the same time as they are creating the tool. That helps participants in meetings to discuss whether the contribution of cropping systems to sustainability should be considered and how. Discussing the concept here means that participants in meetings (users and designers) are allowed to define orientations for the future, that is, to enhance to political side of participatory design (Beck, 2002). In our case, by designing one decision tree rather than another, one selects a vision of agriculture and the individuals called users are granted the right to take part in this selection.

We reveal five profiles of participation supporting the performance of participatory design discussions. They are close to those outlined in the design literature (champion, boundary spanners, leader and super-experts), particularly in the OSS context. As in OSS (Barcellini et al., 2008; Crowston et al., 2007; Mockus et al., 2002), there is a core team structured around the super-experts, the initiator of the project and a facilitator. Around this core team there is room for users' participation regarding not only usage issues (operational level, for instance), but also conceptual issues. This is in line with the OSS literature which shows that it is a key element of the success of OSS design (Barcellini et al., 2008; Raymond, 1999; Scacchi, 2001). In our case study, however, experts are so far agricultural scientists and it seems that the development of an extended core of experts should be promoted in order to enlarge co-design processes (for instance to promote constructive conflict in the sense of Baker, 2009). Likewise, we do not identify clear profiles of boundary spanners (Barcellini et al., 2008) articulating conceptual and functional/operational levels. This means that no participant involved in all design meetings transfers knowledge about functional/operational issues in these meetings; only the “users” may do so but they are not present in all meetings.

The contribution of our research to the practice of participatory design and participatory ergonomics is twofold. First, the research can contribute to improving the teaching of participatory approaches in ergonomics training programs. Second, we discuss the use of models of actual activities as tools to enhance the reflexive activities and learning of stakeholders involved in designing participatory situations and consequently to support the development and quality of the situations proposed.

Teaching the practice of ergonomics requires the construction of pragmatic skills, in order to help trainees carry out actual practices regarding transformative actions (Gadbois and Leplat, 2004; CREE, 2007). Action theory (Schön, 1983) stresses that practitioners cannot just apply pre-defined plans of action while facing a given situation. This is particularly relevant when building participatory design situations to support work transformation (Barcellini et al., 2014; Barcellini and Van Belleghem, 2014). Training programs should therefore support the construction of competences to select and to adapt participatory situations to the diversity of contexts (Gadbois and Leplat, 2004). This requires an accurate understanding of what occurs in real-world participatory situations. In this sense, this research can help in enhancing the understanding of the participants' contribution to participatory activities and the roles of participants that are necessary to build an efficient participatory process.

A second contribution of this type of research is its potential role in supporting the reflexive activities of participants involved in designing and leading participatory design situations. Organizing reflexive activities (e.g. Mollo and Falzon, 2004; Mollo and Nascimento, 2014) is viewed here as a tool to enhance the learning of stakeholders involved in participatory situations and then the organizational choices made to lead these situations. In our research, this was based on discussing a model of actual activities to “feed” reflexive work and thus to answer the initial question of the researchers-designers of MASC, to help them in enhancing their participatory situations. This approach is particularly important in the agronomic field, in which participatory design approaches are growing rapidly and stakeholders are seeking this kind of support. We began to initiate a discussion with the MASC© group about the results of this study, in particular regarding the importance of expanding the core of participants and of boundary spanning activities. The discussion about levels of abstraction made them realize that their position regarding the users required clarification. That opened debates – currently still active – on the way to move to the following steps of the process. Such a reflexive approach, to be continued, may improve the quality of collaboration (Détienne et al., 2012a) and eventually the quality of the design process and of the designed artifact. This places this current research in a research stream that tends to lend more interest to constructive learning processes in design (e.g. Béguin, 2003; Engeström and Toivainen, 2011; Barcellini et al., 2014).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This paper addresses an interesting challenge: how can we study participation and at what level of abstraction of the artifact do participants co-design? We investigated it by following a real-world case study of a participatory design process over a six-month period. To analyze this case study, we adapted the Actual Role Analysis in Design approach of Barcellini et al. (2013). To highlight the discussions occurring at the level of the concept under design, we modified the way the task-oriented role is analyzed, to focus on the themes and levels of abstraction that are addressed by participants. Although an in-depth understanding of the people and the subject is necessary for interpreting roles, this way of analyzing participation allows us to advance in our understanding of a participatory design process by showing that, in our case-study, the participation is linked with wide discussion of the concept of the design. The participation of a broad range of people clearly shows the co-design of the concept of agricultural systems' contribution to sustainability. This reinforces the need for those implementing the PD process to set up spaces in which the concept and the different levels of abstraction can be discussed.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We are grateful for the financial support of the French National Research Agency (Project POPSY, grant number ANR-08-12-STRA).

We thank Waël Benkerrour who collected the data and carried out a first analysis of them, and Liz Libbrecht for language editing the English version of this paper.

We are deeply grateful to all the participants of the MASC© group for their interest and availability, and extend special thanks to D who devoted a great deal of time to our work.

Finally, grateful thanks are due to the two anonymous reviewers and to the Journal Editor. Through their in-depth comments, they provided us with very valuable advice to improve the first version of this article.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

