@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Predicting stretcher carriage: Investigating variations in bilateral carry tests

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           All bilateral carry tests had strong performance correlations to stretcher carriage.


                        
                        
                           
                           Sensitivity and specificity analyses revealed good predictive ability of all tests.


                        
                        
                           
                           Manipulating speed and object had minimal impact on predicting stretcher carriage.


                        
                        
                           
                           Predictive equations are presented to set cut-scores for each test option.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Employment standards

Job fitness test

Physical performance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Carrying a casualty on a stretcher is a critical task within military and emergency service occupations. This study evaluated the impact of manipulating carry speed and the object type in bilateral carries on the ability to predict performance and reflect the physical and physiological requirements of a unilateral stretcher carry. We demonstrated that three task-related predictive tests; a jerry can carry performed at 4.5 km h−1or 5.0 km h−1 and a kettle-bell carry performed at 5.0 km h−1 were strongly predictive of the physical and physiological demands of an individual participating as part of a four-person stretcher carry team. Therefore, bilateral predictive assessments have the utility for predicting the suitability of employees to effectively and safely conduct a four-person unilateral stretcher carry.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Physical employment standards are developed with the aim of ensuring that an employee's physical and physiological capacities are commensurate with the demands of their occupation. The implementation of scientifically-rigorous physical employment standards can lead to a workforce with increased capability and productivity (Taylor and Groeller, 2003) and have been shown to significantly reduce injuries across a range of occupations (Harbin, 2005; Larsson and Harms-Ringdahl, 2006; Rosenblum and Shankar, 2006). In occupations where tasks may be time-critical, such as military, fire, ambulance and emergency rescue, physically capable employees are paramount in ensuring that such tasks are performed effectively and efficiently. One such time-critical task is a stretcher carry, whereby the efficiency of extricating a casualty may impact on medical-related outcomes. This is exemplified in the Australian Army whereby personnel are expected to be able to extract a wounded soldier using a four person stretcher carry over a distance of 100 m.

A range of generic physical assessments have previously been used to predict stretcher carriage, such as grip strength, upright pull, dead lift, isokinetic leg strength, standing broad jump and predictive assessments of peak oxygen consumption (Knapik et al., 1999; Rice and Sharp, 1994). While generic predictive assessments are generally easy to administer, they lack specific job-related characteristics, are susceptible to body mass bias and commonly only test one specific physical construct of a task that may have multiple physical constructs (Payne and Harvey, 2010; Vanderburgh, 2008). Task simulations are considered to be the ‘gold standard’ of assessments as they replicate the actual job task (Payne and Harvey, 2010). However, team assessments introduce poor reliability, lack of standard operation, and remove the ability to accurately assess individual maximal performance. For example, a four person stretcher carry is challenging to assess during large-scale testing and individual performance is dependent on the ability of the other team members. Subsequently, task-related predictive tests provide the opportunity to assess individual performance while still assessing relevant physiological constructs.

Task-related predictive tests also provide the opportunity to manipulate test parameters to maximise the predictive ability and the physical and physiological link to the criterion task. A number of studies have reported the impact of test parameters on the physiological demands of carry tasks. Such parameters include the use of a harness (Knapik et al., 2000; Rice et al., 1996) and number of personnel (Rice et al., 1996) in stretcher carriage, as well as the carried mass (Kilbom et al., 1992; McGill et al., 2013). While these studies provide insight into the change in physiological response according to variation of task parameters, they are not conducted with the aim of developing physical employment standards. As such, they do not provide insight into how task manipulation may impact the ability of a test to reflect the physical and physiological demands of a critical task.

Our group has previously investigated the impact of carry mass and showed that, at matched carry speeds, a bilateral carry of two 22 kg jerry cans better predicted four-person stretcher carry performance when compared to a bilateral carry of two 15 kg jerry cans (Beck et al., 2015). However, the manipulation of other test parameters, such as carry speed and the object type, may enhance the predictive ability of a task-related predictive test and the physical and physiological link to the criterion task. This study aims to address this gap in knowledge.

Given that the stretcher carry involves a deeper squat relative to the jerry can carriage task, it is suspected that even when the carry speed is matched over a set distance, carry speed may be greater in the stretcher carry as a result of the time delay associated with lifting the stretcher from ground level. Similarly, an object that more closely replicates the squat depth required in picking up the stretcher and the handle dimensions of a stretcher may improve prediction of stretcher carriage. Subsequently, we established two hypotheses. The first hypothesis is that a faster carry speed in the bilateral carries will better predict performance and replicate the physical and physiological demands of stretcher carriage at 4.5 km h−1 when compared with the bilateral carries at the same carry speed (4.5 km h−1). The second hypothesis is that an object with a handle that more closely replicates that of a stretcher and requires a squat depth that more closely aligns with picking up a stretcher, such as a kettle bell, will better replicate the physical and physiological demands stretcher carriage compared with the jerry cans.

Subsequently, the aim of this study is to understand the impact of manipulating two parameters (object carried and carry speed) in bilateral carries (task-related predictive tests) on the ability to predict performance and reflect the physical and physiological requirements of a stretcher carry.

@&#METHODS@&#

Seventy-three (49 males and 24 females) Australian Army soldiers, age 40.9 ± 10.2 yrs, stature 1.72 ± 0.09 m and mass 82.5 ± 15.7 kg participated in this investigation (Table 1
                        ). Participants freely provided written informed consent prior to the commencement of the experimental protocol, with ethical approval for the investigation provided by the Australian Defence Human Research Ethics Committee (Protocol 491-07).

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

Participants attended six assessment sessions that consisted of five carry tasks and a test of cardiorespiratory fitness. Each assessment session was conducted to volitional fatigue and separated by at least 48 h rest. Assessment order was balanced to reduce the influence of systematic bias and any learning effects. Prior to, and immediately upon the completion of each assessment participants performed to two isometric tests to measure hand grip and back-leg isometric strength.

A multi-stage shuttle run test to volitional termination was used to estimate peak oxygen consumption (Léger and Lambert, 1982). Eight participants were unable to engage in running activities due to lower limb injury; for these subjects a sub-maximal cycle ergometer assessment was used to predict peak oxygen consumption from changes in cardiac frequency (Astrand, 1960; Åstrand and Ryhming, 1954). Their result was then used to compare the measured maximal oxygen consumption of each carry task to that predicted from the multi-stage shuttle run or maximal cycling test (%). Estimations of peak oxygen consumption using either Leger and Thivierge (1988) or Astrand (1960) are known to be well correlated.

Participants conducted each of five carry tasks: a stretcher carry as part of a four-member team, two jerry can carries and two kettle bell carries. All tests were conducted until volitional fatigue, with performance for each of the carries capped at a maximum carry distance of 2000 m. The performance score was the distance carried to the nearest 5 m. Participants were provided with audio guidance for pacing, with a beep provided at the 10 m and 15 m marks to guide the carry speed. Audio guides were also provided in preparing to lift and lower the carried object. Participants wore disruptive pattern combat uniform (DPCU), boots and a 22-kg weighted vest (MiR Vest Inc., San Jose, CA, USA) to simulate a typical torso borne load worn by Australian Army soldiers in the conduct of training and operational duties. A standardised warm-up was conducted prior to each session.

In the Australian Army, personnel are expected to be able to extract a wounded soldier using a four person stretcher carry over a distance of 100 m. Through detailed job task analysis and subject matter expert guidance, 4.5 km h−1 was deemed to be an appropriate carry speed, ensuring safety of the casualty and an expedited extraction. The task was observed to be conducted in a team of four whereby participants regularly swapped carry hands to reduce fatigue. This task is termed a ‘criterion task’ as it is necessary to ensure that all personnel have the requisite physical capacity to complete this task. Subsequently, we established a simulation of this unilateral task (described below) from which we sought to evaluate potential bilateral carries to predict stretcher carry performance.

Since the aim of this research was to investigate the impact of carry speed on the ability of the bilateral carries to predict performance on the stretcher carry task, pilot testing was conducted to determine alternate carry speeds to the stretcher carry (4.5 km h−1). This involved a subset of participants (n = 17) who carried two 22 kg jerry cans at the current stretcher carry speed (4.5 km h−1) and two faster carry speeds (5.0 km h−1 and 5.5 km h−1). During the 5.5 km h−1 test, participants had difficulty maintaining the required carry speed and some approached the transition between walking and running. This presented potential safety concerns as the carry becomes more dynamic and may increase injury risk. Therefore, 5.0 km h−1 was determined as the faster carry speed for the study.

In a team of four, participants were required to squat or lunge down and lift a 90.4 kg evenly loaded rigid stretcher (2290 × 540 × 125 mm, handle circumference range: 88–117 mm). The 90.4 kg mass represents the mass of an average Australian soldier (83.3 kg) plus the mass of the stretcher (7.1 kg). Olympic weight plates were used to represent the casualty mass. The carriage of the stretcher was conducted over a 25-m course at 4.5 km h−1, where upon traversing this distance participants were required to squat or lunge to lower the stretcher to the ground, turn 180° and squat to pick up the stretcher (with the opposite hand) to recommence the next 25-m transit. A 5-s period was allowed for participants to turnaround at the end of each 25-m transit, which was repeated until volitional fatigue. In order to capture individual carry performance, researchers assumed the place of participants as they failed such that the remaining participants could continue until volitional fatigue. The four participants of a stretcher carry were matched as closely as possible for height to minimise the impact of stature on carry dynamics.

Participants were required to carry two 22 kg water-filled jerry cans (330 × 175 × 470 mm, square handle diameter: 25 mm, Australian Army standard issue) bilaterally at either 4.5 or 5.0 km h−1. 22 kg reflects a jerry can completely filled with water. The carriage of the jerry cans was conducted over a 25-m course, where upon traversing this distance they were required to squat to lower the jerry cans to the ground, turn 180° and squat to pick up the jerry cans to recommence the next 25-m transit. A 5-s period was allowed for participants to turnaround at the end of each 25-m transit, which was repeated until volitional fatigue.

Participants were required to carry two 22 kg Olympic kettle bells (660 mm circumference, 110 mm handle circumference, 245 mm from base to centre of handle) bilaterally at either 4.5 km h−1 and 5.0 km h−1. The carriage of the kettle bells was conducted over a 25-m course, where upon traversing this distance they were required to squat or lunge to lower the kettle bells to the ground, turn 180° and squat to pick up the kettle bells to recommence the next 25-m transit. A 5-s period was allowed for participants to turnaround at the end of each 25-m transit, which was repeated until volitional fatigue.

To compare the physiological responses between the stretcher carry and all potential assessments, cardiovascular measures (oxygen consumption and heart rate) were taken during carriage, while strength measures (grip strength and back-leg isometric strength) were taken prior to and immediately post each carriage. Participants completed the strength assessments wearing DPCU and boots only. The purpose of the pre and post-carry strength measures was to assess how closely the bilateral carries reflected the physical demands of the stretcher carry.

Heart rate (Polar Team 2, Polar Electro Inc, NY, U.S.A) and oxygen consumption (Metamax 3B, Cortex, Leipzig, Germany) measures were collected on a subset of participants (n = 25). Data were recorded at 5 s intervals during each of the carry tasks.

Maximal grip strength was measured using a hydraulic dynamometer (‘Exacta’, North Coast Medical, Arcata, CA, USA) with the grip width set at 60 mm. Participants performed two maximal voluntary isometric contractions with each hand while seated with their upper arm aligned vertically and their elbow flexed 90° (similar to that used by Leyk et al. (2006)). The dominant hand was defined by the largest grip strength measure between the left and right hands during the collection of the first day pre-carry measure. Back and leg strength was measured using a back-leg isometric dynamometer (Muscular Meter 300 kg, Gloria TTM, Tokyo, Japan). Participants performed two maximal isometric pulls with their knees flexed 120°. If there was a discrepancy of more than 15 kg, a third measure was taken. A minimum of one minute rest between efforts was provided to ensure adequate recovery. The maximum force measured was used as the performance score. To ensure that back-leg isometric strength and grip strength were sensitive to changes in the type of carry task conducted, these measures were also taken prior to and immediately post the multi-stage shuttle run.

Analyses were conducted to relate stretcher carry performance with jerry can carry and kettle bell carry performance. Sensitivity and specificity analysis was conducted to investigate the accuracy of prediction for each of the four task-related predictive assessments. Additionally, the physiological demands of each of the carries was compared and contrasted. Further detail of this analytical method is provided below. Significance was set at an alpha level of 0.05. All statistical analyses were conducted in SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 19.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp).

Independent sample t-tests were used to compare differences in participant characteristics between males and females. One-way repeated-measures ANOVAs were used to compare performance scores in the muscular endurance and muscular strength tasks. Where the main effect was significant, pairwise comparisons using a Šidák correction for multiple comparisons are reported.

To utilise the data in the current study to determine an appropriate standard and also to conduct sensitivity and specificity analyses, a k-fold cross validation technique (Kohavi, 1995) was employed whereby the data was split into 10 equal subsamples (Refaeilzadeh et al., 2009; Rodriguez et al., 2010). Slopes, intercepts and coefficients of determination for each of the 10 folds were averaged and presented as means with standard deviations. Standards on each of the task-related predictive assessments were calculated using the averaged linear regression variables and are based on the criterion stretcher carry distance of 100 m. Sensitivity and specificity analyses were used to investigate the ability of a test to correctly classify an employee's performance on a criterion job task; in this case, a stretcher carry. Values of true positives, true negatives, false positives and false negatives were summed from each of the 10 folds. Sensitivity reflects the ability of a test to correctly identify people who can successfully complete the stretcher carry and is calculated as true positives divided by the sum of true positives and false negatives. Specificity reflects the ability of a test to correctly identify people who fail to meet the stretcher carry criterion task requirement and is calculated as true negatives divided by the sum of true negatives and false positives.

Using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, data from all carry tasks violated the assumption of normality and therefore a logarithmic transformation of the data was applied prior to conducting linear regression. The terminology used to define the strength of the coefficients of determination is in accordance with Taylor (1990); coefficients of determination were considered to be weak when R2 ≤ 0.12, moderate when 0.12 < R2 < 0.45 and strong when R2 ≥ 0.45. A test of the difference between two dependant correlations with one variable in common was used to investigate whether coefficients of determination were significantly different between each of the carry tasks. Participants who reached a carry distance of 2000 m were excluded from the regression analyses (n = 9 for the stretcher carry). A further five participants were unable to attend on their stretcher carry testing day and were also excluded from the regression analyses. All data are reported as mean ± standard deviation.

Only complete data sets were included in the analysis (10 conditions: pre and post assessments for each of the five carries). Participants who reached the maximal carry distance of 2000 m were excluded from physiological analyses (as the changes in these measures would not reflect a maximal effort). One-way repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted to investigate differences in heart rate and oxygen consumption measures between carrying tasks and to investigate pre-carry measures of back-leg isometric strength and grip strength across days. Results represent the average heart rate and oxygen consumption across the final two minutes of each of the carries.

To investigate the sensitivity of back-leg isometric strength and grip strength to changes in the type of task, a two-way repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to investigate pre and post measure differences across the five carries and the multi-stage shuttle run. Similarly, a three-way repeated measures ANOVA was employed to investigate pre and post measure differences for grip strength across the five carries and the multi-stage shuttle run as well as the dominant and non-dominant hand. Once this analysis was conducted, these statistical methods were repeated excluding the baseline condition. Where the main effect was significant, pairwise comparisons using a Šidák correction for multiple corrections are reported. Effect sizes are reported as partial eta squared (ηp
                           2) values (Fritz et al., 2012).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Performance data for all carries are summarised in Table 2
                        . There was a significant main effect of carry task on carry distance (F(1.15, 43.64) = 80.074, p < 0.001, ηp
                        2 = 0.68) with stretcher carry distance being significantly greater than all other carry tasks. Pairwise comparisons revealed significant differences between all carry tasks with the exception of no significant difference between the two jerry can carries (p > 0.05) or the two kettle bell carry speeds (p > 0.05).

Strong positive correlations were found between stretcher carry performance and all other carry tasks (Figs. 1–4
                        
                        
                        
                        ). The coefficients of determination between the stretcher carry and each test were not significantly different (p > 0.05). Parameters from the k-fold cross validation for each of the task-related predictive tests are shown in Table 3
                         and form predictive equations to relate performance on a task-related predictive test to stretcher carry performance, noting that a logarithmic transformation has been applied to the data. These equations were then used to calculate cut scores for each of the four task-related predictive tests based on the criterion stretcher carry distance of 100 m (Table 3).

Of the 73 participants, two participants failed to meet the criterion stretcher carry distance of 100 m. All task-related predictive tests exhibited low numbers of false positives and false negatives. The jerry can carry (4.5 km h−1) and kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1) had the smallest number of false negatives (1 false negative; Table 4
                        ). The jerry can carry (5.0 km h−1) and kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1) had the smallest number of false positives (zero false positives). Cumulatively, the kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1) had the smallest number of false negatives and false positives. Sensitivity ranged from 0.96 to 0.98, while specificity was limited by the low numbers or absence of true negatives.

To investigate whether back-leg isometric strength and grip strength were able to detect changes in the type of task conducted, comparisons were made between pre and post measures for the carry tasks and for the multi-stage shuttle run. The comparison to the multi-stage shuttle run was made as this task is very different in nature; it does not require load carriage and is conducted at a much faster movement speed. There was a significant interaction effect of activity and time for back-leg isometric strength (F(3.451, 103.519) = 3.550, p < 0.05, ηp
                           2 = 0.106). Within-subjects contrasts showed that all carry tasks had significantly different changes in pre-to-post carry response compared to the multi-stage shuttle run (p < 0.05), aside from the kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1). Similarly for grip strength, there was a significant interaction effect of activity and time (F(2.881, 100.828) = 19.276, p < 0.001, ηp
                           2 = 0.355). Within-subjects contrasts showed that all carry tasks had significantly different changes in pre-to-post carry grip strength compared to the multi-stage shuttle run (p < 0.001). These results demonstrate that back-leg isometric strength and grip strength were able to discriminate between carry and non-carry tasks.

For each strength measure, comparisons were made across testing days to investigate the presence of any cumulative fatigue. Back-leg isometric strength significantly changed across days (F(3.287, 141.337) = 4.418, p < 0.05, ηp
                           2 = 0.093). Post-hoc analysis revealed that a 5.8% decline in back-leg strength occurred between the first and last day of testing (p < 0.05). However, as a balanced study design was used, this did not affect between-carry comparisons. Similarly, pre-carry grip strength did not change across days for the participant's dominant hand (F(4,184) = 1.303, p > 0.05, ηp
                           2 = 0.028), or non-dominant hand (F(4,184) = 1.792, p > 0.05, ηp
                           2 = 0.037), indicating that measures of grip strength did not reflect any cumulative fatigue.

A summary of pre and post strength measures for each carry task is shown in Table 5
                           . For back-leg isometric strength, there was no main effect between carry tasks (F(2.956, 124.165) = 0.052, p > 0.05, ηp
                           2 = 0.001), however there was a main effect of time with a decline of 11.3% (F(1,42) = 125.440, p < 0.001, ηp
                           2 = 0.749) from the pre-carry measure to the post-carry measure. There was a significant interaction effect between carry and time (F(3.118, 130.956) = 3.464, p < 0.05, ηp
                           2 = 0.076). Within-subjects contrasts showed that only the kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1) demonstrated a significantly different pre-to-post-carry response to the stretcher carry (p < 0.05), with a 7.6% reduction in post-carry back-leg isometric strength compared to 14.1% in the stretcher carry.

For grip strength, there was no main effect between carry tasks (F(3.146, 122.688) = 2.051, p > 0.05, ηp
                           2 = 0.050). There was a main effect for handedness with the dominant hand being 8.2% stronger (F(1, 39) = 30.739, p < 0.001, ηp
                           2 = 0.441). There was also a main effect for time with a decline of 18.0% (F(1, 39) = 123.503, p < 0.001, ηp
                           2 = 0.760) from the pre-carry measure to the post-carry measure across all carries. There was an interaction effect between handedness and time (F(1,39) = 9.062, p < 0.05, ηp
                           2 = 0.189) with the dominant hand fatiguing less (15.9%) than the non-dominant hand (20.3%) from the pre-carry measure to the post-carry measure. Importantly, there was no interaction effect between carry and time (F(2.360, 92.024) = 2.082, p > 0.05, ηp
                           2 = 0.051). This result indicates that there were similar declines in grip strength across all carry tasks.

Oxygen consumption (L.min−1) measured during the final two minutes of each carriage condition are presented in Fig. 5
                        . Although the stretcher carry task was significantly longer in duration (p < 0.05) than each of the other carry assessments, there were no differences between any of the muscular endurance assessments for maximal oxygen consumption (L.min−1) at the point of volitional fatigue (p > 0.05). This indicates that on average participants performed each carriage assessment to a similar metabolic workload. This represents 75–80% of predicted VO2 peak.

Similarly, peak heart rate (at volitional fatigue) (Fig. 6
                        ) was not different between the stretcher carry and either of the muscular endurance assessments (p > 0.05). This represents 85–95% of predicted peak heart rate as determined during the beep test suggesting that participants completed all assessments to maximum effort.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study evaluated the impact of manipulating carry speed and the object type in bilateral carries on the prediction of performance and the ability to reflect the physical and physiological requirements of a stretcher carry. The key outcomes of this study were that all four task-related predictive tests had strong performance correlations to the stretcher carry with sensitivity and specificity analyses revealing low numbers of false negatives and false positives. Pre and post-carry back-leg isometric strength and grip strength measures for each of the bilateral carries showed similar responses to the unilateral stretcher carry, with the exception of the kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1) in which the decline in post-carry back-leg strength relative to pre-carry measures was significantly less than that of the stretcher carry. These results indicate that the manipulation of carry speed and the object type did not improve the performance relationship or physiological link to stretcher carriage, negating our proposed hypotheses.

One hypothesis was that the squat depth required in picking up the kettle bells (handle height = 245 mm) would better reflect the dynamics of the stretcher carry (handle height = 125 mm). However, the additional demands of increased squat depth at the start and end of each 25 m segment relative to the jerry can carry (handle height = 470 mm) were not reflected in back-leg isometric values. In fact, declines in back-leg isometric strength from pre-to-post-carry measures were significantly less in the kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1) relative to the stretcher carry. This result must be considered when selecting and implementing a test to assess individual stretcher carriage and indicates that the physical demands of this test, as measured by back-leg isometric strength, are lower than that of the stretcher carry. A possible explanation for this observation is that better lifting technique is used during the kettle bell carry as it allows for a split-stance squat. This split-stance squat can also be achieved during the stretcher carry, but it is hypothesised that there is a greater requirement on back musculature to stabilise the load when conducting this unilateral task. This additional stabilisation, in addition to the longer carry distances, likely explains the similar declines in back-leg strength between the stretcher carry and the other three task-related predictive tests, despite the lower overall mass carried in the stretcher carry. This hypothesis is supported by a study that reported lower spinal compression in a bilateral carry of 60 kg relative to a unilateral carry of 30 kg (McGill et al., 2013).

Since handle diameter and shape has been shown to effect grip strength (Blackwell et al., 1999; Seo and Armstrong, 2008), we hypothesised that the kettle bell handle, which better reflected that of the stretcher, would better replicate the physical demands of stretcher carriage compared to the jerry cans. We also hypothesised that post-carry declines in grip strength for the 5.0 km h−1 carries would be less than that of the 4.5 km h−1 carries due to the reduced duration the load was carried in the hands per 25 m segment. However, there were similar declines in grip strength across all tasks. This may be explained by the same carried mass in the jerry can and kettle bell carries, similar carry distances and that the variation in carry speed may not have been substantial enough to induce significant changes in pre and post-carry measures. It is assumed that the lower carried mass and use of alternating hands in the stretcher carry would act to reduce the demand on the hand and forearm musculature. However, this may be offset by the increased carry distance in which the stretcher was carried approximately twice as far as the other carry tasks. Additionally, the oscillation of the stretcher has been reported to vary vertical forces at the stretcher handle by 50 N (Leyk et al., 2006) and this may exacerbate the demands on the hand and forearm musculature during stretcher carry. Percentage declines (16–20%) in maximal grip strength post-carry relative to pre-carry in both dominant and non-dominant hands were similar to the declines reported in our previous study (12–18%) in which we reported the mean of a 15 s isometric contraction (Beck et al., 2015) and similar to the 20% reported by Leyk et al. (2006). When comparing hand dominance, grip strength declines in this study were significantly greater in the non-dominant hand relative to the dominant hand. This is in contrast to our previous study (Beck et al., 2015), in which the quantification of grip strength was different, but similar declines have been observed previously (Knapik et al., 2000). However, the magnitude of grip strength decline in the non-dominant hand of the Knapik study (41.8%) is far greater than that observed in this study (20.3%). This may be due to the bilateral stretcher used in the study by Knapik et al. (2000) when compared to the unilateral stretcher carry used in our study in which alternating hands are used every 25 m segment.

The finding that there were no differences in oxygen consumption at the completion of each muscular endurance assessment was important as this indicates that, on average, participants performed each carriage assessment to a similar metabolic workload allowing for true maximal performance correlations. However, when oxygen consumption was normalised to body mass and total mass carried, maximal oxygen consumption (mL kg−1 min−1) was significantly higher at the completion of the stretcher carry compared to each of the other tasks except for the kettle bell (5.0 km h−1) indicating that these two tests required more oxygen per kilogram carried. This outcome was previously demonstrated for the stretcher carry (Beck et al., 2015) and could reflect the requirement to utilise the lower body during the placement of the stretcher and kettle bells at each 25 m interval. Whilst there were no differences in the maximal oxygen consumption at the completion of each muscular endurance assessment, future work should focus on the metabolic requirements at the cut-score.

When compared to our previous study (Beck et al., 2015), the 22 kg jerry can carry (4.5 km h−1) demonstrated similar correlations to stretcher carry performance (R2 = 0.58 in the current study, R2 = 0.59 in the previous study). However, we were unable to conduct sensitivity and specificity analyses in this previous study. To our knowledge, the current study is the first time that K-fold cross validation has been used to enable the development of regression equations and conduct sensitivity and specificity analyses in the development of physical employment standards. These validation techniques are commonly used in medical and biological research (eg. Gardy et al., 2003; Hess et al., 2006; Polat and Güneş, 2007), but to our knowledge have not been used in the development of physical employment standards previously. Only two prior studies in the development of employment standards have utilised sensitivity and specificity analyses to assess the predictive accuracy of a test (Rayson et al., 2000; Sothmann et al., 2004) despite numerous researchers highlighting the importance of doing so (Payne and Harvey, 2010; Tipton et al., 2013). The requirement of a large sample size to develop regression equations comparing performance on a task and a test as well as to conduct sensitivity and specificity analyses may be limiting the use of such analyses in the development of physical employment standards. The use of cross validation techniques whereby the same sample can be used to both develop regression equations and assess the predictive accuracy of a test may increase the utility of sensitivity and specificity analyses.

Sensitivity and specificity analyses are critical steps in the development of physical employment standards to investigate the rate of misclassification of a test (Payne and Harvey, 2010). Minimising false-negatives is essential as the test may exclude personnel that fail a test even though they are capable of performing a stretcher carry. Minimising false-positives is required in order to reduce the number of personnel that may be deemed as suitable but in fact may not be physically capable of performing a stretcher carry, thereby exposing them to an increased risk of injury. In this study, the sensitivity of each task-related predictive test was very high with the majority of participants being correctly classified. Similar to Rayson et al. (2000), however, the analysis was limited by the number of participants who failed to meet either the criterion task requirement or the associated cut-scores on each of the tests. Regardless, this analysis demonstrates the strong predictive ability of each test in classifying a soldier's ability to conduct a stretcher carry.

One limitation of this study was that despite the stretcher carry being a unilateral task, we did not evaluate the utility of unilateral carries to predict performance in the stretcher carry. This decision was largely driven by the McGill et al. (2013) study that demonstrated increased spinal compression and shear in unilateral carries that were half the carry mass of bilateral carries. Subsequently, it was thought that repetitive exposure to unilateral carries (as opposed to rare exposures, such as casualty extractions in the field) may increase injury risk over time. Additionally, we used weighted vests to simulate a typical torso borne load worn by a soldier. As the configuration of these loads can differ between soldiers and between operational tasks, we standardised this by using evenly-loaded weighted vests. However, the weighted vests may not reflect load distributions across all scenarios and this was not accounted for in our study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A stretcher carry is a critical task for a wide variety of occupations including military personnel and emergency services. Given the criticality of this task, it is necessary to ensure that personnel have the requisite physical ability to be able to effectively and safely conduct this task. This study evaluated the impact of manipulating carry speed and the object type in bilateral carries on the ability to predict performance and reflect the physical and physiological requirements of a stretcher carry. The results of this study demonstrated that, aside from measures of back-leg isometric strength in the kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1), the manipulation of carry speed and the object carried did not impact upon the prediction of performance and the reflection of the physical and physiological requirements of a stretcher carry. All four task-related predictive tests had strong performance correlations to the stretcher carry and correctly classified the performance of the majority of participants. Pre and post-carry back-leg and grip strength measures were shown to be similar between all tests and the stretcher carry, with the exception of the kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1) in which the decline in post-carry back-leg strength relative to pre-carry measures was significantly less than that of the stretcher carry. In summary, the task-related predictive tests of a jerry can carry (4.5 km h−1), jerry can carry (5.0 km h−1) and kettle bell carry (5.0 km h−1) were all shown to strongly predict performance and reflect the physical and physiological demands of a four-person stretcher carry. Predictive equations have been provided and can be used to determine appropriate cut-scores on each of the tests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of Ms Heather Bowes and Mr Lachlan Hingley in the conduct of the trial and the support of the Australian Army, particularly LTCOL Melanie Cochbain and WO Andrew Cutts.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

