@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Ingress and egress motion strategies of elderly and young passengers for the rear seat of minivans with sliding doors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A quick method was proposed to identify ingress and egress motion strategies.


                        
                        
                           
                           Elderly and young passengers differed in their preference of ingress strategies.


                        
                        
                           
                           Elderly and young passengers had similar preference of egress strategies.


                        
                        
                           
                           The motion strategies seem to be not car dimension dominant but passenger dominant.


                        
                        
                           
                           The motion strategies requiring less exertion tend to be adopted more frequently.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Ingress

Egress

Motion strategies

Passengers

Minivans

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study investigates the motion strategies performed by elderly and young passengers while entering and exiting the rear seat of minivans with sliding doors. A minivan mock-up was constructed with four adjustable parameters to represent nine different conditions of vehicle geometry. Ten elderly male participants (66.8 ± 3.8 years old) and ten young male participants (31.5 ± 6.6 years old) were recruited. Each of them entered and exited the minivan mock-up for five times under each condition, and the motion data were acquired by the optical motion capture system. Based on the criteria derived from previous studies, all motions were automatically categorized into seven ingress motion strategies and seven egress motion strategies. Further, the differences among motion strategies are discussed in terms of vehicle factors and passenger factors, which provide clues for future studies.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Personal transportation helps the elderly people maintain social participation and hence is critical to their quality of life. Among the several choices, automobiles are commonly adopted. Due to the aging effects, many elderly people experience difficulties in driving and thus have no choice but to move from the driver's seats to the passengers' seats. Although this transition makes the task become easier, some of them are still facing challenges while entering and exiting the cars. For example, Petzäll (1995) indicated that suitable dimensions of door width and roof height, as well as adequate positions of handles, are considered by elderly and disabled passengers as the requirements for the safe and comfortable entrances to cars used in taxi services. Besides, it was found that older people have more problems with getting in and out of the car than young people do, which is mainly due to the inadequate configurations of the side sill, roof, and seat cushion (Herriotts, 2005). All these improper designs will hinder the elderly passengers from neutral postures and smooth movements during ingress and egress, which may lead to increased physical load and dissatisfaction. Therefore, investigating the ingress and egress motions of the elderly passengers in reaction to a variety of car types is a quite important issue for automobile manufacturers.

Considering the ingress and egress motions, one topic of interest is how passengers enter and exit the cars differently. For example, according to Kawachi et al. (2005) and Reed and Huang (2008), there are generally two ingress motion strategies including the head-first strategy and the hip-first strategy, depending on whether the head or the hip passes through the door frame first while getting into the car. In addition, Ait El Menceur et al. (2009) used the sequence of foot/hip placement and joint articulation such as trunk flexion/extension and internal/external rotation as the indicators to identify six ingress motion strategies for the driver's seat of small cars and minivans, including lateral sliding, backward motion, median motion, forward motion, trunk backward, and trunk forward. Among these findings, all of them were interpreted based on the results of kinematic analyses, which usually require great time and effort for the reconstruction of motion data. Thus, a quick method for identifying ingress/egress motion strategies following these criteria would be of great help.

On the other hand, it is particularly interesting to further know about the difference between elderly and young passengers in their ingress/egress motion strategies, which may be caused by aging effects such as impaired muscle strengths and balance abilities. Nakahama et al. (2001) identified three specific motion patterns of older people that require hand supports to facilitate ingress and egress. Chateauroux and Wang (2010) also observed a unique egress strategy performed only by older drivers for four types of cars, in which hand supports are necessary for helping them exit the car more easily. In addition, as reported by Chateauroux et al. (2007), car accessibility is considered to be an important factor in the elderly drivers' car choice. More specifically, difficulties of the elderly drivers mainly depend on their body height, physical condition, and vehicle geometry. Among the several size parameters, the width and height of the door frame were concluded as critical ones. Thus, it is also of concern how the ingress/egress motion strategy relates to car design and the passenger's subjective feelings.

For elderly passengers, minivans are usually considered as one the most suitable choices because of the larger entrance, higher seats, and some other devices such as sliding doors or assisting handgrips (Bodenmiller et al., 2002). However, there are quite few studies focusing on the ingress and egress motion for this type of cars used by elderly passengers. Therefore, the objective of this study is to categorize how elderly passengers would enter and exit the rear seat of minivans with sliding doors, as well as investigating how the strategies differ from those performed by young passengers.

@&#METHOD@&#

In order to represent the varying vehicle geometry, a minivan mock-up was constructed with four adjustable size parameters, including roof height, door width, floor height, and (rear) seat height, as illustrated in Fig. 1
                         and Fig. 2
                        . Adjustable dimensions of the mock-up were determined through the survey of existing minivans. Considering the left hand traffic in Japan, this mock-up was designed to simulate the case that the passenger enters and exits the minivan from the left hand side of the rear seat. Besides, since the need for hand support is also of great concern, a set of headrest and seat back is provided in front of the rear seat as the front passenger seat, so that the participant may put either hand or both hands on it to keep better balance during ingress and egress. In case that the participant's body might be hidden by the front passenger seat from the cameras, the set of headrest and seat back is connected to the base frame of minivan mock-up by only one inclined pillar. As shown in Fig. 1, a piece of cushion made of the same material as the headrest is attached to the upper part of the inclined pillar on the posterior side as well. This setting helps retain the restriction of the participant's leg movements, which commonly exists while entering or exiting the rear seat of real minivans. In other words, the participant will be able to stretch the legs only after being well seated.

Each size parameter contains three levels (low/narrow, medium, high/wide), and there are hence at most 81 combinations. Based on the survey of seventeen minivans (all equipped with sliding doors) manufactured by seven car companies, the unreasonable combinations have been eliminated and only nine were chosen as the experimental conditions, as shown in Table 1
                        . They are generally categorized into three groups (L, M, and H) according to the roof height. As shown in Figs. 1 and 2, the side step is of the same size (420 mm in length, 150 mm in width, and 10 mm in thickness) under all conditions. It was placed 10 mm posterior to the inner edge of the front pillar of the door frame (B-pillar), while aligning the side edge of the door frame horizontally. Including its own thickness, the side step was set 234.5 mm high to the ground.

The Vicon MX motion capture system was adopted to capture the locations of optical markers attached to the 89 pre-specified anatomical landmarks at the frequency of 200 Hz, so that the body movements during ingress and egress can be reconstructed and analyzed. In addition, twenty optical markers were placed on the corners of (front) seat back, (rear) seat pan, door frame, car floor, and side step to help understand the participant's interaction with the car components.

In this study, ten elderly male (between 60 and 72 years old) and ten young male (between 22 and 40 years old) participants were recruited. The demographics and anthropometric characteristics of the participants are summarized in Table 2
                        . As shown in Table 3
                        , the anthropometric data of the recruited participants are compared with those of the Japanese population of corresponding age ranges. According to the results of Z-test, the elderly and young males recruited in this study generally represent the Japanese males in terms of body height and body weight.

The experiment started with few simple demographic questions and the BBS (Berg Balance Scale) test (Berg et al., 1989). The balance ability can be used not only as one of the individual characteristics but also as the criteria for determining whether the participant is capable for safely conducting the experiment. Among the twenty participants, all of them scored 54 or higher (out of 56), which indicates independent balance ability. Then, after measuring fourteen items of body dimensions and placing 89 optical markers on the participant's body surface, the timed up-and-go (TUG) test (Podsiadlo and Richardson, 1991) was conducted to access the participant's mobility. Combining the results of BBS test and TUG test, all the twenty participants were identified with a low falling risk and the mobility level of “mostly independent” or “freely mobile”.

Subsequently, the participant entered and then exited the minivan mock-up for five times under each of the nine conditions presented in a randomized sequence, as shown in Fig. 3
                        . The participant was allowed to freely choose whether to use the side step, as well as whether to put his hand(s) on the B-pillar (the center pillar) or the front seat to support his body weight during ingress and egress. After completing the five trials under a specific condition, the participant was asked “to what extent did you exert physical efforts of the whole body during the last five trials.” Answers were collected separately for ingress and egress following the OMNI scale RPE (Ratings of Perceived Exertion) between 0 and 10, in which higher scores represent higher intensity (Robertson et al., 2003). In the mean time, collisions with the car components were recorded based on the participant's own report and the experimenter's observation. Here, the intentional hand contacts, contacts between feet and car floor, and contacts between buttock and seat pan were not considered as collisions. Finally, the markers were removed from the participant's body surface to finish the experiment. The whole process takes about 3 h for each participant.

For each participant, a total number of 45 trials of ingress motions and 45 trials of egress motions were captured. However, considering the efficiency of data analysis, only one representative trial was selected under each condition. This is because that after a few trials, the participant finally got used to the current condition and hence would perform the ingress/egress motion more naturally according to his own preference. Following this policy, the 5th repetition was picked for all cases. Once the 5th trial was recorded with unacceptable data quality, an exception was then made by taking the 4th one instead. As a result, there are ninety ingress motions and ninety egress motions to be analyzed for either the elderly or the young group.

In previous studies, kinematic parameters were often used to help identify motion strategies (Kawachi et al., 2005; Reed and Huang, 2008; Ait El Menceur et al., 2009). For this purpose, every set of motion capture data needs to be reconstructed prior to data analysis. The process of data reconstruction includes labeling the markers, building the relationships among markers, and repairing missing markers caused by occlusion. However, the full 89-market-set will be required only when 3-D kinematics are considered for advanced analyses. In the current study, we focused on the ingress/egress motion strategy based on the interaction between the passenger and car components. Thus, not each of the 89 markers is always required. For example, as the passenger moves either foot onto the car floor, only the positions of markers paced on both feet are needed to provide information about how and when it happens, while other markers can be ignored. Table 4
                         summarizes the seventeen markers required to help identify motion strategies during ingress and egress.

Moreover, since the motions were captured at the frequency of 200 frames per second, a series of ingress or egress motion lasting for 15 s would hence contain 3000 frames. Nevertheless, not every single frame contributes to the characterization of motion strategies. Instead, the differences among strategies are usually highlighted at the moments when the passenger's body posture is affected by the interaction with car components. For example, as the head passes through the door frame, the body posture may be changed in order to react to the different roof height or door width. Some may lower the head or rotate the torso to reduce the risk of collision, while others just keep the head and torso up straight as moving into or out of the door frame. In other words, each individual takes a specific posture according to the relationship between his body size and the vehicle geometry or for some other reasons. Therefore, this should be selected as one of the key frames that can represent the main features of the whole motion. For the moments between any two adjacent key frames, they are affected less by these factors and hence can be eliminated for data compression. As a result, a motion trial of ingress/egress can be presented in terms of a small number of key frames, which further reduces the complexity. In this study, there are nine key frames defined for either the ingress motion or the egress motion. These key frames are generally the moments when the passenger changes his posture according to the interaction with car components including car floor, door frame, and rear seat.

The descriptions, definitions, and purposes of each key frame used for ingress motion and egress motion are summarized in Tables 5 and 6
                        
                         respectively. Once the nine key frames of the ingress motion or the egress motion are identified along with the corresponding information listed in Tables 5 and 6, its specific pattern, i.e. the motion strategy, can be determined automatically.

In addition to the whole-body movements, the use of hands to support the body weight is also of concern. By comparing the positions of the markers attached on the participant's two hands (between the 2nd and the 3rd metacarpals) and those on the corners of the door frame and front seat, it helps identify whether the passenger has put his hand(s) on the B-pillar or seat back of the front seat to enhance balance during ingress and egress, as well as estimating the contact positions. Besides, verification of the participant's body collisions against the car components was performed based on the marker positions. With all the information mentioned above, the natures of motion strategies can be understood in more details.

Following the corresponding information obtained along with each of the nine key frames, the specific pattern of a trial of ingress or egress, i.e. motion strategy, can be automatically identified according to: (1) the leading part of body movement (head or hip) while passing through the door frame (KF3/KF5 for ingress and KF4/KF6 for egress), (2) the amount of torso rotation (“rotated if torso being rotated by 45° or more; straight if torso being not rotated or rotated less than 45°”) while passing through the door frame (KF3/KF5 for ingress and KF4/KF6 for egress), (3) the sequence of foot (onto or from the car floor) and hip (onto or from the rear seat pan) placement (KF4/KF6/KF8 for ingress and KF2/KF3/KF5 for egress), and (4) the use of side step (yes or no; KF7 for ingress and KF7 for egress). For example, if the nine key frames of a trial of ingress motion is the same as presented in Table 5, it will be characterized as “head passing the door frame first with torso up straight, and then both feet and hip being placed in the sequence of RHL (right foot, hip, and then left foot) without the use of side step.” Similarly, if the sequence of the nine key frames of a trial of egress motion is the same as shown in Table 6, it will be characterized as “head passing the door frame first with torso rotated, and then both feet and hip being moved in the sequence of LHR (left foot, hip, and then right foot) with the use of side step.” In this way, all of the ninety ingress motions and ninety egress motions of either group can be characterized, classified, and interpreted (depending on how they look like) as the motion strategies of ingress and egress with high efficiency and consistency. Further, in case of exceptions, the results of automated identification have been validated by manually checking the recorded videos from the first second to the last second. The success rate was 100%, demonstrating a high degree of validity.

In this section, the identified strategies of ingress and egress motions are summarized and compared depending on how they look like, along with the frequency of each strategy. Besides, the variation of motion strategies are also discussed in terms of vehicle factors and passenger factors.

As Fig. 4
                         shows, there are totally seven ingress strategies observed in this study for all the ten elderly and ten young participants, including the forward strategy (FWD), the left-foot-first stand-and-sit strategy with the use of side step (SS-L/s), the right-foot-first stand-and-sit strategy with the use of side step (SS-R/s), the right-foot-first stand-and-sit strategy (SS-R), the inward strategy (IWD), the inward strategy with the use of side step (IWD/s), and the backward strategy (BWD).

Among the seven ingress strategies, two (SS-R and BWD) are unique strategies performed by either group only, whereas the other five are commonly taken by both groups. The stand-and-sit strategy with the right foot placed onto the car floor first (SS-R) was performed only by elderly passengers, while both elderly and young passengers adopted the similar ingress strategy with the use of side step (SS-R/s). In addition, both elderly and young passengers took the stand-and-sit ingress strategy with the use of side step, in which the left foot was placed onto the car floor first (SS-L/s). For the remaining four ingress strategies, the passenger generally placed the right foot onto the floor, sat down, and then moved the left foot in. Among them, the inward strategy and the forward strategy were observed in both groups, but they are different in the amount of torso rotation as the passenger moved through the door frame. Those who took the inward strategy rotated the torso to face toward inside of the vehicle while moving through the door frame, no matter whether the side step was used (IWD/s) or not (IWD). In the case of the forward strategy (FWD), the passenger kept his torso up straight while moving through the door frame. In addition, the unique backward ingress strategy (BWD) was only performed by young passengers. Unlike all the other ingress strategies, the passenger moved the hip through the door frame earlier than the head.

Considering the most common ingress strategy, elderly passengers and young passengers had different preferences. Most elderly passengers (43%) decided to take the stand-and-sit strategy with the right foot placed onto the car floor first, along with the use of the side step (SS-R/s). While taking this ingress strategy, some elderly passengers put the left hand on the B-pillar (the center pillar) or the right hand on the headrest of the front seat, while other elderly passengers used both the left hand (on B-pillar) and the right hand (on front seat) to keep balance. As for young passengers, the inward strategy with the use of side step (IWD/s) was performed most frequently (57%).

As for egress, there are totally seven egress strategies observed in this study for all the ten elderly and ten young participants, as shown in Fig. 5
                        , including the stand-and-down strategy with the use of side step (SD/s), the turn-and-down strategy with the use of side step (TD/s), the backward strategy with the use of side step (BWD/s), the forward strategy (FWD), the forward strategy with the use of side step (FWD/s), the outward strategy (OWD), and the outward strategy with the use of side step (OWD/s).

Among the seven egress strategies, four are unique strategies performed by either group only, whereas the other three are commonly taken by both groups. The stand-and-down strategy with the use of side step (SD/s) was performed merely by elderly passengers, in which the passenger stood on the car floor with both feet first and then walked down to the side step and then the ground. Besides, the turn-and-down strategy with the use of side step (TD/s) was taken by both elderly and young passengers, in which the passenger first turned to face toward outside and then walked down to the ground by using the side step. Further, the unique backward strategy with the use of side step (BWD/s) was observed only in young passengers' egress motion, in which the passenger stood on the car floor with both feet, turned to face inside of the vehicle, and then stepped down backwards. As for the remaining four egress strategies, the passenger generally moved the left foot out, stood up, and then moved the right foot out. Among them, the forward strategy was observed only by young passengers, no matter whether the side step was used (FWD/s) or not (FWD). The main feature of this egress strategy is similar as that of the forward ingress strategy. In addition, the outward strategy is characterized by the amount of torso rotation when the passenger moves out through the door frame. Both elderly and young passengers took this strategy by turning the upper torso to face toward outside while moving through the door frame, no matter whether the side step was used (OWD/s) or not (OWD).

Furthermore, it was found that elderly passengers (82%) and young passengers (45%) had the same preference of the outward strategy with the use of side step (OWD/s) as the most common egress strategy.

As mentioned in Section 2.1, the nine conditions representing varying vehicle geometry were divided into three groups according to the roof height (L, M, and H). The numbers of trials observed for each ingress strategy by group are summarized in Table 7
                        . Except the strategies that were not observed at all by either age group, almost every ingress strategy was performed under all categories of vehicle geometry. Some were not observed in one or two groups of vehicle geometry, but all of them were taken less frequently. More specifically, the IWD, SS-L/s, and SS-R strategy only count for 6%, 1%, and 4%, respectively for elderly participants, while the FWD, SS-R/s, and SS-L/s strategy count for only 6%, 1%, and 1%, respectively for young participants. In addition to the roof height, the height of car floor is also of interest. For example, the side step might be especially needed as the car floor is relatively high from the ground. However, by looking into the relationship between floor height and ingress strategy (particularly the use of side step), it seems that the side step was required not particularly for the conditions with a high floor. In brief, the vehicle geometry tends to be not a significant contributor to the preference of ingress strategies.

Similar results were found in egress, as shown in Table 8
                        . It was common to observe all categories of egress strategies for each group of vehicle geometry. Among the egress strategies that were not observed in one or two groups of vehicle geometry, the OWD and TD/s strategy only count for 7% and 3% respectively for elderly participants, while the TD/s and FWD/s strategy merely count for 3% and 2% respectively for young participants. Besides, the height of car floor did not have a strong relationship with the use of side step during egress. Similarly, the preference of egress strategies might not be explained well by referring to the vehicle geometry in terms of roof and floor heights.

Although the preference of motion strategy seems to be hardly related to vehicle geometry, the same component of the vehicle may play different roles to the passenger as the motion strategy varies. During ingress and egress, fall prevention and collision avoidance are usually considered, especially for elderly passengers (Dellinger et al., 2008). However, unlike falls due to trips or loss of balance, the passenger's collisions with car components do not directly lead to higher risks of injuries. Instead, they may be sometimes treated as unintentional haptic feedbacks that allow the passenger to estimate how close he/she is to a specific component. This usually results in a smoother ingress or egress. As Table 9
                         indicates, collisions were made commonly while performing all ingress strategies except the less frequent ones. Among those rare ingress strategies, the FWD, SS-L/s, and SS-R strategy count for 9%, 1%, and 4%, respectively for elderly participants, while the FWD, SS-R/s, and SS-L/s strategy count for 6%, 1%, and 1%, respectively for young participants. Similar findings were observed in egress, as summarized in Table 10
                        . Among the exceptions in egress, the OWD and TD/s strategy only count for 7% and 3% respectively for elderly participants. Further, among the four parameters of vehicle geometry, the door height and door width might be more related to the occurrence of collisions. More specifically, narrower door frames seem to be more likely to lead to collisions. Nevertheless, this was observed only when young participants taking the OWD or OWD/s strategy during egress. On other occasions, the frequency of collisions was not rather high under the conditions with a low/narrow door frame (L1, L2, and M1), and it was not lower under the conditions with a high/wide door frame (H3 and H4) neither. Instead, while performing the SS-R/s or IWD/s strategy during ingress, participants made more collisions under the conditions with a larger door frame. To be noted, according to the experimenter, elderly participants sometimes reported “no collision” though there actually was, which did not occur in young participants' trials at all. This seems to be an interesting topic of aging effects that worths further investigation.

On the other hand, hand contacts on the B-pillar or the front seat can be regarded as intentional haptic feedback, which actively allows the passenger to enter or exit the car more easily and smoothly with a proper support of the body weight. Fig. 6
                         and Fig. 7
                         depict the contact positions of the participants' hand(s) for each of the seven ingress strategies and seven egress strategies respectively. Both elderly and young participants tended to put their hand(s) on the front seat more while performing the motion strategies in which the side step is required (SS-R/s and IWD/s for ingress; OWD/s, TD/s, and BWD/s for egress). However, this difference seems to be not particularly prominent. Besides, elderly participants put their hands on the B-pillar or the front seat more than young participants did. It is probably due to the fact that elderly passengers prefer the stand-and-sit strategy for ingress and the stand-and-down strategy for egress, in which hand support on the front seat is necessary for supporting the body weight or providing intentional haptic feedbacks. Moreover, the contact positions are generally higher for young participants, since they are 9.6 cm taller than elderly participants in average.

Assuming that a passenger may prefer a specific ingress/egress strategy according to his/her body size, some motion strategies might be performed only by some passengers with similar body sizes. In order to examine this hypothesis, comparisons were made by dividing all the twenty participants into three groups of body sizes according to their body heights with respect to the heights of door frames, regardless of their ages. Five, twelve, and three people were included in the small (shorter than the medium roof height, i.e. 1643 mm), medium (between the medium and high roof heights), and large group (taller than the medium roof height, i.e. 1770 mm), respectively. It is important to note that all elderly participants were categorized as either small-sized or medium-sized, while all young participants were categorized as either medium-sized or large-sized.

As shown in Table 11
                        , no such cases were found for ingress strategies, except that the BWD strategy was observed only among participants of large size group. However, these nine trials were in fact performed by one participant. As for small-sized and medium-sized participants, many of them tended to prefer similar ingress strategies. More specifically, small-sized participants took the SS-R/s strategy for 71% of the trials, while medium-sized ones adopted the IWD/s strategy for 58% of the trials. In the case of large-sized participants, they demonstrated quite diverse preferences instead. In general, it seems that no specific ingress strategy was exclusively preferred by passengers of a specific group of body size, but large-sized ones tended to make rather different ingress strategies from one another than the medium-sized and small-sized ones did.

Similar trends were found with egress strategies, as summarized in Table 12
                        . The SD/s, BWD/s, and FWD/s strategy was adopted only by small-sized, medium-sized, large-sized participants, respectively. However, all these three egress strategies were performed not so frequently (counting for less than 10% of all trials, as shown in Fig. 5). In addition, no specific egress strategy seemed to be exclusively preferred by passengers of a specific group of body size. Small-sized and medium-sized participants generally exhibited a more consistent preference of OWD/s strategy (78% of small-sized ones and 66% of medium-sized ones), whereas large-sized participants had more diverse preferences of egress strategies. More specifically, there was no egress strategy counting for over 50% of the trials performed by large-sized participants.

Although the passenger's body size did not have strong relation with the preference of motion strategies, there was a noticeable relationship between the perceived exertion (OMNI scale RPE) and the frequency of motion strategies (total counts among all observations). More specifically, the strategies with less perceived exertion (resulting in lower average of RPE scores among all trials) tended to be performed more frequently for both elderly and young participants, as shown in Table 13
                        .

Moreover, by excluding the rare strategies counting for less than 5%, the tendency becomes even clearer. According to the correlation coefficients, the frequency of ingress motion strategy is highly negatively correlated with elderly passenger's self-reported exertion (r = −0.75) and perfectly negatively correlated with young passenger's self-reported exertion (r = −1.00), while the frequency of egress motion strategy is modestly negatively correlated with elderly participant's self-reported exertion (r = −0.19) and highly negatively correlated with young participant's self-reported exertion (r = −0.77). Generally speaking, the tendency is more pronounced in ingress than in egress and more pronounced with young passengers than with elderly passengers.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

As mentioned earlier, few differences among motion strategies in terms of passenger factors were found, whereas the relationship between motion strategies and vehicle factors appears to be weak. Further investigation based on kinematics and kinetics, such as the analysis of joint moments and low back compression forces, is necessary to provide more quantitative evidence about the reason why a specific motion strategy is preferred. Following this, it will be possible to predict the motion strategy that a passenger may take while entering and exiting the rear seat of a minivan, as well as how the passenger may feel during ingress and egress.

In addition, this study is a preliminary attempt to understand elderly and young passengers' ingress and egress strategies with respect to the rear seat of minivans with sliding doors. Inevitably, there exist some limitations. The major limitation of this study is the sample size. Apparently, it needs to be increased in future studies. Prior to that, a bootstrap estimate was conducted to evaluate how representative the small sample size could be. By randomly choosing any five from the ten participants in either age group, it can be treated as a random sample. Finally, variation of the percentage of each ingress or egress strategy over 252 such samples for both elderly participants and young participants was obtained and summarized in Fig. 8
                     . Comparing the two age groups, the recruited ten-people sample appears to be more suitable for explaining the general nature of elderly passengers, where a smaller variation was found. Besides, the results of egress tend to be more robust than ingress, indicating a more common preference of motion strategies while exiting the rear seat of a minivan.

In spite of the small sample size, few motion strategies were newly found in this study, including the SS-L/s strategy, the SS-R strategy, and SS-R/s strategy for ingress, as well as the SD/s for egress. This is probably due to the larger entrance space and supporting devices provided by minivans with sliding doors. By referring to the results of bootstrapping, a few more new strategies might be further observed, especially for young passengers. Definitely, it would be worthwhile to continue to investigate why these strategies were not observed in the previous studies of medium and small cars.

Moreover, according to Saito and Yamazaki (2008), during ingress and egress, female passengers may alter their posture not only in reaction to the relationship between the body size and vehicle geometry, but also in order not to get their clothing, shoes, and hair ruined. Thus, only male passengers were considered in the current study to exclude these affecting factors. Nevertheless, the motion strategies of female passengers should be studied as well by overcoming this restriction, such as designing protocols that allow female participants to dress as usual during motion capture.

Finally, owing to the limitation of optical motion capture systems, the front seat was simulated by using a set of headrest and seat back being connected to the base frame of minivan mock-up with only one inclined pillar. Although this setting helped avoid occlusion while retaining the restriction of the participant's leg movements during ingress and egress, improvements such as adopting other kinds of motion capture systems would be needed in the future studies to make it as much similar as the case of real minivans as possible.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this study, the ingress and egress motions of elderly and young males for the rear seat of minivans with sliding doors were investigated. Based on the criteria derived from previous studies, a quick alternative method was proposed for automatic identification of motion strategies based on key frame information. By comparing the similarities and differences of movements, seven ingress strategies and seven egress strategies were identified. During ingress, most elderly passengers preferred taking the stand-and-sit strategy with the right foot placed onto the car floor first, along with the use of side step (SS-R/s), while the inward strategy with the use of side step (IWD/s) was performed most frequently by young passengers. As for egress, elderly and young passengers had the same preference of the outward strategy with the use of side step (OWD/s). Further, the ingress and egress strategies seem to be more passenger dominant than car dimension dominant. More specifically, motion strategies that require less perceived exertion tend to be adopted more frequently, whereas no specific motion strategy was preferred particularly under any condition of vehicle geometry. In future works, the biomechanics of ingress and egress motion strategies will be further assessed by inverse dynamic analysis to provide more quantitative evidence of causes and effects. The risk of discomfort can be clarified based on the probability of motion strategies and the corresponding biomechanical loading on the human body. All these efforts will eventually benefit the elderly passengers by providing them with the better design for enhanced safety, greater comfort, and higher satisfaction.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This study was carried out thanks to the financial support of National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology of Japan and National Science Council of Taiwan (NSC-100-2917-I-564-013). The authors would like to express their special gratitude to Mr. Kei Aoki, Ms. Rika Ichimura, Ms. Yuko Kawai, and Mr. Shinya Masuda for all the support provided during the experiment, as well as Mr. Takaaki Arifuku for his technical assistance in building the minivan mockup.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

