@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#L4–L5 compression and anterior/posterior joint shear forces in cabin attendants during the initial push/pull actions of airplane meal carts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Low back load (L4–L5) during cart acceleration was estimated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Working situations creating the highest low back load was identified.


                        
                        
                           
                           Effect of handling type, floor type, inclination and cart weight was investigated.


                        
                        
                           
                           L4–L5 load was not greater than accepted values for single exertions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Effect of decreasing external forces on L4–L5 load was smaller than expected.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Low back load

Cabin attendants

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The aim of the present study was to assess the acute low back load of cabin attendants during cart handling and to identify working situations which present the highest strain on the worker. In a setup, 17 cabin attendants (ten females and seven males) pushed, pulled and turned a 20kg standard meal cart (L: 0.5m×
                     W: 0.3m×
                     H: 0.92m) loaded with extra 20kg and 40kg, respectively on two different surfaces (carpet and linoleum) and at three floor inclinations (−2°, 0° and +2°). Two force transducers were mounted as handles. Two-dimensional movement analysis was performed and a 4D WATBAK modelling tool was used to calculate the acute L4–L5 load.
                  No working situations created loads greater than the accepted values for single exertions, however compression and anterior/posterior shear forces during pulling and turning were much higher when compared with pushing. There were significant effects of handling the cart on different floor types, at the varying inclinations and with different cart weights. Additionally, when external forces were reduced, the cabin attendants did not decrease push/pull force proportionally and thus the L4–L5 load did not decrease as much as expected.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Limited space, standardized work routines, standardized cart size and inclined vibrating floor present special physical challenges to cabin attendants working in commercial air travel (Lee et al., 2006, 2008). Low back pain (LBP) among such employees and an increased risk of sick leave related to LBP make it relevant to investigate work-related factors that could contribute to the development of LBP (Elders et al., 2003; Wickstrom and Pentti, 1998).

In general, it is established that pushing and pulling may generate compression and shear forces which may increase the risk of developing LBP. (Hoozemans et al., 2004, 2007; Jäger and Luttmann, 1997; Jäger et al., 2007; Knapik and Marras, 2009; Laursen and Schibye, 2002; Lee et al., 1991; Lett and McGill, 2006; Marras et al., 2009a,b; Norman et al., 1998; Schibye et al., 2001). Also, limits of tolerance have been suggested for compression primarily based on epidemiological and biomechanical studies (Niosh, 1981; Jäger and Luttmann, 1997) and for shear based on tissue tolerance (Gallagher and Marras, 2012; McGill et al., 1998; McGill, 1997).

Even though earlier studies have stated that pushing and pulling activities are related to an increased risk of LBP (Hoozemans et al., 1998; Pope, 1989), more recent work (Hoozemans et al., 2002a,b) and a review by Roffey et al. (2010) have stated that push/pull activities in general are not a main risk factor in relation to LBP (Roffey et al., 2010). However, the special working conditions in the cabin and the expressed need for more studies in this area (Roffey et al., 2010) make it relevant to investigate low back loading during manual cart handling for this particular group that worldwide includes an increasing number of people who operate under very similar working conditions.

Factors such as handling type (pushing, pulling, turning), floor inclination, floor type and cart weight are expected to be related to the low back load (Al-Eisawi et al., 1999; Boocock et al., 2006; Jung et al., 2005; Laursen and Schibye, 2002), and it is important to evaluate which combinations of these factors are more likely to create the largest load on the lower back during work aboard the air craft in order to optimize future recommendations and interventions.

Handling of commercial carts has been investigated in earlier studies (Glitsch et al., 2007; Jäger et al., 2007; Schaub et al., 2007; Winkel, 1983). In the study by Winkel, female subjects were asked to accelerate the cart (push and pull) with the maximum force they perceived acceptable for repeated exertions. This experiment caused the Swedish National Board of Occupational Safety and Health to reduce its recommended limit for repetitive push and pull in this task from 200N to 100N. The carts investigated were wide body carts weighting approximately 85kg which where pushed and pulled on level carpet floor. In 2007 a comprehensive work was published on work factors, muscular capabilities and work load among German flight attendants during pushing and pulling of trolleys (Glitsch et al., 2007; Jäger et al., 2007; Schaub et al., 2007). Some of the results from the project include hand forces, posture analyses and low back load during pushing and pulling with two different cart sizes each with three different masses and on four different floor inclinations (48 actions). The main results regarding low back load showed an effect of floor inclination (0°–8°) mainly during pushing and an effect of cart weight mainly at higher floor inclinations. They also showed that pulling as in many other studies resulted in a higher low back load compared to pushing (Hoozemans et al., 2002b, 2004; Kumar, 1994; Laursen and Schibye, 2002; Lee et al., 1991; Lett and McGill, 2006; Marras et al., 2009a; Resnick and Chaffin, 1995; Schibye et al., 2001; Straker and Stevenson, 1997; van der Woude et al., 1995), however primarily with the half size cart. These data reveals that adjustments in posture and action force occur depending on cart size, manoeuvre and floor inclination.

The present study aims to further investigate lumbar spine load during cart handling, focussing on the following aspects. First, the floor type plays a role in relation to forces and low back loading during pushing and pulling because of differences in rolling friction (Al-Eisawi et al., 1999; Jansen et al., 2002; Laursen and Schibye, 2002; Marras et al., 2009b). In airplanes the floor space in the centre aisle is usually carpeted, and we hypothesized that cabin attendants are subject to a higher low back load on this kind of surface compared with floors with lower rolling friction (e.g. linoleum). Thus, recommendations to the industry to change the flooring to e.g. linoleum would depend not only on differences in friction between the two types of flooring but also on the attendant's push/pull force in the initial phase. E.g. if the linoleum reduces rolling friction by 17N compared to carpet, will we see a reduced push/pull force of about 17N on linoleum or will the attendants maintain the same push/pull force as on carpet thereby creating a faster cart acceleration and in real life, gain seconds during a stressful working day?

Secondly, in addition to pushing and pulling movements, turning movements are also included in the present study as this manoeuvre is often performed, especially in the galley where meal carts are prepared for servicing the passengers. But small turning actions also occur when attendants are pushing/pulling the cart in a straight line, as corrections of the movement direction in the narrow aisle also affect the body asymmetrically (Lee et al., 2012). Finally, low back muscle activity was recorded in order to measure the relative muscle activation during different cart manoeuvres. The estimation of low back load during cart acceleration will be used to identify working situations which present the highest strain on the worker. We present a number of recommendations for handling carts, both ergonomical and technical, that aim at reducing the risk of developing LBP.

@&#METHODS@&#

17 Cabin attendants (10 women, 7 men) with a mean age of 41.8 years (±10.1 years (SD), min/max: 24/61 years) participated. Average body weight was 70.4kg (±11.7kg), average height (173.5cm (±8.6cm) and average BMI 23.3 (±2.3)). Average number of years working as cabin attendant: 16.1 years (±10.4 years) with an average of 35.8 (±6.7) working hours per week. Standardized Nordic questionnaires for the analysis of musculoskeletal symptoms (Kuorinka et al., 1987) were used to assess musculoskeletal health. To be included in the study, cabin attendants had to work half time as a minimum, and should at least have been employed as a cabin attendant for one year (full time). Exclusion criteria were musculoskeletal symptoms within the last 7 days, musculoskeletal disorders or symptoms within the last 12 months lasting longer than 30 days, as well as pregnancy, hypertension and regular use of medicine. The subjects gave their informed written consent before participation and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Copenhagen, Denmark (HC-2009-036).

In order to perform cart handling activities in a laboratory environment similar to the aircraft centre aisle, a gradient adjustable floor (4.8m×0.8m) was manufactured. The effect of different floor types was tested with a carpet surface and a linoleum surface that were identical to the flooring in the centre aisle and galley in SAS commercial airplanes. For testing purposes, the floor inclination was adjusted to −2°, 0°, 2° and 4°. Measurements of floor inclinations during flight carried out before the study was undertaken showed a mean inclination of 2° at flight cruise level and a mean of 4° at sign off. Thus, the −2° and 2° represented pushing and pulling in the centre aisle during cruise flight while the 4° floor inclination represented cart manoeuvres in the galley right after sign off during flight. The horizontal floor was used as a reference inclination in order to relate to earlier studies.

A standard SAS meal cart with the dimensions 0.5m×0.3m×0.92m (L
                        ×
                        W
                        ×
                        H), a wheel diameter of 0.075m and a weight of 20kg was used for three handling types (pushing, pulling and turning). The top railing of the cart was removed and a custom-made rack was designed for the mounting of two force transducers, which were placed either vertically or horizontally on the cart. Oral reports from the cabin attendants showed that when pushing the cart, they primarily hold their hands in a vertical thumb-up position with their palms placed on the corners of the railing, whereas when pulling, they primarily place both hands on the horizontal railing. Thus, when measuring pushing activity, the force transducers were placed vertically on the cart with the top at the same level as the corner railing, and when measuring pulling activities, the transducers were placed horizontally at the same level as the top railing (Fig. 1
                        ). Pushing and pulling movements were performed with both hands on the force transducers. Turning the cart was performed with both hands placed vertically on the transducers as during pushing. The total cart weight was adjusted by placing loads on the bottom and centre shelf of the cart. Testing was performed with 60kg and 40kg corresponding to a fully loaded and half-loaded meal cart, respectively.

For practical reasons and to avoid fatigue among the test persons during testing, not all possible combinations of handling types, inclinations, floor types and cart weights were performed. Thus, pushing and pulling were performed on both floor types at all inclinations, however only with the 60kg cart (12 working situations). The effect of different cart weights was evaluated during pushing and pulling on both floor types but only on horizontal floors (4 working situations). Finally, turning the cart was performed at a 0°, 2° and 4° inclination with a 60kg cart on a linoleum floor surface only, as most turning occurs in the galley (3 working situations). In total, 19 working situations were recorded (Table 1
                        ).

All measurements were performed on one day. Resting electromyography (EMG) and maximal voluntary contractions (MVC) during back extension were performed prior to cart handling (Jensen et al., 1999). Before each trial the subjects stood at a self chosen distance from the cart with their hands alongside their body. After an auditory start signal, they pushed or pulled the cart for approximately 2m or they turned the cart 90° to the right. The cart was always positioned with its wheels parallel to the direction of the movement. The subjects were requested to handle the cart as they would when working aboard the aircraft and three trials of each working situation were performed. The order in which the working situations were performed was partially randomized. Thus, the subject completed pushing and pulling at the three inclinations on one floor type before continuing on the other floor type and likewise, pushing and pulling at each inclination was completed at one inclination before continuing to the next. The order of pulling/pushing, inclination and floor type was randomized between subjects.

In addition, at the end of the session, pushing and pulling of the cart (three trials) was performed with the cart placed on a force plate. This was done to assess the vertical force component during pushing and pulling as the force transducers were single axis transducers. The subjects did not stand on the force plate during these manoeuvres.

Force, video and electromyographic (EMG) were recorded. Force was recorded with single axis force transducers (KIS-2, Vishay Nobel AB, Sweden) and with a force plate (AMTI LG6-4-1, MA, USA) at 1000Hz. Video was recorded at 50Hz for 2D analysis with the camera (JVC, GR-DVL 9800, USA) placed 5m from the ramp (perpendicular view) at the same height as the force transducers on the cart. Sixteen reflective markers were placed on the subjects as illustrated in Fig. 1. Specifically markers were placed at: 1) caput metatarsalis V, 2) the malleolus of the ankle, 3) knee (lateral epicondylus), 4) hip (trochantor major), 5) shoulder (2cm distal to acromion), 6) elbow (epicondylus), 7) wrist (2 markers indicating joint centre when wrist was in vertical and horisonal position, respectively), 8) hand (2 markers indicating the distal end of metacarpus when hand was in vertical and horisonal position, respectively), 9) the mandible right under the ear. Two sets of markers were placed on the subject's wrist/hand in order to have visible markers for hand positions during both pushing and pulling. Video and force recordings were synchronized with the use of a trigger.

To assess muscle activity in the lower back, surface electromyography (EMG) was measured from the most bulky part of the right and left m. erector spinae at the L3–L4 level with a intra-electrode distance of 20mm (Amplifier: Logger technology, Sweden. Electrodes: Ambu, Neuroline 720-01-K-ambu, Denmark). EMG was sampled at 1024Hz, and low and high pass filtered at 10Hz and 400Hz, respectively. For EMG normalization, three MVCs were performed where subjects were in standing position and had support in front of their hips. Isometric back extensions were performed against a horizontal bar placed across the upper back at the level of the angular inferior of the scapula (Jensen et al., 1999). Muscle activity is reported as %EMGmax.

It is expected that the difference in force applied to the transducers when handling the cart on a carpet and linoleum surface, respectively, is equal or close to the difference in rolling friction between the two surfaces. To test this, rolling friction of the cart moving on the two floor types was measured with an electro-motor pulling the cart on the horizontal ramp at different constant velocities. The electro-motor was attached to the centre of the force transducers on the cart with metal wires. Six trials were performed.

4D WATBAK modelling tool (University of Waterloo, CA) was used to calculate the acute compression force and anterior/posterior (A/P) joint shear force on L4–L5. The model calculates compression and A/P joint shear forces at a certain time point based on the force amplitude and force direction induced on the hands and the body position (joint angles) at that particular time point (Cole et al., 2004; Laursen and Schibye, 2002; Norman et al., 1998). The model is a 2 dimensional model which include a single equivalent back extensor muscle (moment arm length=6cm). The back extensor muscle does not run parallel to the line of compression. A proportion of the extensor muscles are considered to pull at an angle from the line of compression (e.g. pars lumborum fibres of the longissimus thoracis). This influences A/P joint shear values. Also the model uses a single equivalent abdominal muscle (moment arm length=4.5cm). Finally, it includes ligament anterior shear forces contributions at high degrees of lumbar flexion.

Normally, the 4D Watbak model is used for lifting where the mass of the burden is inserted into the model. This neglects the force applied in order to accelerate the burden. In this study the actual force as a result of mass and acceleration of the mass is included in the model. Thus, the 4D WATBAK was used as a quasi-static modelling tool in the present study.

The model also calculates compression and A/P joint shear forces during turning of the cart. Turning of the cart in the current setup demands pulling with the right hand and pushing with the left hand (with very little or no trunk rotation). Thus, forces at left and right side hands have opposite direction. The model calculates the resultant force vector and uses it as a common force vector from both hands. This and the torque created by the position of the upper body create the total torque at L4–L5. The model has some limitations and is in this study used as an estimate of low back load to compare working situations as suggested by Dempsey (Dempsey, 1998) and to evaluate whether low back loads during this work raised concerns in relations to limits of tolerance. In the present paper limits of tolerance for compression forces are set at 3200N for the participating women and at 4100N for the men as suggested by Jäger and Luttman (1997) for the mean of the current age group. Anterior/Posterior joint shear limit is set at 700N as suggested by Gallagher and Marras (2012).

It was assumed that the maximal strain on the back occurred at the time of peak force application to the transducers (Hoozemans et al., 2007). Thus, the force output from the right and left transducer were summed and the time of the peak force was identified. The applied hand force was calculated as the average force during a 100ms period located from 50ms before to 50ms after the time of the peak force. The direction of force entered into the 4D WATBAK was an estimated resultant force direction. The estimation of the resultant force direction was the vector sum of the mean maximal forces applied to the transducers for each working situation and a mean maximal vertical force assessed during three trials of pushing and pulling on a force plate. The estimated force direction was used in all pushing and pulling situations, but not for turning situations. The video frame recorded closest to the time of the peak force was digitized and calibrated, and two-dimensional coordinates of joint centres were reconstructed by direct linear transformation using the Ariel Performance Analysis System (APAS vers. 10.100.0). Joint angles were then calculated in custom-made software (MATLAB, MathWorks, Inc.) and inserted into 4D WATBAK.

EMGmax was determined as the maximal mean value developed during 1s (running window) and the highest value found in the three trials was used. Root mean square EMG (RMS-EMG) using intervals of 100ms was then calculated and expressed relative to maximum EMG (%EMGmax).

Finally, rolling friction was calculated as an average of the forces from the two transducers from a 4-s period after the initial acceleration. An average of six trials with the electro-motor was calculated.

Finally, the trunk inclination is presented as the angle between vertical and the line between the markers at the hip and the shoulder.

In order to evaluate push and pull on both floor types at three inclinations solely with the 60kg cart (12 working situations), a three-way ANOVA (general linear model) (2×2×3) with repeated measures was performed. If the ANOVA resulted in interaction between e.g. inclinations and floor type, data were analyzed for each floor type and a two-way ANOVA (general linear model) (2×3) was used to evaluate the effect of inclination and pushing/pulling. In order to detect significant differences among the individual levels of inclination, post hoc Tukey tests were performed. The effect of different cart weight (40kg and 60kg) on a horizontal floor during push and pull on both floor types (4 working situations) was evaluated the same way (2×2×2). Turning the cart performed at a 0°, 2° and 4° inclination on a linoleum surface (3 working situations) was evaluated using a one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey test. When there was non-normality, a new ANOVA was performed on logarithmic data. Finally, a squared Pearson correlation value (r
                        2) was calculated for pushing and pulling, respectively, to evaluate the association between: A) the compression force and the absolute hand force applied to the transducers and, B) the A/P shear force and the absolute hand force. Eight data points representing three inclinations on two surfaces and two cart weights at a 0° inclination were included.

Data are presented as means±standard deviation in the text and as means±standard error in the figures. For level of significance, p
                        ≤0.05 was used.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The subjects reported that the current setup resembled their working conditions well and they expressed that they were able to handle the cart as they would during flight.


                     Fig. 2
                      shows typical raw force data from the pushing (upper panel), pulling (middle panel) and turning (lower panel) manoeuvres. The hand force peaks 0.5–1s after force application begins. At the time of peak force application, the static friction is surpassed and thus the cart is moving when force application peaks. As in earlier studies (Schibye et al., 2001; van der Beek and Kluvers, 2000), we also in the current study observed a lower sustained force compared to the initial peak force (Fig. 2). But during the sustained phase the right and left hand force differed substantially from each other over time, indicating a need for corrective forces to keep the cart moving straight forward.

The hand force (Fig. 3
                     ) during pushing was 104.6±14.6N, and −91.8±16.1N during pulling while the sum of pulling the right handle and pushing the left handle during turning at 0°, 2° and 4° floor inclination was −6.7N±14.8N.

There was a general effect of floor type. On average, hand force was 12% lower on the linoleum surface compared with the carpet surfaces during pushing (97.8±12.3N versus 111.3±16.6N, p
                     <0.001), and 8% lower on linoleum compared with carpet during pulling (88.0±16.9N versus 95.5±15.3N, p
                     <0.001).

Changing the inclination from −2° to 2° led to a 36% increase in hand force for both pushing and pulling (pushing: 94.5±18.0N to 128.5±11.4N, p
                     <0.001. Pulling: 82.6±18.6N to 112.6±22.9N, p
                     <0.001). Finally, during pushing and pulling, when handling of the 40kg cart there was a significant average reduction of 26% in applied hand force from 105.5±12.1N to 78±13.7N (p
                     <0.001) compared with the 60kg cart.

The L4–L5 compression forces (Fig. 4
                     ) for this group showed a marked difference between pushing and pulling. The average compression force during pushing was 536±259N (SD), which was less than 50% when compared with pulling (1145±221N) (p
                     <0.001), while the compression during turning (784±204N) was 46% higher than pushing, and 32% lower than pulling (p
                     <0.001). There was a tendency (p
                     =0.064) to a general effect of the floor type on compression forces across pushing and pulling. We found an overall effect of inclination (p
                     =0.049). During pushing, a 13% increase in the compression force from 509±253N to 574±229N was found when inclination was changed from −2° to 2°, and during pulling we found an increase of 10% in compression forces when inclination was changed from −2° to 2° (1128±167N to 1239±99N). During turning movements, a 20% increase was found when inclination went from 0° to 4° (714±157N to 856±207N). Finally, when comparing cart weights, we saw a significant average reduction in compression force of 14% during pulling from handling the 60kg (1191±228N) to handling the 40kg cart (1021±288N) (p
                     =0.013).

The L4–L5 A/P shear forces (Fig. 5
                     ) showed an average posterior shear force of −37.3±58.2N during pushing, while there was an anterior shear force during pulling and turning of 69.9±53.9N and 73.6±54.9N, respectively. There was an overall effect of inclination during pulling with a 72% increase (p
                     <0.001) from an average of 58.1±37.2N at −2° to 101±65.2N at 2°, and during turning with a 99% (p
                     <0.001) increase from 0° to 4° (50.4±31.7N to 100.2±52.7N). Finally, we found a significant average reduction in A/P shear force of 35.3% when subjects handled the 40kg cart compared with the 60kg cart (p
                     <0.001).

The overall pushing and pulling angle relative to horizontal estimated from the pushing and pulling trials on the force plate was calculated to −23.8°±13.2° during pushing and 24.9°±5.8° during pulling.

The average EMG amplitude (Fig. 6
                     ) was 10.3±7.9%EMGmax during pushing, 22.2±8.6%EMGmax during pulling and 20.1±7.8%EMGmax during turning. An effect of floor type was seen during pulling where the EMG amplitude was 13% lower when pulling on linoleum (20.7±9.5%EMGmax) compared with a carpet surface (23.7±7.6%EMGmax) (p
                     <0.001). During pushing changing the inclination from −2° to 0° led to small but significant increase in EMGmax (from 9.7±7.5 to 11.7±8.2%, p
                     =0.016) but during pulling the overall increase in %EMGmax was 26% (p
                     <0.001) from an average of 20.5±8.0%EMGmax at −2° to 25.7±10.6%EMGmax at a 2° floor inclination. Finally, we found a significant average reduction in the EMG amplitude of 2.9%EMGmax during pushing and pulling when manoeuvring the 40kg cart compared with the 60kg cart (p
                     =0.003).

During pulling, significant correlations (based on group means) were found between low back compression force and absolute hand force (r
                     2
                     =0.94, p
                     <0.001, y
                     =5.1x
                     +673.9), between A/P shear force and absolute hand force (r
                     2
                     =0.94, p
                     <0.001, y
                     =1.2x
                     −42.9). However, when these correlations were calculated at individual level and expressed as the average of individual r
                     2-values, the results were: Compression force versus absolute hand force (r
                     2
                     =0.58, p
                     =0.05), A/P shear force versus absolute hand force (r
                     2
                     =0.67, p
                     =0.02). No significant correlations were found for pushing.

The rolling friction between the 60kg cart and the floor type was 46.6±1.2N on carpet and 29.0±0.8N on linoleum. With the 40kg cart these values were 31.2±1.3N on carpet and 19.0±0.4N on linoleum. Average trunk inclinations showed that subjects leaned towards the cart. Inclinations in relation to vertical were 9.5°±5.8 (pushing), 5.9°±5.6 (pulling) and 10.5°±5.8 (turning).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In general, the forces presented to L4/L5 in the current study did not raise concern in relation to limits for compression force as defined by the Dortmunder Recommendations (3200N for Women at age 40–50 years and 4100N for men at age 40–50 years) (Jäger and Luttmann, 1997) or in relation to the recommendations for activity level of 700N for A/P shear (Gallagher and Marras, 2012). The highest compression and A/P shear forces were found when the cabin attendants pulled a 60kg cart on a carpeted floor at 2° inclination. The data revealed that pulling presented the highest strain on the back, followed by turning while pushing resulted in a markedly lower back load compared with pulling. Also, it was shown that changing the inclination even in steps of only 2° had a significant effect, especially during pulling and turning. Furthermore, a tendency to a reduced low back load was found when manoeuvring on a linoleum surface compared to carpet surface. Finally, the weight of the cart affected the compression force during pulling and the A/P shear force in general.

Hand force during pulling was slightly smaller than during pushing. However, this relationship may depend on the cart's dimensions. In a study involving German flight attendants, Glitsch et al. (2007) found much higher pulling forces compared with pushing forces when handling a 60kg cart. The cart used by the German flight attendants was both 10cm shorter and 10cm higher compared with the cart used in the present study and thus, the German cart was more prone to tilt. To prevent the cart from tilting, the German flight attendants applied substantial upward hand force which contributed to the high resulting force found in this group (Jäger et al., 2007).

Compared with hand force, compression force is more sensitive to handling type. Thus, compression force during pulling is much higher compared with pushing. Even though it is well known that pulling results in a higher low back loading compared to pushing (Hoozemans et al., 2002b, 2004; Jäger et al., 2007; Lett and McGill, 2006; Marras et al., 2009a) the difference is substantial in the present study compared with the earlier studies. During pushing there is sufficient space for leaning forward against the cart to create a flexion moment at the hip and lumbar joints that outbalances the extension moment created by the reaction forces (de Looze et al., 2000; Laursen and Schibye, 2002). During pulling the principle of leaning against the external force could in theory be utilized by leaning away from the cart, however the design of the carts in commercial air travel does not allow this. This can be seen from the position of the cabin attendants body: a pronounced hip flexion causes the trunk to actually lean towards the cart during pulling with an average angle of 5.9°±5.6° (see Fig. 1B), which is only a few degrees less than during pushing (average: 9.5°±5.8°) (Fig. 1A). Thus, the large difference in external moment arm due to the trunk leaning posture in combination with the similar reaction force during pushing and pulling contributes significantly to the differences in compression force (Hoozemans et al., 2007; McGill, 1996, 1997).

Anterior/posterior shear forces were relatively low with a value of 37N during pushing, and approximately 70N during pulling and turning. These values do not raise concern regarding overload in general, however one subject experienced A/P shear force values during pulling that were higher than 400N several times during testing with an average of 233N. The A/P shear force is highly dependent on the degree of flexion in the lumbar spine (McGill, 1997), and cabin attendants with a fully flexed lumbar spine during pulling experienced the largest shear force. Anterior/posterior shear force during turning was almost as high as during pulling although hand forces in anterior/posterior direction were much smaller. This could be explained by a larger trunk inclination of 10.5° during turning compared to the 5.9° during pulling and the fact that more subjects during turning had a flexed spine which increases A/P shear force. The A/P shear force during pushing had in some subjects an anterior (positive) direction as well as a posterior (negative), indicating that in some instances the cabin attendants lean against the cart more than required to accelerate the cart to the desired speed. The large differences in A/P shear forces among subjects are primarily related to the individual's initial push/pull force during work rather than the external work load itself and it underlines the importance of ergonomic training as a part of general job training. A number of earlier studies have found A/P shear forces similar to the present values with comparable external loads (Schibye et al., 2001; van der Woude et al., 1995), while other studies have found higher values than the values found in this study (Knapik and Marras, 2009; Lett and McGill, 2006; Marras et al., 2009a,b).

The muscle activity (Fig. 6) during pushing and pulling showed a similar pattern as the calculated compression and A/P shear forces across the different working conditions; this supports the calculations of the 4D Watbak model. The muscle activity was as expected markedly higher during pulling (∼20–25%EMGmax) compared with pushing (∼8–12%EMGmax), whereas mean muscle activity during turning was almost as high as during pulling. As mentioned above, the summed left and right hand forces during turning was very small (Fig. 3) and the relatively high EMG found during turning may be due to a trunk inclination of 10.5° or approximately 1° more than during pushing where hand forces of 100–150N supports the trunk. During turning, the muscle activity was slightly higher at the left side muscles compared to the right side, possibly in order to counteract both a lateral moment and a rotation of the trunk created by the pulling of the right hand to turn the cart.

As expected, group level based correlation values for pulling showed close association between forces applied to the hands and compression and A/P shear forces, indicating that the applied hand forces account for most of the variation in the low back forces. However, lower correlation values were found at individual level, which can be explained by inter-individual differences in body positions even though the standard deviations of the hand forces were small. The average trunk position during pulling was 5.9°±SD 5.6° forward, and the SD leaves room for differences in compression forces of >200N at trunk inclinations between 0° and 10°. Thus, prediction of low back forces based on the applied hand force should therefore be used with caution, e.g. in field studies.

Summing up, the data showed small differences in hand force, whereas there were large differences in compression and A/P shear forces depending on whether pushing or pulling movements were being performed. Furthermore, turning creates A/P shear forces almost equal to pulling.

Pushing and pulling on linoleum floors could be beneficial to the lower back as the rolling friction is lower and less force is needed to handle the cart. In this study the rolling friction was 17.6N (60kg cart) and 12.2N (40kg cart) lower on linoleum compared with the carpet surface. Thus, in principle the cabin attendants could reduce their initial force application on linoleum by these values and maintain cart acceleration and hence, working pace as on carpet.

On average the pushing and pulling hand forces of the cabin crew was only 10.9N (60kg cart) and 9.2N (40kg cart) lower on a linoleum surface compared with the carpet surface. This caused a modest reduction in compression force of ≈6% on linoleum compared with on carpet during both pushing and pulling, representing an absolute force reduction of 50N. The reduction in A/P shear force on linoleum compared with on carpet was only significant during pulling with a reduction of 12%, which is less than 10N in absolute shear force.

These data emphasize the importance of ergonomic instructions when external loads are reduced due to e.g. technical improvements. Otherwise, the expected reduction in body load may be lost due to the worker assuming a more unfavourable body position or increasing his or her working speed.

Floor inclination had a substantial and similar effect on hand force during pushing and pulling and there was an average increase of 36N in hand force when the inclination increased from −2° to 2°. This 10N increase per degree inclination is similar to comparable data from the study by Glitsch et al., who found an average increase of 70–80N when inclination was increased from 0° to 8° (Glitsch et al., 2007). In the present study, the effect of inclination on compression force during pushing was not significant, but during pulling and turning the compression force increased with more than 100N across 4°. During pulling and turning the A/P shear force was substantially affected by floor inclination: the A/P shear force was on average 46% lower at −2° compared with 2°. The fact that inclination had no effect on compression and A/P shear force during pushing supports the notion that pushing allows for optimizing body position (e.g. trunk inclination) to keep the low back load low.

The effect of cart weight was in this study evaluated at 0° inclination. Reducing cart weight to what could be regarded as a half-empty cart resulted in significant reductions in all parameters except the compression force during pushing. Absolute hand force was reduced by 26%, which resulted in a 14% reduction in compression during pulling. In earlier studies increases in cart weight of 30–100% have created modest increases in of 10–20% in compression force but this has been found both during pushing and pulling (Hoozemans et al., 2004; Jäger et al., 2007; Schibye et al., 2001). In relation to the work in the cabin, Jäger (2007) showed that the effect of cart weight increased with steeper floor inclination. We found low absolute values for A/P shear force and a reduction of approximately 35% during both pushing and pulling when handling the 40kg cart. This is in line with data from Schibye et al. where subjects handled 25 and 50kg two-wheeled waste containers (Schibye et al., 2001). On the other hand, Marras et al. showed an increase in A/P shear force when pushing a mass of 145.3kg compared to pushing 54.5kg but mainly at vertebral levels above L4–L5 (Marras et al., 2009a). In general our findings support previous findings, that changes in cart loads of +/−50% and keeping everything else constant, leads to relatively small absolute changes in low back load depending.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The Watbak model has its limitations as a 2D rigid body model as it only includes forces in the sagittal plane and it does not take into account the possible effect of muscle activities on joint loads. Also, it is a static model which does not include the acceleration of the body and burden but since accelerations in the current working situations are relatively low and the actual force is included in the model, the model fulfils the purpose of the study as it succeeded in identifying which working situations created the highest low back load. Moreover it could be used to quantify the effect of changing handling type, floor inclination, floor type and cart weight. The estimation of resultant force direction based on separate measurements of a vertical force component on a force plate is not comparable to using a three-axis force transducer. However, it is clear that the results of the 17 subjects presented here are more in line with earlier results and more precise compared with using the horizontal force solely. Finally, the line between the hip and the shoulder may not represent an accurate trunk inclination as the shoulder joint centre can be moved back and forth independently of the spine. Also, the spine and hip segments may assume different degrees of flexion/extension during the push/pull activity.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The low back loads measured during cart accelerations did not reach levels that raise concern in regard to single action overload (Gallagher and Marras, 2012; Jäger and Luttmann, 1997). Instead, a cumulative effect of multiple repetitions of cart accelerations in combination with forward bending and lifting, often in awkward positions, may be the cause of the back problems reported by the cabin attendants. However, the present study shows that the low back load is very dependent on specific working situations, the surroundings and the strategy during the initial push/pull phase. Thus, the acute load on L4–L5 during pulling was markedly higher and more affected by changes in floor inclination and cart weight than during pushing. This may partly be due to a more restrained working position during pulling compared with pushing. However, the effect of floor type was less than expected because the cabin attendants did not reduce hand force to the same extent as the external force was reduced. Finally, turning could in this environment be regarded as motion with the same risk level as pulling as especially A/P shear forces during turning was high primarily due to increased forward bending. The main recommendation for the cabin attendants is to avoid pulling, reduce the acceleration of the cart, especially when turning and finally, perform the repetitive cart accelerations on negative floor inclination.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

