@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of thermal formation and air ventilation inside footwear during gait: The role of gait and fitting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The effect of air behavior inside footwear on foot temperature formation was studied.


                        
                        
                           
                           The effect of the energy balance of the foot on skin temperature was examined.


                        
                        
                           
                           The cooling effect of ventilation on the arch temperature was observed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The ventilation rate was determined based on the footwear air space and gait.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ventilation was found to be a key to the design of thermally comfortable footwear.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Foot temperature

Air behavior

Energy balance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Comfort is an important concept in footwear design. The microclimate inside footwear contributes to the perception of thermal comfort. To investigate the effect of ventilation on microclimate formation inside footwear, experiments with subjects were conducted at four gait speeds with three different footwear sizes. Skin temperature, metabolism, and body mass were measured at approximately 25 °C and 50% relative humidity, with no solar radiation and a calm wind. The footwear occupancy and ventilation rate were also estimated, with the latter determined using the tracer gas method. The experimental results revealed that foot movement, metabolism, evaporation, radiation, convection, and ventilation were the main factors influencing the energy balance for temperature formation on the surface of the foot. The cooling effect of ventilation on the arch temperature was observed during gait. The significance of the amount of air space and ventilation on the improvement in the thermal comfort of footwear was clarified.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Covering the body is a major contributor to the microclimate around the human body, which is the state of temperature formed by the combination of the environment, the human body, and materials. The outer materials influence the heat transfer between humans and their surroundings and the thermoregulation of the human body, thus affecting thermal comfort. Therefore, assessment of coverage thermal insulation has been carried out by several researchers, and a guideline has been provided in ISO9920 (2007), particularly for clothing. Like clothing, footwear serves a physiological function. Although the feet account for only 7% of the body surface area (Hardy and Dubois, 1938), they significantly influence physiological heat exchange. The thermal protection characteristics of footwear play an important role in confining heat inside footwear, particularly in hot environments. Because the feet are dense in sweat glands (Kuno, 1956), high temperatures induce sweating. During exercise, particularly in the heat, which is assumed to be the normal use condition of footwear, there is a larger sweat secretion rate from the dorsal surface than from the sole and plantar side of the toes (Smith et al., 2013). Because sweat production is one of the influential factors in footwear design, evaluation of footwear for moisture disposal has been conducted (Schols et al., 2004; Heus et al., 2005). The subjective perception of the thermal comfort of footwear has been found to be related much more to increased foot temperature than to moisture retention (Arezes et al., 2013). This finding seems to be related to the basic idea that the thermal comfort is related to skin temperature (Bulcao et al., 2000).

In order to provide thermal comfort inside footwear, the temperature and humidity need to be maintained within normal limits. One study reported that the footwear temperature should be kept in the range of 27–33 °C for foot comfort (Kuklane, 2009). Footwear temperatures up to 50 °C have been measured in summer during exercise (Kinoshita and Bates, 1996), and foot temperatures beyond the comfortable range have been measured even for indoor gaits (Shimazaki and Murata, 2015). Cooling the foot may therefore affect the comfort of footwear.

Footwear has multiple functions, including reducing injuries and maintaining hygiene by protecting the foot. One possible solution to cooling feet enclosed in footwear is prompt ventilation. The removal of heat and moisture from inside footwear is achieved mainly by the piston-like action, called bellows action, that occurs during gait (Vokac et al., 1973). Several methods for measuring microclimate ventilation for enclosed spaces have been developed (Crockford et al., 1972; Lotens and Havenith, 1988). Havenith et al. (2010) confirmed the validity of a method intended for clothing ventilation after comparing several ventilation methods. Subsequently, Satsumoto et al. (2011) proposed a method that was applicable to footwear. Because the gait motions change depending on the gait speed, the ventilation conditions vary. However, the effects of ventilation on thermal formation inside footwear under various gait conditions are still unclear, and there is no organized data available for use in footwear design.

The thermal aspect of comfort is one of the most important concepts in footwear design. The temperature and air behavior inside footwear contribute to the perception of thermal comfort, and many commercial products have been developed based on the optimization of these parameters. However, there have been no studies on the heat exchanges in footwear that are associated with ventilation of air and thermal comfort. Therefore, this study was conducted to analyze the heat exchanges associated with ventilation and assess their influence on the formation of the thermal environment inside specific footwear. The results of the study also provide a database for designing comfortable footwear with adequate ventilation.

Experimental measurements were performed in this study to examine the relationships between the characteristics of footwear, the microclimate inside footwear, ventilation, and gait. First, the characteristics of the footwear were determined, namely, their fitting and air ventilation rate. Then, to analyze the microclimate conditions inside the footwear, the inside temperatures were measured during gait. The ambient weather conditions were also measured, including the global solar radiation (with an EKO MR-60), the solar radiation reflected from the ground (with an EKO MR-60), the infrared radiation from the atmosphere and ground (with an EKO MR-60), the air temperature (with a thermistor), the wind speed (with a Kanomax model 6531), and the humidity (with a polymer resistance hygrometer).

Most studies of the thermal comfort of footwear have been conducted using foot manikins. However, the characterization of footwear under real gait is essential and requires human participants. All of the measurements used in this study were obtained during a single session. The participants were seven healthy adult males (1.72 ± 0.07 m height, 61.8 ± 4.7 kg weight, and 23.8 ± 4.3 years old). After informed consent was obtained from all the participants, the subject experiments were conducted with the approval of the Research Ethics Committee of Okayama Prefectural University.

Four gait speeds, transitioning from walking to running, were selected for the experiments: 0.0, 3.0, 6.0, and 9.0 km/h.

The participants changed into specified clothing and were acclimated to the initial environmental state in a chamber before the experiment. They wore shoes on their bare feet to eliminate any effect from socks.

For the purpose of eliminating the influence of different types of footwear on the microclimate inside the footwear, we studied different sizes (26.0, 27.0, and 28.0 cm) of specific footwear designed for running to analyze their fitting (Fig. 1
                        ). The footwear had a slightly raised heel with rubber cushioning and a maximum height of 2.0 cm, and the outsides of the shoes were made of porous material. When considering the airflow inside footwear, the gap space between the foot and the footwear is important. There are several techniques for modeling the foot and footwear shapes (e.g., Kouchi, 1995; Mauch et al., 2009), but a simple method was used in this study. In order to assess the overall fitting between the foot and the footwear, occupancy was used as an indicator of the gap space volume. The occupancy R [no units] is the ratio of the volume of the foot to the volume of the interior of the footwear and is expressed as follows:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    R
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             V
                                             
                                                f
                                                o
                                                o
                                                t
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             V
                                             
                                                f
                                                o
                                                o
                                                t
                                                w
                                                e
                                                a
                                                r
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where V denotes volume [m3]. The volume of the foot V
                        
                           foot
                         was measured by the water displacement method using Archimedes' principle (Manna et al., 2001). After marking the upper limit of the footwear on the foot with the footwear on, the participant's foot was positioned in a water bath filled with water to ensure that the mark met the water surface, and the volume of spilled water was taken as the volume of the foot. The volume of the footwear V
                        
                           footwear
                         was measured using a fine powder. The footwear was filled with the powder, and then the mass of the powder was measured. The volume of the footwear was obtained by dividing the mass of the powder by its density (1.09 kg/m3). The powder was put inside a plastic bag so that it could deform smoothly and freely. The volumes were determined from the masses of the spilled water and powder, using an electrical balance with a 0.1-g resolution (Shimadzu ELB3000).

The tracer gas method was used for ventilation rate measurements (Havenith et al., 2010; Ke et al., 2014), as shown in the schematic diagram in Fig. 2
                        . The tracer gas, CO2, was mixed with air and injected at four locations inside the footwear (upper, bottom, inner, and outer sides) using a perforated tubing system. After the inlet flow into the footwear was enriched with CO2, the flow circulated through the system via the connected pump. The flow rate was measured at 1-s intervals (Azbil MQV), and the tracer gas concentrations were measured at the inlet and outlet, and in the ambient environment (Vaisala GMP343). The ventilation rate Vent [L/min] was calculated using the following expression:
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    V
                                    e
                                    n
                                    t
                                    =
                                    Q
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             C
                                             
                                                i
                                                n
                                             
                                          
                                          −
                                          
                                             C
                                             
                                                o
                                                u
                                                t
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             C
                                             
                                                o
                                                u
                                                t
                                             
                                          
                                          −
                                          
                                             C
                                             
                                                a
                                                m
                                                b
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where Q is the flow rate of the circulating flow [L/min], C
                        
                           in
                         is the CO2 concentration of the inlet flow into the footwear [ppm], C
                        
                           out
                         is the CO2 concentration of the outlet flow from the footwear [ppm], and C
                        
                           amb
                         is the CO2 concentration in the ambient environment [ppm].

The experiment was performed in a climate chamber at Yokohama National University. The chamber provided a constant air temperature of 25 °C, a relative humidity of 50%, no solar radiation, and a calm wind. Before the experiment, the ventilation measurement system was turned on to ensure a steady state. The sensors were installed 15 min before the measurements began, and the measurements were carried out for 17 min in the indoor chamber. After performing 12 min of gait, the participants recovered for 5 min.

Foot skin temperatures were measured at seven points during gait at 1-min intervals using thermocouples. Understanding the regional distribution of skin temperature contributes to advancing footwear design; thus, measurement points at the ball of the foot, the neck of the big toe, the arch, the heel, the instep, the medial malleolus, and the lateral malleolus were selected to represent the entire foot (Fig. 3
                        ). The ball is the point between the big toe and arch and contacts the ground, whereas the point on the neck of big toe does not.

The experiment was performed in an indoor chamber at Okayama Prefectural University. The sensors were installed 15 min before the measurements began for acclimatization to the environment, and the measurements were carried out for 50 min. After 10 min of rest, a subject performed a gait exercise for 30 min and then recovered for another 10 min.

The average air temperature, humidity, solar radiation, and wind speed were approximately 26.6 ± 2.0 °C, 58.5 ± 10.7% RH, no solar radiation (0 W/m2), and calm wind, respectively.

In general, the temperature values depend on the energy balance: when the received heat is greater than the released heat, the temperature increases, and vice versa. Thus, the measurements were planned to determine the energy flows to and from the skin regions and particularly on the enclosed foot, so that the knowledge gained from the analysis can be utilized in practical design applications. The energy balance for humans consists of heat generated by metabolism, physical work output, net radiation, convective heat, and evaporative latent heat (Fanger, 1972). However, there is currently no established method for directly calculating the energy balance of an individual body part, such as the feet. Therefore, the components contributing to energy balance were evaluated based on whole-body calculations using the “human thermal load” model (Shimazaki et al., 2011). Footwear was considered to act as a thermal insulator in the same manner as clothing.

The inhaled oxygen and exhaled carbon dioxide were measured at 20-s intervals during the experiments to determine the heat generated by the metabolism of the subject. The heat generated by metabolism was estimated by Weir's method (Weir, 1949). Evaporative heat and convective heat were estimated based on ASHRAE's method (ASHRAE, 2013). Net radiation, which is the difference between the incoming and outgoing radiation, is the summation of the solar radiation and infrared radiation. The skin temperature used in the heat transfer and energy balance calculations was the mean value for the bottom of the foot.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The fitting and room inside the footwear affect the air ventilation. Therefore, occupancy was measured to take into account the characteristics of the footwear used in the experiments.

The volumes of the shoes were 0.69 × 10−3 m3 at 26.0 cm, 0.73 × 10−3 m3 at 27.0 cm, and 0.95 × 10−3 m3 at 28.0 cm, and the occupancies at each experimental condition were calculated as mean values after three trials, as shown in Table 1
                        . For normal use conditions, it is normal for the occupancy to be narrowly distributed around approximately 1.00. The occupancies for the 26.0-cm footwear ranged from 0.99 to 1.35, whereas the occupancies for the 28.0 cm footwear were less than 1.00. Because the upper material of the footwear was stretch fabric and the skin of the foot is deformable, the foot could fit inside footwear even when the occupancy was more than 1.00.

Air ventilation affects the heat transfer between the inside and outside of the footwear. Therefore, ventilation rates were measured during gait using the tracer gas method.

The influence of gait speed on ventilation rate is illustrated in Fig. 4(a)
                        . The data are means with standard deviations. It can be seen that faster gaits result in higher ventilation rates. Significant differences in ventilation were observed for 0.0–3.0, 0.0–6.0, 0.0–9.0, and 3.0–9.0 km/h gait. The ventilation rate at standing (0.0 km/h gait) was approximately 1.0 L/min, and the value increased more than fivefold, to 5.4 L/min, at the 6.0-km/h gait. The highest ventilation rate, approximately 7.3 L/min, was measured for the fastest gait, 9.0 km/h. This rate is seven times higher than the rate at standing.

The influence of occupancy on the ventilation rate at a gait of 6.0 km/h is shown in Fig. 4(b). It was observed that the ventilation rate tended to decrease with increasing occupancy. There is a slightly linear relationship between occupancy and ventilation rate (correlation coefficient |r| = 0.51, p < 0.05). We used Pearson's correlation r as a measure of the strength of the relationship between two variables. In order to express the significance of the correlation coefficient, the probability p was also calculated.

Foot skin temperatures directly affect the thermal comfort inside footwear. Therefore, temperatures were measured at seven points on the foot during gait.

Examples of time-dependent skin temperatures at 6.0 km/h gait and 0.87 occupancy are shown in Fig. 5
                        . During the initial 10 min, there were variations in the temperature levels at the different measurement points, but the temperatures were almost stable. After 10 min of gait, the temperatures on the upper side of the foot, i.e., at the instep, medial malleolus, and lateral malleolus, dropped sharply and then increased gradually. The temperatures at the other points increased throughout, particularly those at the ball and heel, which rose sharply. During gait, the temperatures at the ball and heel increased by approximately 3.8 °C, those at the neck of the big toe and the arch increased by approximately 1.7 °C, and the upper-side temperatures increased by approximately 1.2 °C. After 30 min of gait, the temperatures on the upper side of the foot increased, whereas those at the other points decreased, especially the temperatures at the ball and heel, which dropped sharply. During the 10-min recovery period before the end of the experiment, most of the temperatures reached their stable states. Moreover, all the temperatures after the experiment were higher than those before the experiment. The temperature at the ball exhibited the greatest increase of 2.8 °C, and the foot skin temperature increased by 2.1 °C on average. These results are consistent with the analysis results reported by previous researchers (Shimazaki and Murata, 2015), who reported that there are three types of temperature elevation trends during gait: the ball and heel are the higher temperature elevation regions, the neck of the big toe and arch are the lower temperature elevation regions; and the instep, medial malleolus, and lateral malleolus are the moderate temperature elevation regions. Therefore, the skin temperature elevation was considered in groups, and the ball and arch were dealt with on behalf of the higher temperature elevation regions and the lower temperature elevation regions, respectively, with respect to the microclimate inside footwear.

To eliminate the effect of differences in body temperature levels among the subjects, the temperature elevations were examined. The influence of gait speed on temperature elevation is shown in Fig. 6
                        . Faster gaits resulted in higher temperature elevations at both the ball and the arch. It can be seen that the temperatures at the ball increased during gait, with a maximum temperature elevation of 11.2 °C at 9.0 km/h gait and an elevation of 1.1 °C at standing (0.0 km/h gait). During the standing recovery period, the temperatures at the ball decreased by up to 1.6 °C in comparison to those at the 6.0-km/h and 9.0-km/h gaits. The temperatures at the arch also increased during gait, but the degree of elevation was relatively small, with a value of 7.7 °C at the fastest gait of 9.0 km/h and close to 0 °C at standing. During the recovery period, the temperatures slightly decreased.

The influence of occupancy on temperature elevation is shown in Fig. 7
                         for the same subject as in Fig. 5 and a gait speed of 6.0 km/h. At the ball, the temperature elevation increased sharply after the gait started, reaching maximum values of 3.1 °C at an occupancy of 0.87, 4.1 °C at an occupancy of 1.12, and 5.5 °C at an occupancy of 1.19. At the arch, the temperature elevation increased gradually and reached maximum values of 2.4 °C at an occupancy of 0.87, 3.8 °C at an occupancy of 1.12, and 5.4 °C at an occupancy of 1.19. At both the ball and the arch, the temperatures decreased slightly after gait terminated.

The influence of ventilation rate on temperature elevation on the bottom side of the foot at the 6.0-km/h gait is shown in Fig. 8
                        . The temperature elevation tended to decrease with increasing ventilation rate. There is a linear relationship between occupancy and ventilation rate (correlation coefficient |r| = 0.61, p < 0.05).

Energy balance is considered to be associated with thermal states of the body and reflected in changes in skin temperatures. Therefore, the energy balance during gait was calculated.

The time-averaged values of the amount of heat generated by metabolism, mechanical work-out, net radiation, evaporation, convection, and the total thermal load during gait are shown in Fig. 9
                        . Faster gaits result in higher values for all components. The amount of thermal load represents an imbalance between heat gain and heat loss, namely, heat storage in this cases. The amount of heat generated by metabolism exhibits a great increase, whereas the other components increase more gradually. Because the thermal loads were within 10 W/m2, the heat gain and heat loss were comparable when standing (0.0 km/h gait) and at the 3.0-km/h gait, and the energy balance during these periods was almost maintained. Because the heat generated by metabolism varies considerably, the thermal load increased to 33 W/m2 at the 6.0-km/h gait and to 164 W/m2 at the 9.0-km/h gait.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The relationship between gait speed and temperature elevation on the bottom side of the foot has been examined in previous research. The heat generation due to foot contact is mainly influenced by the heat generation inside the footwear midsole and the friction between foot and footwear (Shimazaki and Murata, 2015). Therefore, the amount of heat gain is affected by the contact force, contact duration, contact frequency, and hence the gait speed in the experiments. In this sense, a certain amount of heat may be added as heat gain in the energy balance shown in Fig. 9 when considering the energy balance for the foot in particular. However, the quantitative estimation of the amount of heat generation due to foot contact will be addressed in a future study.

Evaporation and convective heat release associated with foot movement decrease as the temperature increases. This convective heat release occurs in complicated ways. Because the temperature of the skin of the foot is normally higher than the ambient temperature, heat transfer to the ambient environment and the footwear surface occurs by convection. When the footwear surface warms up, convection from footwear occurs to dissipate the heat. At the same time, heat penetrates through voids in the footwear. This process of heat release is referred to as “overall heat dissipation” in this paper. With respect to the energy balance shown in Fig. 9, this whole process of heat dissipation is considered to occur under steady-state conditions. The overall heat dissipation under gait cannot be estimated simply, but some increase in convective heat transfer can be expected. The amount of radiative heat transfer that occurs depends on the temperature gradient between the feet and the ambient environment, regardless of gait conditions.

As previously reported (Shimazaki and Murata, 2015), metabolic heat production and evaporative heat loss can be predicted based on exercise intensity, which was represented by the gait speed in this study. Similarly, for the purpose of calculating the energy balance, the overall heat dissipation, i.e., the cooling potential due to ventilation, was examined as follows. The overall heat dissipation was assumed to be influenced by the temperature gradient between the feet and the ambient environment, the degree of foot movement, and the gait speed in the experiments. As the heat gain due to metabolism was approximately 10 W/m2 higher than the total heat loss during the resting period (no foot contact and no additional convection) and the energy balance of the foot maintained stable temperatures, the overall heat dissipation potential of the footwear at standing can be estimated as approximately 10 W/m2. Another factor that influences the overall heat dissipation is the air space between the foot and the footwear. Therefore the occupancy was measured as an integrated characteristic of the footwear. As shown in Fig. 7, higher occupancy resulted in a higher temperature elevation during gait. When the air space between the foot and footwear is small, the airflow cannot sufficiently develop, and therefore heat release cannot occur at a beneficial level. Therefore, in order to understand the factors affecting heat release, we measured the ventilation rate. The ventilation rate can be seen as an indicator of the convective heat transfer. Bellows ventilation plays an important role in cooling the foot and the inside of footwear by convection. When the foot lands on the ground, foot stamping and deformation of the foot and footwear induce airflow under the foot. This airflow circulates inside the footwear and then dissipates heat to the outside. Thus, the arch temperature may be affected by bellows ventilation. Considering the forced convective heat transfer from Fig. 9, the maximum overall heat dissipation was calculated to be approximately 60 W/m2 or somewhat larger due to induction by foot movement. In fact, the values are not large enough to release the generated heat, and the temperature still increases.

During the initial 10 min of the experiment, gait was not performed. Therefore, the standing condition (0.0 km/h gait) in Fig. 9 can be considered to be a substitute for the temperature formation inside the footwear. Because the amounts of heat gain and heat loss are comparable when standing (0.0 km/h gait), the energy balance of the foot during this period was maintained, and the temperatures were stable. Even if the energy balance is off, the imbalance and temperature variations are quite small.

During the gait for 30 min, different temperature trends were observed in different regions. The temperatures at the ball and heel rose sharply because of heat generation due to foot contact at the beginning of gait. As this heat generation lasts during gait, the temperature increases sharply at first and then continues to increase gradually. Because the arch is not directly grounded, it is not influenced by foot contact. However, it is affected by bellows ventilation, and therefore, the temperature increases at the arch, although not as sharply as at the ball. The upper side of the foot is largely influenced by convective heat release associated with foot motion. Therefore, at the beginning of gait, the temperature drops sharply and then gradually increases during gait. At all the regions, the temperatures gradually increase after a certain period. Because of the energy balance, the convective heat transfer generally increases in response to the second root of the relative moving speed within a certain speed range (JSME, 1986). As the foot contact speed is reported to be approximately 2.6 m/s at a 9.0-km/h gait (Shimazaki and Murata, 2015), the overall heat dissipation during gait was estimated to be several times higher than 10 W/m2, which is the estimated dissipation at standing, and generally somewhat smaller than the above-mentioned convective heat loss (up to 60 W/m2). During higher-intensity exercise, the foot temperature increases by thermoregulation, based on the core–shell concept (Aschoff and Wever, 1958). This means that heat loss by convection and radiation increase but to a limited degree. Moreover, because the foot is confined inside the footwear and the humidity inside the footwear remains high, efficient evaporative heat release cannot be expected. Consequently, the heat generation exceeds the heat loss, and thus, the foot temperatures increase.

After the gait exercise, the temperatures decreased under some conditions. The energy balance during this recovery period was considered to be similar to that during the initial resting period. Therefore, the temperatures decreased based on the degree of temperature elevation during gait. Because the foot movement was terminated and the convective heat transfer became weaker, the temperature on the upper side of the foot increased sharply. The amount of temperature elevation is equivalent to the temperature decrease at the beginning of the gait.

An example of the relationship between the ventilation rate and temperature elevation on the bottom side of the foot at 6.0 km/h gait is shown in Fig. 8, which illustrates a linear trend between the two parameters. The results suggest that higher ventilation rates result in lower temperature elevations. Related findings are that there is also a linear relationship between occupancy and ventilation rate (Fig. 4 (b)) and that foot temperatures tend to increase as the occupancy increases. The ventilation rate increased as the gait speed increased. As the occupancy influences the ventilation rate, it was concluded that the variations in the ventilation rate at the same gait speed were due to variations in the occupied shoe conditions. In this study, the ventilation rate represented the degree of overall heat dissipation, but the local effect of ventilation on temperature formation needs to be validated in future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In order to identify the mechanism of formation of the microclimate inside footwear for the purpose of assessing thermal comfort, experiments with subjects were conducted at four different gait speeds and three different sizes of specific footwear to evaluate skin temperature changes.

Considering the energy balance of the skin region is useful for understanding the temperature formation trends inside the footwear. In fact, during the resting period, when the energy balance was confirmed to be stable, the foot temperature was also found to be stable. During gait, heat generation associated with gait exercise and foot contact is the dominant factor influencing the foot temperature elevation. Radiative and evaporative heat loss cools the foot, but heat generation has a stronger impact than heat losses at higher gait speeds. Other cooling factors are the overall heat dissipation associated with convective heat loss and the air ventilation inside the footwear. The skin temperature at the arch, below which an air space exists, was found to be lowered by ventilation, and thus the ventilation rate could be used as an indicator of cooling.

A beneficial way to improve the design of footwear for coolness and comfort would be to enhance the ventilation. As the degree of ventilation is determined by gait conditions and air behavior inside the footwear, clarification of the airflow formation mechanism and effective space arrangement inside the footwear need to be pursued in future research.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

