@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Determinants of maximal oxygen uptake (VO2 max) in fire fighter testing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We evaluate the current daily practice of aerobic capacity testing in Belgian fire fighters.


                        
                        
                           
                           The impact of personal and test-related parameters on the outcome has been evaluated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Test-related parameters have to be taken into account when interpreting VO2 max results.


                        
                        
                           
                           Standardization of aerobic capacity testing is needed in the medical evaluation of fire fighters.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Aerobic capacity

Maximal oxygen uptake

Fire fighters

Medical evaluation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The aim of this study was to evaluate current daily practice of aerobic capacity testing in Belgian fire fighters. The impact of personal and test-related parameters on the outcome has been evaluated.
                  Maximal oxygen uptake (VO2 max) results of 605 male fire fighters gathered between 1999 and 2010 were analysed. The maximal cardio respiratory exercise tests were performed at 22 different centres using different types of tests (tread mill or bicycle), different exercise protocols and measuring equipment.
                  Mean VO2 max was 43.3 (SD = 9.8) ml/kg.min. Besides waist circumference and age, the type of test, the degree of performance of the test and the test centre were statistically significant determinants of maximal oxygen uptake.
                  Test-related parameters have to be taken into account when interpreting and comparing maximal oxygen uptake tests of fire fighters. It highlights the need for standardization of aerobic capacity testing in the medical evaluation of fire fighters.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Fire fighting is a physically demanding profession even though the number of interventions and occupational demand during a 24-hour shift might be low. At an emergency scene, fire fighters perform a series of actions under stressful conditions, such as moving and lifting heavy weights and rescuing victims while wearing protective clothing and a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). The total weight of the equipment and SCBA is around 21–22 kg. As such, it increases the energy demand significantly (Baker et al., 2000; Dreger et al., 2006; Selkirk and Mc Lellan, 2004).


                     Bos et al. (2004) conducted a field study during eighty-five 24 h shifts in Dutch fire stations and they concluded that two tasks (SCBA and Inside tasks) in actual fire fighting exceed the guideline for energetic workload of Wu and Wang (Wu and Wang, 2001, 2002). This guideline consists of prediction models on the relationship between the percentage of heart rate reserve (%HRR) and the acceptable work duration (MAWD) for both short and long periods of work. The real duration of the “Inside and SCBA” tasks were 23 and 21 min; the corresponding MAWDs are 17 and 4 min respectively. In addition, fire fighters are exposed to high temperatures, which further stresses the cardiovascular system (Barr et al., 2010; Bruce-low et al., 2007; Selkirk and Mc Lellan, 2004).

Heart rates measured during normal fire fighting tasks are at or near maximal levels (Bos et al., 2004). Elsner and Kolkhorst (2008) found the oxygen uptake associated with performing live fire rescue and suppression tasks were around 62% of the VO2max. According to an investigation of Bilzon et al. (2001) metabolic demands of simulated shipboard fire fighting tasks could reach up to peaks of 43 ml oxygen/kg/min, being equivalent to 82% of VO2max. Consequently, it is imperative that fire fighters are physically fit to perform their job and to guarantee their own safety as well as the safety of their colleagues and victims. Numerous studies have demonstrated the necessity of maintaining a high level of aerobic capacity for rescue personnel such as fire fighters (Bilzon et al., 2001; Bos et al., 2004; Elsner and Kolkhorst, 2008).

Leading researchers and agencies recommend that the measurement of aerobic capacity would be included in the medical examination of fire fighters. The measurement of aerobic capacity is recommended to be part of the medical examination of fire fighters by leading researchers and agencies (Ben-Ezra and Verstraete, 1988; Elsner and Kolkhorst, 2008; International Association of Fire Fighters, 2008; Peate et al., 2002). VO2max is used as a measure of aerobic capacity. Investigations of fire fighting activities have led to minimal requirements for VO2max, ranging from 33.5 ml/kg/min (Sothmann et al., 1990) to 41 (Bilzon et al., 2001) and 45 (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992) ml/kg/min. In Belgium, for example, fire fighters wearing SCBA should have a minimum VO2max of 45 ml/kg.min (Kiss et al., 2010).

Aerobic capacity can be measured at either sub maximal or maximal level. Sub maximal aerobic capacity tests, when properly validated, provide an accurate estimation of an individual's oxygen consumption. These tests are less expensive and easier to carry out than maximal tests since they can be performed in a fitness centre by qualified trainers or coaches. Maximal aerobic capacity tests on the other hand, can only be carried out by qualified medical personnel under the supervision of a physician. Testing must be conducted in a medical setting with electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring, resuscitation and defibrillation equipment on site (International association of Fire Fighters, 2008). However, maximal testing is often preferred because the results are more precise and consistent than sub maximal testing (Dreger et al., 2006; Elsner and Kolkhorst, 2008; Kiss et al., 2010).

A variety of exercise tests can be used in order to determine VO2 max. Several studies emphasize the use of task specific exercise tests because of particular adaptations in the organism to that activity (Ben-Ezra and Verstraete, 1988; Wisløff and Helgerud, 1998). For fire fighters a tread mill or stair mill exercise test is recommended (Ben-Ezra and Verstraete, 1988; International Association of Fire Fighters, 2008). This type of exercise resembles most of the emergency activities of fire fighters. In the case of a maximal test, subjects should complete a continuous, incremental stair mill or tread mill run to exhaustion with continuous monitoring of ECG and oxygen consumption (VO2max).

However, in daily practice many aerobic capacity tests are performed by cardiologists who prefer bicycle ergo meter tests because the electrocardiogram during these tests is more stable and hence shows better ischemic changes than an electrocardiogram during a tread mill test. Treadmill tests are more performed at Sports Medicine centres.

Maximal oxygen consumption depends on age, gender, physical activity, heart rate at maximal exercise, and weight (Fleg et al., 2005; Hawkins and Wiswell, 2003; Kiss et al., 2010; Laukkanen et al., 2009). Furthermore, non-personal factors like the type of test and test centre might influence an individuals' VO2max (Ben-Ezra and Verstraete, 1988; Wisløff and Helgerud, 1998). As the decision to declare a fire fighter fit for his job depends largely on the result of the VO2max, it is important to investigate the relation between VO2 max, the type of test and the possible influence of the test centre on the outcome.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the current daily practice of aerobic capacity testing in Belgian fire fighters using data gathered from different field practitioners in different test centres.

It was hypothesized that persons who performed a treadmill test reached a higher VO2 max than those who performed a bicycle test. During running more muscle groups are involved than during cycling, therefore it can be expected that VO2 max is higher in tread mill running than in ergometer cycling (Wasserman and Hanssen, 2005). The second hypothesis was that the maximal oxygen uptake varied among the test centres. Test centres use different testing protocols and although it is asked to perform maximal exercise test, centres can differ in the evaluation of maximal exhaustion.

Maximal oxygen uptake (VO2 max) is used for the evaluation of cardio respiratory fitness in Belgian fire fighters. Once a year, fire fighters have a medical examination by their occupational physician. Every five years, the occupational physician refers the fire fighters to a cardiologic or Sports Medicine centre for VO2 max determination. According to the Belgian guidelines for the medical evaluation of fire fighters, VO2 max needs to be measured directly, preferably during a maximal stair mill test, if not available during a maximal treadmill test or bicycle ergo meter test.

Since 1999, five occupational physicians of IDEWE, the largest external service for prevention and protection at work in Belgium, gathered 613 VO2 max results of 605 male and 8 female fire fighters. The tests were performed at 22 different cardiologic or Sports Medicine centres.

Besides VO2 max, age, gender, body mass index (BMI), waist circumference, type of test (treadmill or bicycle) and medical centre, data on the quality of the performance of the tests such as heart rate at maximal exercise were registered. Maximal oxygen uptake was directly measured during a maximal cardio respiratory exercise test on a treadmill or bicycle ergo meter. As fire fighters were referred to different cardiologic or Sports Medicine centres, different test protocols and measuring equipment were used. The comparison of the heart rate at maximal exercise to the expected maximum heart rate for age (220 beats per minute (bpm) – age) was used as a measure of the quality of the performance of the test (Maximum heart rate percentage = Percentage of maximum heart rate for age at maximal exercise = heart rate at maximal exercise*100/expected maximal heart rate for age).

Since there were only 8 women in the total population, the analysis was confined to the results of 605 male fire fighters who underwent cardio respiratory testing in 22 different cardiologic or Sports Medicine centres in Flanders (the Dutch speaking part of Belgium) from 1999 until 2010.

All statistical analyses were conducted with SPSS 19.0 for Mc Intosh. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used to test for statistically significant differences in continuous variables, chi-square for dichotomous variables. A univariate general linear model was used to detect the determinants and possible interactions that best predicted maximal oxygen uptake. For this model the database was limited to the 6 cardiologic centres that delivered a minimum of 10 cardio respiratory tests, reducing the study population to 564 cases. All important factors and covariates and all their possible interactions were put in the initial model, leaving out one by one the least significant to obtain a model that best predicted the dependent variable.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Mean age of the study population was 40.4 years (n = 603, SD = 11.5), ranging between 20 and 60 years. Almost 60 percent was under 45 years of age. Mean VO2 max was 43.3 ml/kg.min (n = 605, SD = 9.8). Mean VO2 max according to age, BMI, waist circumference, type of exercise test and maximum heart rate for age (220 bpm – age) attained or not attained according to age is shown in Table 1
                     . Maximal oxygen uptake was statistically significantly dependent of all these variables.

Of the 605 tests performed, 71.1% were treadmill tests, and 28.6% were bicycle tests (for two persons the type of test was unknown). Mean maximal oxygen uptake, age, BMI, waist circumference, and percentage of the maximum heart rate for age at maximal exercise for treadmill and bicycle tests are shown in Table 2
                     . Mean maximal oxygen uptake was statistically significantly different between treadmill and bicycle tests (45.8 ml/kg.min versus 37.3 ml/kg.min). Also age, waist circumference and the mean maximum heart rate percentage were statistically significantly different between treadmill and bicycle tests. Fire fighters who underwent bicycle testing had a lower VO2 max, but they were also younger and more overweight and they reached lower maximum heart rates. In total 53.2% (n = 596) of tested persons reached the maximum heart rate for age. Of those who performed a treadmill test 64.4% reached the maximum heart rate according to age, comparing to 25.0% of those who performed a bicycle test. This difference is statistically significant (chi square, p < 0.001).

Maximal oxygen uptake was related to the type of test performed and the centre where the test had been performed. In Table 3
                     , the mean VO2 max of the 6 centres that delivered a minimum of 10 tests is compared. A statistically significant difference in mean VO2max between centres was found even if treadmill and bicycle tests were compared separately. For the two centres that offered both types of test, VO2max was significantly higher if performed on a treadmill than on a bicycle.

The results of a univariate general linear model analysis to detect the determinants and their interactions that best predict maximal oxygen uptake are shown in Table 4
                     . Waist circumference was chosen as a measure of overweight over BMI because the relation between waist circumference and VO2 max was stronger in a univariate regression model than the relationship between BMI and VO2 max. Determinants listed in Table 4 explained together 62% of the variation of VO2 max. As expected waist circumference was a statistically significant determinant of VO2max. There was a significant interaction between age and the type of test indicating that the effect of age on the maximal oxygen uptake was dependent of the type of test. Other significant determinants were the performance of the test as expressed by the maximum heart rate percentage and the centre where the test had been performed.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION@&#

The aim of this study was to evaluate the current daily practice of aerobic capacity testing in Belgian fire fighters. The hypothesis that persons who performed a treadmill test reached a higher VO2max than those who performed a bicycle test and that the maximal oxygen uptake varied significantly among test centres, was confirmed. The relationships between these not person related determinants and VO2max remained significant even after correction for age and waist circumference, two important determinants of aerobic capacity.

Bicycle tests aren't commonly used in scientific investigations concerning aerobic capacity testing of fire fighters, in fact all investigations concerning this subject in recent literature used tread mill, step or stair mill tests, because these exercises, in contrast to cycling, resemble more the activities fire fighters do in emergency situations (Ben-Ezra and Verstraete, 1988; Bilzon et al., 2001; Bruce-low et al., 2007; Dreger et al., 2006; International Association of Fire Fighters, 2008; Kiss et al., 2010; Peate et al., 2002; Selkirk and Mc Lellan, 2004). In this study the data gathered during daily aerobic capacity testing in a sample of Belgian fire fighters were analysed in order to evaluate current practice in Belgium. In this sample 28.6% of aerobic capacity testing was performed on a bicycle ergometer.

Using data of current practice made it possible to gather VO2max results from a large population of fire fighters, much larger than has been described until now (Barr et al., 2010; Kiss et al., 2010). This is a major strength of this study. However the multiplicity of centres where tests were performed, implicated that it was not possible to gather information on the testing protocols used. Analysing existing data also holds the limitation that social factor like motivation could differ and influence the results. This might be another weakness of this study. However we are confident that the fire fighters who underwent aerobic capacity testing in this study were motivated to deliver a maximum effort as the decision to be declared fit for their job depended on an adequate VO2max result.

The mean VO2 max (45.8 ml/kg.min) of fire fighters performing treadmill tests in our study was in close agreement with the values for fire fighters tested on treadmills in other studies (Barr et al., 2010; Ben-Ezra and Verstraete, 1988; Elsner and Kolkhorst, 2008; Kiss et al., 2010).

Waist circumference and age were significant predictors of maximal oxygen uptake. This relationship between parameters of obesity and age and maximal oxygen uptake have been demonstrated in several investigations (Fleg et al., 2005; Hawkins and Wiswell, 2003; Kiss et al., 2010; Laukkanen et al., 2009).

Maximum heart rate for age was more often reached in tread mill than in bicycle tests, suggesting workload was increased to a higher level in tread mill tests. Ben-Ezra and Verstraete (1988) found a significant difference in VO2max between tread mill and stair climbing exercise. They suggest that the type of exercise test (and training) should be task-specific and that a stair mill test is preferable to a treadmill test. A bicycle test differs considerably from the physiological requirements of fire fighting and is therefore probably inferior to the cardio respiratory evaluation of fire fighters. Likewise, sport-specific tests are important in sports medicine (Wisløff and Helgerud, 1998).

On the other hand cardiologists often prefer to do a bicycle test because the ECG during a bicycle exercise test is of better quality and ischemic changes can be detected more adequately. Therefore it should be preferable to disconnect the cardiologic evaluation with exercise testing to detect ischemic changes on ECG from the aerobic capacity testing that should be task-specific. Fire fighters with cardiovascular risk factors should have a cardiologic check-up prior to the aerobic capacity testing.

This study also confirms that the mean VO2max is higher in some centres independently of the type of test. This might be due to the use of different testing protocols. Some centres probably insist more to proceed to maximal exhaustion than others. This finding underlines the need for a stringent testing protocol. The International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) (2008) has formulated a protocol that could be an example for institutions and agencies that elaborate ability tests and criteria for fire fighters.

The decision to declare a fire fighter able to perform fire fighting tasks depends among other variables on his aerobic capacity. We therefore recommend that the exercise test should be specified and task-specific. A stringent testing protocol should be developed in order to gather results that are interpretable, comparable and useful for further investigations.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

We thank the occupational physicians of IDEWE for data collection in the study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

