@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Analysis of foot clearance in firefighters during ascent and descent of stairs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Following firefighting, increased risk of falls may exist while traversing stairs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Foot clearance decreased during ascent and increased during descent after activity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Medial-lateral asymmetric load carriage significantly affected stair clearance.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Foot clearance

Stairs

Firefighters

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Slips, trips, and falls are a leading cause of injury to firefighters with many injuries occurring while traversing stairs, possibly exaggerated by acute fatigue from firefighting activities and/or asymmetric load carriage. This study examined the effects that fatigue, induced by simulated firefighting activities, and hose load carriage have on foot clearance while traversing stairs. Landing and passing foot clearances for each stair during ascent and descent of a short staircase were investigated. Clearances decreased significantly (p < 0.05) post-exercise for nine of 12 ascent parameters and increased for two of eight descent parameters. Load carriage resulted in significantly decreased (p < 0.05) clearance over three ascent parameters, and one increase during descent. Decreased clearances during ascent caused by fatigue or load carriage may result in an increased trip risk. Increased clearances during descent may suggest use of a compensation strategy to ensure stair clearance or an increased risk of over-stepping during descent.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Firefighting is an inherently dangerous occupation. Numerous factors associated with firefighting result in increased risks for injuries: traversing obstacles on the fireground (e.g. stairs), the highly demanding workloads of the fireground, and carrying heavy tools and equipment (e.g. asymmetric carriage of firefighting hose over one shoulder). Slip, trip, and fall (STF) injuries are the second leading cause of minor injuries on the fireground (20%) and the leading cause of moderate to severe injuries in firefighters (28%) (Karter, 2012). Indeed, STF injuries are the only cause of fireground injury which have a higher percentage of moderate to severe injuries than minor injuries on the fireground (Karter, 2012).

As a common obstacle on the fireground, firefighters routinely traverse stairs before, during, and following fire suppression operations. Typical examples include traversing a short stair case (about 3 steps) at the entrance to a residence, and ascending/descending several flights of stairs to reach the fire floor in high rise buildings. Results from a survey of 148 firefighters indicated stairs were involved in nearly 10% of STF injuries (Petrucci et al., 2012).

There has been no research examining the risks of slips, trips and falls by firefighters on stairs; however stair-related risk of STFs have been studied in high-risk populations including persons with degenerative neurological diseases (Di Fabio et al., 2007) and in the elderly (Hamel et al., 2005). Di Fabio et al. (2007) found lower clearance during ascent in subjects with more severe impairments, while Hamel et al. (2005) reported that young adults increased their foot clearance during descent when ambient light was decreased to ensure stair clearance, but that older adults did not similarly adapt their foot clearance. Bergmann et al. (2012) examined the effects of lower-limb fatigue (after a maximal recumbent cycling protocol) on stair performance in healthy adults and found that overall joint range of motion was not influenced post-fatigue. However, firefighters experience whole-body fatigue during firefighting activities, and examination of foot clearances over stair edges following simulated firefighting activity would provide a better understanding of how changes in movement control relate to increased STF risk.

Acute fatigue is common during firefighting tasks (Smith et al., 1996). Heat stress contributes to the onset of fatigue and has been shown to negatively impact firefighters by altering physiological parameters (Rowell, 1974; Smith et al., 1996, 2001; Horn et al., 2011), decreasing hydration levels (Horn et al., 2012), and decreasing the delay before muscular fatigue sets in Gonzalez-Alonso et al.(1999). Fatigue can negatively impact postural sway (Nardone et al., 1997) and may contribute to increased STF risk in firefighters.

While most of these data were collected from activities performed within a live-fire environment, there is a current need in fire service research to determine how best to generate acute fatigue in controlled laboratory environments which simulate firefighting environments (Barker, 2005). Live-fire testing simulates temperature, humidity, and visibility conditions through a very large controlled wood-burning fire within a specially constructed burn building. Live-fire testing has high costs and high risks, as well as risk of damage to sensitive equipment; thus limiting data collection opportunities. Temperature-controlled environmental chambers allow for safe, controlled data collection but can be limited in their ability to replicate the thermal and visibility conditions of the fireground.

While conducting these strenuous activities, firefighters commonly carry asymmetric loads, such as sections of fire hose, tools, or extinguishers. For example, responses in high-rise structures will often involve the carriage of a hose load (about 7.5 m of folded fire hose) carried over one shoulder resulting in a medial-lateral asymmetric load distribution. However, studies on asymmetric loading have focused mostly on the general population. In these works, medial-lateral asymmetric load carriage has been shown to impact gait kinematic parameters on both the loaded and unloaded sides of the body (DeVita et al., 1991; Zhang et al., 2010; Ozgul et al., 2012). Ozgul et al. (2012) suggested that habitually carrying a backpack weighing 15% of body weight on one shoulder may result in changes in knee biomechanics that could contribute to joint degradation. Zhang et al. (2010) investigated the impact of carrying a dumbbell weighing 10% or 20% of body weight in one hand and found increased medial-lateral trunk bend and ground reaction force asymmetry during walking than without load carriage. DeVita et al. (1991) found that asymmetrical load carriage of 20% of body weight carried in a sidepack increased the hip and knee extensor moments of the unloaded leg, while decreasing moments on the loaded side. The impact of asymmetric load carriage on stair ascent/descent could lead to compromised performance on the fireground and increased injury risk, an issue that has not previously been studied.

The specific aims of this study were to evaluate foot clearance during stair ascent and descent with emphasis on the effects of (1) acute fatigue and (2) load carriage inducing medial-lateral asymmetry. A secondary aim was to assess different firefighter exercise testing protocols to help inform standards for experimental protocols.

@&#METHODS@&#

This research focuses on one aspect of a larger study involving a six station obstacle course (Fig. 1
                        ) that was completed before and after three different testing protocols designed to replicate workloads associated with firefighting activities. Horn et al. (2015) provides a detailed description of the three protocols that include: (1) walking on a treadmill (4.5 km/h at a 2.5% incline) in an environmental chamber (47 °C, 30% humidity) (ECTM), (2) simulated firefighting tasks in an environmental chamber (47 °C, 30% humidity) (ECFF), and (3) simulated firefighting tasks in a burn building with live-fire (135 °C at 30 cm from ceiling, 85 °C at 120 cm from the floor, 30 °C at 30 cm above the floor, very low humidity) (BBFF). Simulated firefighting tasks consisted of four activities, where a single activity (climbing stairs, advancing a weighted hoseline, searching a room, pulling down a ceiling) was performed for 2 min, followed by a 2 min rest period. Each of the three protocols was 14 min long. Trials were presented in a counter-balanced order to minimize any potential familiarization effects with the simulated firefighting tasks. At least 24 h prior to beginning the first simulated firefighting protocol, subjects completed a baseline session where they were familiarized with all of the exercise and assessment protocols as well as the personal protective equipment (PPE) and self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) that they were to wear for the study.

All activities were performed in full NFPA 1971 (2013) structural firefighting protective equipment (turnout coat and pants, boots, gloves, Nomex hood, and helmet; Globe Manufacturing, Pittsfield, NH) with a NFPA 1981 (2013) 45-min SCBA air pack (Firehawk M7, MSA Co., Cranberry Township, PA). A full SCBA bottle was always utilized during pre- and post-exercise data collection.

This manuscript focuses on the second station of the obstacle course, which required firefighters to traverse a short stairway, simulating the typical front steps that a firefighter might navigate entering and exiting a single family home. Subjects crossed over a three step wooden-frame stairway (1.2 m wide, 18 cm rise, 28 cm run), ascending one side and descending the opposite, always facing forward. The top surface was the equivalent of two steps deep (56 cm). Participants started the station 60 cm from the start of the stairway and ended 91 cm from the final step.

Subjects were instructed to cross the stair obstacle at a pace that he or she would use on the fireground, without running. Subjects completed the obstacle twice wearing full firefighting PPE without supplemental load carriage (no Hose condition), and twice carrying an 11.3 kg hose load, which was always carried on the right shoulder (Hose condition). Rest was allowed between each trial.

To characterize risk of trip or slip incidence while traversing stairs, toe and heel clearances over the edges of the stairs were calculated using three-dimensional motion capture data recorded at 200fps (OQUS 100, Qualisys AB; Sweden). Reflective passive markers were placed on the boot in the vicinity of the heel, first metatarsal, fifth metatarsal, and on the tip of the boot. Using vertical and horizontal offsets specific to each subject and the foot angle throughout the trial, the heel and metatarsal markers were projected to the sole of the boot. Markers were also placed on the corners of the each step, with vertical and horizontal offsets used to locate the true stair edge. The clearances were calculated between the projections to the boot sole and the stair edges (Fig. 2
                        ).

Vertical and horizontal boot clearances during ascent and descent, time to complete the station, and stair contacts were examined. Vertical ascending clearances were calculated as the average vertical distance between the “true” boot toe when each metatarsal marker was horizontally aligned with the stair edge. Vertical descending clearances were determined as the vertical distance between the “true heel” and the stair edge when the two were horizontally aligned (Fig. 2). Horizontal clearances were measured in an analogous fashion when the markers were vertically aligned with the stair edge. Vertical and Horizontal clearances were divided into ‘Landing’ and ‘Passing’ clearances following the convention proposed by Muhaidat et al. (2011) (i.e. the vertical clearance over the edge of Stair 1 when the foot landed on the step directly after the edge was defined as Stair 1 Landing Vertical (S1LV)) (Fig. 3
                        ). Clearances over Stair 5 were not examined as some subjects stepped immediately to the finish line while others took an intermediate step resulting in inconsistent data. The time taken to traverse the stairs (start-line to end-line) was measured by two independent research staff members with stopwatches, while contacts made with the stair edges were recorded by a third staff member. Trials in which contact was made with a stair edge were excluded from clearance analysis.

Clearance data were analyzed using four separate (vertical and horizontal clearances during both ascent and descent) 3 × 2 × 2 (i.e. 3 Protocol (ECTM, ECFF, BBFF) × 2 Time (Pre, Post) × 2 Load (No Hose, Hose) conditions) repeated measures MANOVAs. Completion time and stair contacts were analyzed with two separate ANOVAs (3 Protocol × 2 Time × 2 Load conditions). Replicate conditions (e.g. both trials for a given test Time and Load condition) were averaged together in all analyses. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. A Tukey honestly significant difference test was conducted to examine interactions between main effects.

Twenty-four firefighters (23 male, 1 female, age 28.6 ± 7.9years, height 1.8 ± 0.1 m, weight 90.7 ± 14.9 kg) participated in this study. All provided informed consent and approval was obtained from the University of Illinois Institutional Review Board. While data were collected on 24 subjects, technical issues with the motion capture system prevented analysis of one subject's results. Thus 23 subjects (22 male, 1 female) were included for all analyses.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The statistical tests found no significant main effects of Protocol and no significant interactions between any of the main effects.

There was a significant main effect of Time (pre-vs post-activity) for 11 parameters (nine during ascent and two during descent) (p < 0.05, Table 1
                        ). For ascent, nine of the 12 stair clearances were significantly reduced following simulated firefighting, with a maximum reduction of 11.4 mm. For descent, two of the eight stair clearance measurements significantly increased following simulated firefighting. Maximum increase during descent was 5.0 mm.

The right-shoulder hose load resulted in statistically significant reductions in stair clearance for four of the parameters studied, while one parameter significantly increased (p < 0.05, Table 2
                        ). For ascent, three of the 12 stair clearances were significantly reduced when the asymmetric load was added to the firefighters, with a maximum reduction of 7.0 mm. For descent, two of the eight stair clearance measurements changed significantly when carrying the hose load; S3bLV increased by 9.0 mm while S4PH decreased by 4.6 mm.

For the 23 subjects analyzed, the mean vertical boot clearances were 146±6 mm for Landing and 239 ± 50 mm for Passing during ascent, and 91±8 mm for Landing and 188±9 mm for Passing during descent. Horizontal clearances averaged 453 ± 61 mm for Landing and 291 ± 126 mm for Passing during ascent. Horizontal clearances during descent averaged 82 ± 25 mm for Landing and 203 ± 11 mm for Passing.

Speed of stair traversal and contact with stair edges did not reveal any significant patterns, other than that all contacts occurred on landing edges. No significant differences were found in the total time to traverse the stairs (p > 0.05), indicating that subjects traversed the stairs at the same speed regardless of acute fatigue due to firefighting activity or load carriage (average time: 4.8 ± 0.1 s). Foot contact with a stair edge occurred 24 times throughout the study. These contacts were not distributed in a significant pattern between ascent/descent (n ascent = 11, n descent = 13), pre/post (pre = 11, post = 13), or hose/no-hose trials (no hose = 11, hose = 13). Fifteen of the 24 subjects had at least one contact, but no subject had more than three total contacts and no more than one on any given trial. No contact resulted in a fall during the study.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The objective of this study was to examine foot clearances over stair edges while wearing firefighting PPE, with specific emphasis on the effects of acute fatigue induced by simulated firefighting activities and carriage of an asymmetrical hose load. Other observations included differences between Landing and Passing clearances, and investigation into stair traversal time and contacts with stair edges. A secondary objective was to investigate whether different testing environments and protocols provide similar information and comparable responses.

When comparing clearances before and after firefighting activity, clearances decreased during ascent and increased during descent (Table 1). These results suggest a potential increase in risk of stair contact during ascent and an increased risk of over-stepping during descent, either of which could lead to a fall and possible injury. Increased clearances during descent may also be due to a compensation strategy to increase clearance, reducing the risk for a STF. The significant changes in clearances over stair edges pre-to post-activity may be the result of decreased stability and control as a result of fatigue. Lemon and Hermiston (1977) have shown that firefighting activities place a high physiological demand on firefighters often exceeding an individuals' anaerobic threshold, and this level of physical exertion has been shown to increase postural sway (Nardone et al., 1997). The reported changes in clearance over the stair edges may be the result of changes in movement control induced by the exercise protocol.

The effect of load carriage was not as consistent as that due to acute fatigue, but does suggest that there may be an elevated risk of trips during stair ascent, a direct result of the reduced clearance caused by carrying an asymmetric load (Table 2). The 11.3 kg hose load used in this study was an average of 12.8% of the participants' body mass, which is slightly less than the load carriage studied by Ozgul et al. (2012) (15%) and DeVita et al. (1991) (20%), and within the range used by Zhang et al. (2010) (10–20%). All of the subjects in this study were trained firefighters and may be more acclimatized to carrying asymmetric loads than the general population, thus reducing the impact of the load carriage. Importantly, when traditional gait parameters (step width, stride length, step width, single leg support time, and double leg support time) were examined, the same hose load was found to induce more conservative behavior during level ground walking (Sy et al., 2013). While traversing stairs, foot placement is confined to each stair step and has a limited range of safe locations that allow propulsion to the next step. These constraints may explain why fewer differences were found while traversing stairs relative to level ground (where minimal constraints existed).

The vertical clearances measured during descent in this study (91 mm landing, 188 mm passing) were significantly greater than absolute minimum descent clearances reported by Hamel et al. (2005) (21 mm–36 mm landing) and Muhaidat et al. (2011) (45 mm landing, 107 mm passing) in young adults wearing normal clothing under normal lighting conditions. As expected, clearances over passing edges were larger than landing clearances which is consistent with those findings reported by Muhaidat et al. (2011). The restriction and overall weight of the gear, which have been found to negatively impact posture and balance (Punakallio et al., 2003) and oxygen consumption (Perroni et al., 2013), may have caused over-compensation by the firefighter resulting in stair clearances that are much higher than previously documented. These larger clearances strongly suggest that wearing PPE alters how the firefighter traverses stairs to ensure adequate foot clearance; thereby reducing the risk of a STF. We have previously shown that donning PPE significantly impacts obstacle crossing abilities compared to wearing normal work clothes, and this detriment is further impacted by acute fatigue due to short duration firefighting activities (Park et al., 2010).

All stair contacts occurred on landing edges, indicating that STF risk while ascending or descending stairs is greater with a landing foot than a passing foot. Contacts due to low clearance on landing steps may pose an increased fall risk as the individual is transitioning toward loading the landing foot (shifting the center of mass away from the supporting limb) as opposed to contact on a passing step, where the center of mass is closer to the contralateral limb. In situations which inherently have a higher STF risk, it may be advisable to take one step at a time, placing both feet on a single step between movements; thereby reducing the displacement of the center of mass and reducing the risk of a stair contact.

No significant differences due to Protocol were found for any parameter presented in this paper, even though testing Protocol resulted in significant differences in other parameters evaluated in the larger study, i.e., heart rate and core temperature (Horn et al., 2015) and level ground gait biomechanics (Sy et al., 2013). The relatively rigid requirements of foot position placements necessary to safely traverse the stairs may explain why significant differences in the physical and thermal stress induced in each of the three protocols did not significantly impact foot clearances over stair edges, yet did impact heart rate, core temperature and level ground walking.

There were several important limitations to consider in this study. First, longer stairways would have allowed comparisons between steps requiring similar stepping biomechanics (in the middle section of the stair case) within each trial. However, the three step stairway here is similar to other laboratory investigations (Hamel et al., 2005; Muhaidat et al., 2011) and the increased height may also increase risk to fatigued subjects. Second, the load carried was constant for all subjects regardless of body weight, whereas other studies have used loads proportional to body weight. We would argue that this is more ecologically valid than altering the weight by percent body weight, since firefighters carry the same tools and hose loads regardless of size and body weight.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Stair clearances were impacted by performing simulated firefighting activities replicating workloads comparable to those encountered on the fireground and by carriage of an asymmetrical hose load. Following activity, subjects exhibited a decrease in clearance of 3.5 percent during ascent and an average increase of 7.6 percent during descent. Carrying a hose load on one shoulder had a similar, though less consistent impact on firefighter foot clearance. The significant changes in clearances due to acute fatigue may represent increased risk for firefighters following bouts of firefighting activities. Such changes in clearance might increase the risk for tripping over stair edges during ascent or slipping on a stair edge during descent. Firefighters' vertical clearance over stair edges during descent were significantly larger the previous reports from individuals in normal clothing, suggesting a possible compensation strategy to account for decreased postural control and concern for increased risk of STF. To reduce the risk of STFs on the fireground, special attention and more conservative movements should be used when traversing stairs, especially following firefighting activity or when asymmetric loads are carried.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Department of Homeland Security Fire Prevention and Safety Grant #EMW-2010-FP-01606. No conflicts of interest exist between this work and any of the authors. The authors would like to thank Matt Petrucci, Mike Angelini, Julian Sy, Dan Warner, Lela DiMonte, and Sue Blevins for their assistance in this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

