@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effect of rest break schedule on acute low back pain development in pain and non-pain developers during seated work

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Pain and non-pain developers engaged in prolonged sitting under four conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Pain developers showed clinically relevant increases in pain in all conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Non-pain developers remained at stable low-levels of pain in all conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Productivity was maintained in both groups in all four sessions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Changes in muscle activation were not observed in pain or non pain developers.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Low back pain

Standing rest breaks

Prolonged sitting

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A significant portion of the population (25–50%) is known to develop acute low back pain (LBP) within a bout of prolonged sitting. Previous research has supported the use of frequent rest breaks, from seated office work, in order to reduce self-reported LBP, however, there is limited consensus about the recommended frequency and duration of rest breaks. This may be due to the limited consideration of individual differences in acute LBP development. The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of three different standing rest-break conditions on a group of pain developers (PD) and non-pain developers (NPD) engaged in prolonged seated work. Twenty participants completed four one-hour-long bouts of seated typing: Condition A – no rest; Condition B – 5 min of standing rest every 30 min; Condition C – 2.5 min of standing rest every 15 min; Condition D – 50 s of standing rest every 5 min. Self-reported LBP, self-reported mental fatigue and 30-s samples of EMG were collected every 10 min throughout each session. Eight out of 20 participants (40%) reported LBP during Condition A (classified as PD). Only PD demonstrated clinically relevant increases in LBP across conditions where Conditions B, C, or D provided some relief, but did not restore pain scores to their original level, prior to sitting. PD and NPD developed mental fatigue equally, with Conditions B and D helping to reduce fatigue. No differences in productivity were observed between conditions or groups and no main effects were observed for muscle activity, median power frequency or co-contraction. These data suggests that frequent, short, standing rest breaks may help to reduce symptoms of LBP, however they are only a temporary solution as PD still developed clinically important LBP, even with frequent rest breaks.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Prolonged sitting is a work-related factor commonly associated with the development of acute low back pain (LBP) (Andersson, 1999; Kelsey and Golden, 1988). Considering the average American spends approximately 8 h per day engaged in various forms of sitting (Matthews et al., 2008), LBP continues to be a significant and increasing concern in workplaces (American Association of Orthopedic Surgeons NOW, 2009). Given the ubiquitous nature of sitting in Western society, proactive methods for reducing acute LBP should be at the forefront of research efforts.

Curiously, not all those who sit or stand for long periods develop LBP. In controlled laboratory studies, during prolonged sitting or standing, 25–50% of participants develop self-reported back pain where this sub-population has been termed “responders” or “pain developers” (PD) (Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013; Nairn et al., 2013; Mork and Westgaard, 2009; Nelson-Wong and Callaghan, 2010b). Within this paradigm, individuals are classified as PD if they self-report VAS discomfort scores that increase substantially over time. The definition for substantial increase has varied between 10 mm on a 100 mm VAS scale (Nelson-Wong and Callaghan, 2010b; Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013; Nairn et al., 2013) to 2 units on a 10 unit VAS scale (Mork and Westgaard, 2009). In prolonged sitting situations, PD demonstrate unique movement and muscle activation characteristics (Mork and Westgaard, 2009; Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013; Nairn et al., 2013). For example, elevated co-contraction indices (CCI) and muscle activation in the trunk region were observed in PD, when completing two hours of prolonged sitting (Nairn et al., 2013; Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013). Additionally, participants who develop acute-LBP while sitting demonstrate increased sagittal plane trunk movement, more fidgeting and larger whole body shifts during sitting (Willigenburg et al., 2013; Dunk and Callaghan, 2010). While it is unclear if PD have developed these alternate responses as a precursor, or consequence of increasing pain; it is clear that PD and non-PD (NPD) represent different responses. As such, it is important to study how interventions might affect both PD and NPD.

At present, with respect to rest-breaks while working, workplace guidelines in Ontario state that “An employer shall give an employee an eating period of at least 30 min at intervals that will result in an employee working no more than five consecutive hours without an eating period” (Ministry of Labour, 2004). Given emerging evidence suggesting that PD and NPD respond differently to prolonged sitting; employers, policymakers and employees may benefit from considering individual differences between workers when trying to establish ergonomic hazard controls, such as a rest break schedule.

Periodic rest breaks have been identified as a way to reduce the onset and severity of acute LBP. Previous research has shown that scheduled rest breaks can reduce self-report discomfort at the low back by as much as 35%; while maintaining, and in some cases, improving work productivity (Henning et al., 1997; Balci and Aghazadeh, 2004; McLean et al., 2001). At one of two worksites, Henning et al. (1997) found that both productivity and overall body comfort improved with the introduction of rest breaks at 15-min intervals over the course of a six-week intervention. Compared to a no-break group, productivity was also improved by 5% with the introduction of the rest breaks. These findings however, were not replicated at the second, larger worksite during the study. Elsewhere, Balci & Aghazadeh (2004) support scheduling breaks at 15-min intervals as the most effective schedule for reducing physical discomfort at the neck, low back and chest, while improving worker productivity, speed and accuracy during prolonged sitting. A 5-min rest break every 30 min, during seated work was most beneficial however, for reducing blurred vision, eyestrain and physical discomfort at a number of other body locations. Implementing these recommendations poses a challenge as the exact nature of the prescribed rest breaks were not well described (i.e., standing, sitting, talking with a coworker, stretching). It is likely that the activities completed during a rest interval can affect the utility of the break in alleviating physical and mental discomfort. Given the evidence suggesting that a combination of sitting and standing is beneficial for reducing musculoskeletal discomfort (Gallagher et al., 2014), recording the exact nature of these rest breaks is paramount. When considering the effectiveness of a rest break schedule, and the ability to translate resulting evidence to the practitioner community, it is important to consider and control the nature of the activities conducted during the rest break.

Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine the effect of three different standing rest-break schedules on groups classified as PD and NPD, engaged in prolonged seated work in a controlled laboratory environment. Objective measures of productivity, muscle activation amplitude, median power frequency (MdPF) and co-contraction were calculated, in addition to subjective measures of self-report mental fatigue and low back pain. It was hypothesized that 25%–50% of the participants would develop acute LBP during an uninterrupted bout of prolonged seated work, thereby classifying them as PD. Furthermore, it was expected that the rest break schedule that offered more frequent rest opportunities would be most effective at reducing LBP among PD. Lastly, we expected PD to demonstrate higher levels of trunk muscle activation and co-contraction, relative to NPD, where these measures would also increase during a bout of prolonged sitting for this sub-group.

@&#METHODS@&#

Ten males (mean weight = 79.19 kg, mean height = 181.48 cm) and ten females (mean weight = 65.19 kg, mean height = 166.63 cm; group mean weight = 72.4 kg, group mean height = 173.8 cm) were recruited from the university population. Participants were excluded from the study if they had previously been diagnosed with chronic LBP or other neuromuscular disorders. Participants were asked to refrain from any vigorous low back or core exercise 24 h prior to the participation in any of the sessions. Additionally, our classification of PD or NPD was based on self-report discomfort findings obtained during Condition A of the protocol (see Section 2.3). Informed consent was obtained from all participants. The study protocol was approved by the University's General Research Ethics Board.

Electromyography (EMG) data, sampled at 2000 Hz, were recorded from select muscles of the trunk. Participants' skin was prepared over the location of the muscle belly of the right and left rectus abdominus (RRA and LRA respectively) and lumbar erector spinae (RES and LES respectively) (Cholewicki et al., 2005). RRA and LRA were identified by palpating 3 cm from the sagittal plane of the umbilicus. The LES and RES were identified by first palpating the spinous processes of L4, and then moving laterally 2 finger widths from this location (Cholewicki et al., 2005). Wireless EMG electrodes (Delsys Trigno, Delsys Inc: Natick, MA) were attached to the skin at these sites using double-sided adhesive strips, where the system specifications are reported in the Delsys Trigno™ Wireless System User's Guide (2013). Maximal voluntary contractions (MVC) were collected for the RA and ES according to protocols outlined by Moraes et al. (2009) and Imai et al. (2010), respectively. All MVC trials were five seconds in length where participants were asked to ramp up to maximum force over the first two seconds, maintaining maximum effort for the remaining time.

Upon completion of the MVC, participants were seated at a computer workstation to begin a typing session. The workstation was set-up for each individual according to the office ergonomics guidelines outlined by the Canadian Standard Association's Guideline for office ergonomics (2012). The locations of the monitor, input devices, and chair as well as any height and width adjustments were then recorded in order to standardize each individual's setup for subsequent sessions.

On four separate, non-consecutive days, participants reported to the laboratory and participated in conditions A, B, C and D (Table 1
                        ). The order of completion was randomized using a random number generator and participants were asked to complete all sessions at the same time of day in order to reduce the effect of diurnal changes in the material properties of the trunk (Adams et al., 1987). During each session, participants typed out a written document into a word processing file on a desktop computer. At appropriate intervals, the experimenter would enter the workspace and notify the participant of their rest-break. Participants were then required to stand in the middle of the room without leaning or stretching. They were permitted to access their mobile phones or converse with the researcher. The rest break provided both a physical and mental reprieve from the typing task.

Additionally, at ten-minute intervals, the experimenter entered the workspace to ask the participant about their level of self-report LBP and mental fatigue. Participants were asked to rate their level of LBP on a scale from “No pain” to “Worst pain ever” by selecting a point on a 100-unit scale. The data were collected using the VAS Tool application (Geerten van Hooff). Participants who showed an increase of 10 units or more over the course of Condition A were classified as PD (similar to Nelson-Wong, 2010b; Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013; Nairn et al., 2013). At the same time, participants were also asked to rate their level of mental fatigue from “None” to “Completely Exhausted” by selecting a point on a 100-unit scale. Corresponding with these ten-minute intervals, 30-s EMG samples were collected from the specified muscles and were used to calculate MdPF, percent muscle activation and CCI. No EMG was collected during standing rest break periods. Productivity was calculated for each participant at the end of their session based on Equation (1):
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    Productivity
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          (
                                          Total
                                          
                                          words
                                          
                                          typed
                                          −
                                          Errors
                                          )
                                       
                                       
                                          Total
                                          
                                          collection
                                          
                                          time
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

Participants were allowed to correct errors during the typing task. However, spell and grammar check functions were turned off in order not to confer additional proofreading benefits. After the study the participants completed an exit survey where they ranked their preferred Condition from favourite to least favourite and placed them in order of most feasible to least feasible for a workplace setting.

Each participant's EMG data were normalized to their maximum muscle activation from the MVC of the same day. A dual-pass, fourth order, high pass Butterworth filter (30 Hz) was used to remove contamination from heart rate (Drake and Callaghan, 2008). The DC offset was then removed and the linear envelope applied by full wave rectifying and low-pass filtering the data (dual pass, fourth order, Butterworth filter, at a cut-off frequency of 2.5 Hz, as per Brereton and McGill, 1998). The highest value from the filtered data was extracted as the MVC. Filtered data were then normalized to the peak activation elicited during the MVC trials, and multiplied by 100 to indicate percent muscle activation. Mean amplitude values were calculated for each muscle at each time interval for all conditions.

To obtain the MdPF of the signal, a Fast-Fourier Transformation (FFT) analysis was performed. FFTs were applied to non-overlapping 0.5 s epochs of the raw EMG data from each 30-s sample, where the median frequency was extracted from each epoch, yielding a total of 59 MdPF values for each 30-s sample. These values were averaged to produce a single MdPF value representative of each 30-s sample.

CCI were calculated using the normalized EMG data from each 30-s trial. The normalized EMG data were down-sampled to 50 Hz as per Schinkel-Ivey et al. (2013). CCI were calculated for six unique muscle pairings (see Table 2
                        ) based on Equation (2) (Lewek et al., 2004):
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    CCI
                                    =
                                    
                                       ∑
                                       
                                          i
                                          =
                                          1
                                       
                                       N
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          (
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         EMG
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               low
                                                            
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         EMG
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               high
                                                            
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          )
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          (
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   EMG
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         low
                                                      
                                                      i
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             +
                                             
                                                
                                                   EMG
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         high
                                                      
                                                      i
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where EMGlow represents the lower EMG value for the muscle pairing and EMGhigh represents the higher EMG value for the muscle pairing at each sample. A custom program was written in Matlab (MathWorks®, Natick, MA) to compare the magnitude of EMG activation (%MVC) on a point-by-point basis for determination of EMGlow and EMGhigh values in Equation (2).

Statistical analyses were not completed for self-reported LBP. Instead, these data were evaluated by considering measures of clinical importance (Hagg et al., 2003). After classifying PD and NPD in Condition A, consistent with reported methods (Nelson-Wong, 2010b; Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013; Nairn et al., 2013), the effectiveness of each break in reducing self-reported LBP was considered. For the purpose of the current study, the 10 mm increase implemented by Nelson-Wong and Callaghan (2010b) was interpreted as a 10% increase for our VAS. Though our scale was not 100 mm, Wewers and Lowe (1990) have suggested that a VAS can be any length deemed suitable by researchers.

An improvement was defined as a minimal clinically important difference (MCID) of 18 units relative to Condition A. More specifically the difference between the LBP score from time 0 to time 60, for each condition, was required to be at least 18 units less than the LBP score from time 0 to time 60 observed in Condition A. Additionally, we also monitored for increases in LBP, where an increase of 8 units (from time 0 to time 60) was used to indicate a minimal clinically important increase (Hagg et al., 2003).

A mixed measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied to each of the four conditions to detect for differences in the remaining outcome measures including: mental fatigue, MdPF, percent muscle activation (for each muscle) and CCI (for each muscle pairing, see Table 2). Time (0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 60 min) was treated as a within-participant factor and Group (PD vs. NPD) was treated as a between-participant factor. Greenhouse-Geisser corrections were used to determine the degrees of freedom where sphericity was violated. Where significant Time by Group interactions were observed, a one-way ANOVA was conducted post-hoc within each group to determine time specific changes within groups, where Kruskal–Wallis tests were conducted to detect specific differences between PD and NPD at each time point. All pairwise comparisons for main effects in the mixed ANOVA models and in the post-hoc ANOVA models were completed with a Bonferonni-adjusted significance level to control for family-wise error. Paired t-tests were used to evaluate the differences in productivity within PD and NPD while independent t-tests were used to examine productivity differences between PD and NPD within the same condition. All statistical analyses were completed using SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics v. 19 - SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Participants separated into two distinct groups of PD (5F:3M) and NPD (5F:7M). PD demonstrated substantial increases in self-report LBP during the time-course of Condition A while NPD remained at stable, low levels of self-reported LBP (Fig. 1
                        A). From time 0 to time 60, PD showed increases in self-reported LBP of 32.13 ± 15.16, 9.00 ± 13.55, 13.75 ± 14.20 and 8.26 ± 10.62 units respectively in Conditions A, B, C, and D. Compared to Condition A, PD reduced self-reported LBP ratings by 23.13 ± 13.55, 18.38 ± 14.20 and 23.87 ± 10.62 units for Conditions B, C and D respectively, where these reductions met the requirement for a MCID for improvement in self-report LBP (Hagg et al., 2003).

A significant main effect of Time was detected for Conditions A (F
                        2.04, 36.73 = 12.64, p < 0.001), C (F
                        2.33, 41.93 = 6.29, p < 0.05) and D (F
                        2.17, 39.09 = 7.39, p < 0.05) (Fig. 2
                        ). Specific time differences (p < 0.05) are indicated in Fig. 2.

No significant differences were detected in the productivity outcome measure between PD and NPD, or across the four conditions (Table 3
                        ).

The exit survey results showed that both PD (6/8) and NPD (11/12) preferred Condition B (a 5 min break every 30 min) the most out of all sessions. However, preferences diverged when considering their second preferred option, where PD favoured Condition C (a 2.5 min break every 15 min) as second best, NPD selected Condition A (no break) as their second preferred session. Overall, both PD (5/8) and NPD (7/12) viewed Condition B as most feasible in an office workplace, followed closely by Condition A.

No significant effects of Condition, Time or Group were detected for any of the muscle activity related outcome measures, including CCI, EMG amplitude (%MVC) or MdPF of the four muscles examined (Table 4
                        ).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of three different rest-break schedules on LBP, mental fatigue and productivity of PD and NPD engaged in one hour of sitting. Over the course of Condition A (the baseline uninterrupted bout of prolonged sitting), 40% of the participants (8 out of 20) developed self-reported LBP consistent with previous research on prolonged sitting (Mork and Westgaard, 2009; Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013; Nairn et al., 2013). By definition, NPD did not show any significant increases in self-reported LBP during Condition A, the uninterrupted bout of sitting.

While all three rest break conditions conferred relief in terms of self-report LBP for PD relative to the 60-min prolonged sitting condition, none of the conditions prevented the occurrence of clinically relevant increases in LBP. The improvements observed in Conditions B, C and D are notable given that Hagg et al. (2003) have suggested that a difference of 18 units or more on a VAS is considered a clinically important improvement in symptoms for individuals suffering from LBP. However the MCID for each of these conditions compared to Condition A suggest that these break-schedules are not fully restoring PD to the same low-levels of self-report LBP noted in NPD. Additionally, the fact that no major differences in the improvements of LBP for PD in any condition were observed also suggests that more frequent rest breaks are not necessarily beneficial. This observation may be due to postural loading that occurs while engaged in sitting and standing, as well as the neuromuscular nature of pain and its related perception.

Research by Callaghan and McGill (2001) for example, has shown that prolonged sitting (2 h) causes changes in the passive structures of the spine and induces a low back compressive load (1698 ± 467 N) significantly higher than that observed in standing (1076 ± 243 N). Though the authors suggest that a standing break may be beneficial for the passive tissues of the spine, both standing and sitting provide little structural relief to the musculature of the spine or loading at the low back (Callaghan and McGill, 2001). These findings may be relevant to the current study given that our participants were required to sit and stand in static postures throughout each condition. Stretching and movement was not permitted during the prescribed rest breaks of our study, and as a result there was probably very little structural relief provided to tissues of the low back. The fact that our PD still reported clinically relevant levels of pain despite improvements in their reporting suggests that the structural tissue of the low back may have still been compromised and that the standing rest breaks provided more of a mental relief than physiological or biomechanical benefit to the low back. This mental reprieve may have caused PD to rate lower levels of LBP during rest-break conditions.

Notably, Nelson-Wong and Callaghan (2010b) have found that additional movement and exercise training provides muscular and self-report relief for PD engaged in prolonged standing. This finding points towards the notion that some level of exercise is beneficial in altering the tissue activation properties of PD. It should be noted however, that the exercise regiment prescribed to PD focused on strengthening trunk musculature. Though CCI decreased in PD who showed improvements in self-report LBP post-exercise, it is unclear if this is attributable to a more active lifestyle, improved musculoskeletal fitness or changes in perception of pain among PD during the four weeks. Regardless of the actual nature of improvement in pain ratings for PD in Nelson-Wong and Callaghan's study (2010b), it would be interesting to examine the effect of an exercise regiment for PD engaged in prolonged sitting in a more acute (daily) time frame. At present it is unclear if short- or long-term exercise interventions can improve LBP ratings of PD during sitting.

The considerations provided by LBP findings should be interpreted in light of participants' own preference. Despite the similar magnitude of reduced LBP provided by Conditions B, C and D interestingly, all participants favoured Condition D the least. Frequent interruptions to work have shown to decrease the ability of a worker to maintain a task's flow (Jett and George, 2003), which may provide an indication of why participants favoured Condition D the least. This is an important consideration given that the implementation of a standing break schedule depends largely on its feasibility as determined by employees, requiring employees to maintain the task's flow. In support of this statement, exit survey results also indicated that participants thought that Condition D was the least feasible for workplaces. Compliance to an evidence-based intervention may be low if workers perceive that its ill effects on performance outweigh the intervention's potential health benefits at body regions such as the low back.

Reducing mental fatigue can also be an important benefit of a rest break and should be acknowledged. As shown in Fig. 2, participants' mental fatigue increased the most during Condition A – the 60-min of seated work without any rest breaks. The magnitude of the benefit in reducing self-reported mental fatigue was dependent on the rest break schedule, where increases in mental fatigue were prevented the most by the rest break schedule employed in Condition B. This finding seems to support participants’ suggestion that Condition B was their favourite of the three standing rest break sessions, providing some reduction in both self-report LBP and mental fatigue, without interrupting work flow.

One potential concern regarding the introduction of frequent rest breaks (e.g., 5 min break every 30 min) is the potential negative effect on productivity. Our results do not provide support for that concern, where productivity was maintained across all conditions, in each group (though PD showed elevated productivity, this is likely due to one PD who drove up the mean by typing at an average pace of 64 words/min across sessions). Literature affirms this finding where interruptions have been shown to facilitate performance on simple tasks (Speier et al., 2003), such as the transcription task required in this study. However, task difficulty may be a confounding factor that modifies the link between break frequency and productivity. Lee and Duffy (2015) have suggested that frequency of interruptions does not affect performance on skill-based tasks (i.e., typing and arithmetic) and that cognitive tasks are likely to take longer to complete with increased interruptions. Again, considering that transcription of a written document into a computer document is a relatively simple, skill-based task our results may not be generalizable to all workplace settings, particularly those requiring employees to engage in more cognitively demanding work. In line with our assertion that individual differences (such as PD status) be considered when designing effective interventions, Karwowski et al. (1994) have also suggested that the type of task, mental workload and postural dynamics should all be carefully considered when optimizing human–computer data entry tasks.

PD and NPD did not show increasing muscle activity or CCI over time. The muscle activation values found, however, are similar in magnitude to the values reported by Schinkel-Ivy et al. (2013). Though Schinkel-Ivy et al. (2013) reported significant main effects of group and time at a number of back and abdominal muscle pairings, none were observed in the RA-ES CCI of their protocol, the same bilateral pairings reported in our study. Thus it is likely that RA and ES are not muscles contributing to the elevated CCI reported within the trunk region for PD elsewhere. This finding supports evidence that suggest deep-tissue muscles such as lumbar multifidus and internal oblique are responsible for the development of LBP in PD (Mork and Westgaard, 2009; Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013). Additionally, participants from previous research participated in 2 h of prolonged activities (Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013; Nelson-Wong and Callaghan, 2010a). As a result, it is hypothesized that a longer period of time may be required to induce noticeable changes in muscle activation for abdominal and back muscles. Indeed, most of the statistically significant increases in muscle co-contraction among PD reported by Schinkel-Ivy et al. (2013) occurred over time intervals of 60 min or greater.

Our MdPF findings are consistent with existing literature examining low-level contractions (Arendt-Nielson et al., 1989; Hansson et al., 1992): no changes were observed over time. Hagg (1992) has suggested that during prolonged low-level contractions, additional recruitment of new motor units with higher recruitment thresholds and conduction velocities may result in an increase in MdPF that masks signs of fatigue. This may have been why a decrease in MdPF over time was not observed in PD during Condition A. Given that there were no differences between groups or conditions, we do not believe that rest break frequency or duration had significant effects on muscle fatigue of the four muscles examined. Again, this may be related to the time duration of our protocol (60 min). As rest breaks have been proven to be beneficial in reducing fatigue in the back muscles (McLean et al., 1997, 2001), future studies should continue to investigate this relationship during longer bouts of sitting.

The current research supports the findings from previous research that have classified PD and NPD based on self-report LBP. Specifically, our study classified 40% of participants as developing acute self-report LBP, agreeing with the incidence reported in similar studies (Mork and Westgaard, 2009; Nairn et al., 2013; Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013). However, by contrast, in previous studies increases in self-report LBP were not noted until the end of 2 h or longer (Mork and Westgaard, 2009; Nairn et al., 2013; Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013), where these differences were detected in as little as 40 min of prolonged sitting during Condition A of the current study. When considering individual differences on the basis of PD/NPD, a 60-min bout of prolonged sitting may be sufficient to identify and classify PD.

These findings indicate that frequent rest breaks provide some relief from LBP for PD, yet do not affect productivity, while also providing a mental rest for both PD and NPD. The fact that pain was not completely alleviated in our group of PD, however, cannot be ignored. Employers may be tempted to introduce these standing rest breaks given that alternatives in the form of sit-stand workstations and exercise based interventions have been proposed (Huseman et al., 2009; Robertson et al., 2013) but are quite costly and often require intensive training for employees. Future research should investigate the feasibility of short-term exercise interventions targeting deep tissue muscles on both subjective and objective outcome measures related to LBP. These exercise approaches may confer more tangible benefits to tissues of the low back and associated relief from pain for the worker.

These results should be interpreted within the scope of the following limitations. While we were able to discern differences among PD and NPD after one-hour, a longer duration may help to better understand the true benefit of a rest break structure, with reference to an entire work-day. In a similar protocol where the effect of seated rest breaks were investigated during prolonged standing, Gallagher et al. (2014) noted that during the second hour of standing, PD reported a larger increase in pain beyond the initial reduction caused by a seated break, suggesting that the break briefly interrupted the increase in LBP, but did not mitigate it entirely. Our results are also suggestive of this, where the introduction of rest breaks seems to have slowed the increase in self-reported LBP, but the shorter testing duration does not provide the opportunity to monitor this trend over a longer duration that may be more representative of the typical workday. In addition, the use of a convenience sample comprised primarily of university students poses some limitation to the external validity of the results. It is possible that over time, office workers, who are also PD, may develop unique strategies to deal with increasing reports of LBP, such as altered trunk muscle activation, which has been reported in previous research (Schinkel-Ivy et al., 2013; Nairn et al., 2013). However, we believe that the effects of rest, as shown here, would be similar in a traditional office work environment.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of three different standing rest-break conditions on PD and NPD engaged in prolonged seated work. Both PD and NPD will benefit from standing rest breaks, however the rest-break needs may differ between groups. PD can mitigate LBP by taking rest breaks. Conversely by design, NPD do not suffer LBP and may take rest breaks as required to gain other health and performance benefits. The need for costly interventions such as sit-stand workstations should be considered carefully on a case-by-case basis given that not all individuals respond to prolonged sitting in the same way and since productivity seems to be maintained despite frequent standing rest breaks among PD and NPD. Further research is needed to determine whether the trends observed in the current study endure beyond the 60 min of work, and research should consider the risk/reward of intermittent rest breaks when considering more complex, cognitive based work tasks.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest for the study.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank Dr Robert May from the Queen's University English Department for providing the written document for the transcription task. Additionally, thank you to all the participants who took part in the lengthy data collection.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

