@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Perceived density of road maps

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We model the perceived density (PD) of information as a property of road maps.


                        
                        
                           
                           The model predicted PD with three variables (R
                              2 = .923).


                        
                        
                           
                           The PD model was cross-validated with a different set of maps and participants.


                        
                        
                           
                           The validation experiment showed an effect of map configuration on PD.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Digital road map

Perceived density

Map scale

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Maps should be designed so that users can comprehend and use the information. Display decisions, such as choosing the scale at which an area is shown, depend on properties of the displayed information such as the perceived density (PD) of the information. Taking a psychophysical approach we suggest that the PD of information in a road map is related to the scale and properties of the mapped area. 54 participants rated the PD of 60 maps from different regions. We provide a simple model that predicts the PD of electronic road map displays, using the logarithm of the number of roads, the logarithm of the number of junctions and the length of the shown roads. The PD model was cross-validated using a different set of 60 maps (n = 44). The model can be used for automatically adjusting display scales and for evaluating map designs, considering the required PD to perform a map-related task.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Digital road maps in Geographic information systems (GIS) are widely used for navigation, orientation and human visual object recognition, and their use and sophistication rapidly increase (Wu and Zhang, 2009). Well-designed maps improve users' understanding of the surroundings and assist in various tasks. As map datasets grow in size and complexity, the design of map displays becomes more challenging (Ziefle, 2010), especially if the maps are viewed on mobile devices, such as cell phones or small tablet computers that often have screens with 10–26 cm diagonal sizes.

The design of maps in GIS calls for choices to determine what information should appear on the map and how it is shown and organized, affecting users' perceptions regarding the displayed information and their interaction with the systems (Brown et al., 2013; Doyon-Poulin and Robert, 2012; McCrobie, 2000; Montello, 2002; Oliva et al., 2004; Srinivasan and Jovanis, 1997). This issue is part of the general topic of user-centered design of geographic information, a subject that receives much attention, as is evident, for instance, from the special issue in Applied Ergonomics published in 2013 (Sharples et al., 2013).

Various properties of the displayed information (e.g., line styles, shading, object sizes, color use, labels, symmetry, etc.) generate subjective impressions of map clutter and complexity. These properties depend on the scale at which the information is shown. Changes in scale alter the density of the maps (i.e., the number of elements in a given area), affecting its appearance. We deal here with the study of the perceived density (PD) of maps, which is a user's subjective rating of the map density at a given scale. Two maps may have the same objective density (e.g., number of roads, number of junctions), but different PD.

Little research has dealt with PD and methods to measure it. We develop here a simple model to predict the PD of a road map from a set of displayed map elements and their characteristics, adopting a psychophysical approach. The model can be used to adjust the map scale automatically to obtain a PD level that is preferred for performing a specific map-related task (e.g., navigation, searching a point on the map).

This is essentially a control loop in which the scale is adjusted until the map has the desired PD for a particular task (Fig. 1
                        ), which is the PD the user prefers in a given context. It may depend on the task for which the map is used and other factors. Either the user or the display software (in a future application, based on our model) can alter the map scale, so that the observed PD matches the desired PD. The controller compares the desired PD to the observed PD, and scale is changed in the direction of the difference (if the desired PD is smaller than the observed PD, the map scale will be increased).

PD does not only depend on scale. Adjusting the information displayed in different layers or the selection of displayed layers of information and changing visual properties of graphical elements (e.g., font sizes, line styles, etc.) may also alter PD. We do not address these points here, but future algorithms can, of course, also include changes in these elements.

Our study is part of a broader research effort, intended to determine the appropriate scale for displaying a map as a function of map characteristics, task context, and user preferences. In the current paper we deal with measuring the PD for maps showing different terrains at different scales, assuming that PD is one of the variables in the model for determining the optimal scale.

The terms density, clutter and complexity are closely related and are used to measure explicitly or implicitly how much information exists in a display, or how difficult it is to detect an object (Kim et al., 2011). When the density of displayed information is too high or the layout is erratic, the effectiveness of the display decreases (Evans and Stevens, 1997; Wu and Zhang, 2009). In this situation, the visual information is referred to as "cluttered" (Rosenholtz et al., 2005; Van den Berg et al., 2009), with clutter defined as an abundance of irrelevant information (Doyon-Poulin and Ouellette, 2011; Doyon-Poulin and Robert, 2012). Thus clutter has negative connotations, and in general less clutter is considered to be better than more.

In contrast, density is a neutral term, referring to the number of objects in a given area. In graphic display design Tufte and Graves-Morris (1983) suggested that often “less is more” and one should maximize the data-ink ratio, which is the proportion of informative ink (that represents the data) to the total ink in the graph. Gillan and Richman (1994) indeed showed improved performance with larger data-ink ratios. However, several studies on users' perceptions of designs showed that in some cases users preferred the more complex designs and considered them as more attractive (Norman, 2007), and even for graphic displays the "junkcharts" were sometimes preferred (Inbar et al., 2007). Thus the display with the largest data-ink ratio is not necessarily the best display or the preferred one.

Changes in the density of a map through changes in scale are not really changes in data-ink ratio, because the change in scale alters the size of the depicted area and the amount of information that is shown. Here, too, the quality of a display may not be monotonously related to its density. A display with very low density conveys little information in the display area, while a display with very high density conveys much information in the display area. Since very little or too much information are both problematic, there should be a level of display density that shows information clearly, optimally using the display area. Ideally the display density should be adjusted so that the display has this optimal density.

The optimal density of a display may depend on the purpose for which the display is used, the viewing conditions, the characteristics and preferences of the individual viewer, and other factors. We do not address these issues here, but rather focus on measuring the perceived density of a display.

Research on perceived clutter measured variables such as information and edge density (Bravo and Farid, 2004, 2006; Kim et al., 2011; Neider and Zelinsky, 2011; Rosenholtz et al., 2005; Rosenholtz and Nakano, 2007), or color density and saliency (Lohrenz et al., 2009). These measures can be calculated, and they predict the perceived clutter well, and they are usually correlated with search time. Edge density, for example, refers to the number of edges in a scene, where edges are the "borders" between objects in the scene. As the number of edges in a scene increases, the search time increases and the display is described as more cluttered (Bravo and Farid, 2004, 2006).

There is no consensus on the definition of the term map complexity. MacEachren (1982) distinguished between two aspects of map complexity: visual and intellectual. The first focuses on the "map reading" process and the second on the interpretation and analyses of the map. Map designers mainly influence the visual complexity. Complexity also has various definitions, such as the spatial variance in the map pattern (Muehrcke, 1973), the distribution and the relationship between neighboring values, or the map viewer's subjective judgment of the complexity (Harrie & Stigmar, 2010; MacEachren, 1982; Olson, 1972).

Cartographers have dealt with complexity when considering the number of visualized features (e.g., colors, size and form of shapes) and the relation between their size on the map and on the surface (Lohrenz et al., 2009; MacEachren, 1982). This issue is addressed in “cartographic generalization”, which deals with selection and simplification procedures to reduce the amount and the complexity of information shown on a map when the map scale is reduced (Mackaness et al., 2007), e.g., changing the curvature of a road so that at smaller scales the road will be shown straighter and less complex (Sadalla and Magel, 1980). Numerous methods for simplification and selection have been developed as part of the automation of map generalization (Buttenfield et al., 1991; Shi and Cheung, 2006; Topfer and Pillewizer, 1964; Weibel and Jones, 1998), but they generally do not take into account the viewer's perception of the density of the whole map.

With current technologies it is possible to count and characterize the elements on a map and to manipulate the data display. The selection of the scale at which the map is shown is an important factor. Dillemuth et al. (2007) examined what drives the choice of scale in navigation systems. In their analysis of the consistency or variation of six software packages they found a large range of scales and zoom steps in different applications, and there were no accepted design guidelines regarding the choice of scales.

One determinant of the scale choice is the PD of the map for a given scale. To adjust scale choice so that the map will have a desired PD it is necessary to measure PD, to be able to predict PD from map properties and eventually to have the system adjust the map scale to obtain the desired PD level, considering the map function, the situational cognitive load and the user's information needs (Schreiber, 2009; Wu and Zhang, 2009).

Our model deals with the prediction of the PD of road maps. Previous studies dealt with graphical and conceptual complexity using different measures. For example, attempts were made to measure complexity as a function of geometry, color differences and similar properties (DuBois and Battersby, 2012; MacEachren, 1982). Fairbairn (2006) used file compression to measure the visual complexity of maps. Other studies examined the user's perception regarding the clutter in maps and the visual complexity using measures related to human judgments, considering the configuration of the elements in the display (Oliva et al., 2004; Rosenholtz et al., 2005; Rosenholtz and Nakano, 2007). Harrie and Stigmar (2010) studied measures for quantifying the complexity of building objects in maps, using the amount and distribution of information. Measures based on the number of objects and the lengths of lines corresponded relatively well with user evaluations. Information content entropy was also used to measure the complexity of mobile maps and the preferred level of information (Stigmar, 2006).

A number of studies analyzed the use of geographic information displays in terms of psychological, perceptual mechanisms. For instance, Li et al. (2004) and Yang et al. (2011) used Gestalt principles in the processing and presentation of GIS data (e.g., proximity, common orientation and similarity). Another study evaluated the size, shape, and density of buildings using Gestalt principles to classify urban buildings structure (Steiniger et al., 2008). However, analyses of map displays based on Gestalt principles necessarily require rather complex algorithms, because Gestalt principles characterize configurations of elements, rather than individual elements in a map. A similar approach, focusing on configurational aspects of map displays exists in the study by Vertesi (2008) on the relation between properties of the iconic London Tube map and the ways people experience the city of London when using the map. Thus we acknowledge the possible importance of configurations in understanding maps, but we focus here on more basic elements of map displays.

We also use concepts from the psychology of perception, but our approach is intentionally simple and can be easily implemented. We develop a model for predicting the PD of displayed maps from basic properties of the map image. To do so, we use methods from psychophysics, the domain in psychology that studies the relation between physical stimuli and psychological responses (Gescheider, 1997). Rather than dealing with complex perceptual processes that may be involved in the processing of the map information, we focus on a single perceived property of the displayed map (namely its perceived density), computed from easily measurable variables in the displayed image. Even though this approach is simplistic, it can still capture important aspects of the image that affect the user's impression when viewing the object (Shigemoto, 2003; Wang et al., 2011). In our effort to develop a function for predicting the PD of maps, we first develop a model, based on empirical data. We then validate this model on additional maps and users. The following sections describe the two stages in detail.

@&#METHOD@&#

In this study we develop a statistical model to predict the PD of a road map from map properties. To do so, we showed participants (54 students, 29 female, 25 male, ranging in age from 23 to 28 with an average of 25.61 ± 1.19 years) 60 maps depicting different areas and asked them to rate the PD on a ten-point Likert type scale with 0 meaning low PD and 10 meaning high PD. We did not provide any definition of "density".

We conducted the experiment in a Human Factors Laboratory in groups of up to 8 participants who sat in front of computers with 19" screens and 1280*1024 pixel resolutions (each pixel length is 3*10−4 m). The application represents the scale in units of meter/pixel. The application was based on the ESRI MapObjects Version 2.4 development environment, which supports various data manipulations, such as map display, panning and zooming, drawing graphic features and text, identifying and selecting features, calculating statistics and rendering features. Maps were selected from the ESRI data and maps U.S.A StreetMaps, which includes images, base maps, census data, street datasets, and a host of geographic information of Tele Atlas or NAVTEQ. Maps were selected and displayed using the ArcGIS V9.2 ESRI software. Maps contained several data layers and properties (streets, lakes, rivers, background, state/city boundaries, parks, forests, landmarks, etc.). The user interface, developed in Visual Basic.Net and C#, supports administrator and user modes, and English and Hebrew language interfaces.

An experimental session began with a short questionnaire with questions about the participant's name, age, navigation skills and experience, followed by the density rating task. A session lasted approximately 45 min. The application appeared in an 800 x 700 pixel window (i.e., 24 × 21 cm), and maps were presented in a 450 x 630 pixel (13.5 × 18.9 cm) frame as shown in Fig. 2
                        .

Participants estimated the map density, using a scale bar located in the right part of the screen with values between 0 (low density) and 10 (high density). The default density of the map was set to 5 (the middle of the scale bar). We selected the maps from various parts of North America to show rural, urban and suburban areas, with one third of the maps from each type of area (see Fig. 3
                         for examples).

All participants saw the same set of sixty maps, but each saw it in a different random order. We showed each map at three different scales: the largest scale was 1.92 m/pixel [1:6500] (i.e., high resolution), the medium scale was 3.84 m/pixel [1:13,000], and the smallest scale was 5.76 m/pixel [1:19,500]. The program randomized the presentation order of the maps and the scales at which each map was presented for each participant (see Fig. 4
                         for examples).

The GIS provides information about 'polyline' and 'polygon' objects in the map. Based on this information, we computed a set of measures for each map at each scale. The measures were the frequency of particular objects (e.g., the number of roads, the number of junctions) and the sizes of the depicted objects (e.g., the distances between junctions, the size of junctions). The application also provided information on additional characteristics of the objects and the map (e.g., road types, maximum speed limit).

We distinguish between visible and hidden predictor variables, as shown in Table 1
                        . The visible variables are those users can see and count, although in some cases this may be difficult (e.g., the number of roads, the number of junctions, and the mean junction size). The counting of the objects was based on the unique identifier of each object as it appears in the GIS system. For example, road is a polyline that has a unique ID and a set of properties such as length, name, and type. The hidden predictor variables are map attributes that require external knowledge, such as road type and the maximal allowed speed. We include these variables in the model because these attributes may be correlated with the visible properties of the map. For instance, the maximum allowed speed may be related to the road curviness and the density of the junctions in the map. These, in turn, may affect the perceived complexity and density of a map.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The GIS application provided data on 116 variables of which 98 variables had constant or nearly constant values. The initial column in Table 2
                         presents the remaining 18 variables. We used these variables to predict the participants' ratings of the PD. The first six variables are counts of objects in the frame, cumulative lengths of streets, and maximum allowed speeds, which are properties of the whole map. The other 12 variables count the number of roads of a particular road type. We analyzed the results with a backward linear regression with α = 0.05 for entry and α = 0.10 for removal on the eighteen variables. In this method the analysis starts with a full model in which all variables are included and proceeds by removing the variable with the lowest partial correlation (Weisberg, 2005). This is repeated as long as the partial correlation of the removed variable is not significant. The column Stage 1 in Table 2 shows the results of the initial analysis, which resulted in an adjusted R
                        2 = .874 (the model explained 87.4% of the variance of the dependent variable). This model predicted the participants' ratings of PD with 13 independent variables. The variable average speed was not included in any of the models, probably because it is correlated with other variables (e.g., distance between junctions, number of roads, average junction size, etc.). The standardized coefficients β values of the variables number of roads and number of junctions are negative, possibly due to the correlation between them and the particular road types (i.e., variables 7–18). The coefficient for the variable average distance between junctions is also negative, with larger distances leading to lower PD.

The coefficients of the variables in the regression equation are often used as measures for the importance of the variables. However, when the predictor variables are correlated, as is the case in our study (i.e., there exists multicolinearity), it is also necessary to use a measure that takes into account the correlations between the variables. We used here the squared semi-partial correlation, known as the "usefulness" of the predictor. It is the decrease in R
                        2 that will result from omitting a variable from the equation. These values provide information on the importance of each variable in the prediction (Howell, 2010).

To simplify the model we chose to remove variables 7–18 for three reasons:
                           
                              1.
                              There was a high correlation between them and the other variables of the model (i.e., variables 1–6 in Table 2), and in particular the total number of roads, which expresses the sum of variables 7–18.

As mentioned before, the GIS categorized roads to particular road types based on the street name, a criterion that is not strongly related to particular visual characteristics of the road.

After the removal the model is much more compact, and R
                                 2 decreases only very little (from .87 to .856).

After removing the twelve variables that relate to specific street types we remained with five predictor variables (see Table 2 stage 2). Applying a backward linear regression with α = 0.05 for entry and α = 0.10 for removal resulted in an adjusted R
                        2 = .856 with five variables: Total number of roads, average distance between junctions, number of junctions, average junction size, and average length of roads. In this model the coefficient of the variable number of roads is positive, whereas the coefficient in stage 1 was negative. This was caused by the removal of the specific road type variables that were strongly correlated with the total number of roads.

We predict the PD of the map from the physical properties of the stimuli (i.e., the number and lengths of objects in the map). Since the 19th century, extensive psychological research dealt with "psychophysical laws", the functions describing the relation between physical stimulation and psychological impressions. An early and widely used law is the Weber-Fechner law. It states that the response to a stimulus changes with the logarithm of the intensity of the stimulus (Dehaene, 2003). Applying this law, we computed logarithmic transformations of the two predictor variables that are counts of objects - the number of junctions and the number of roads. A backward linear regression on the five independent variables (with the log transformations) improved predictions compared to the previous model. Now the coefficients of the variables number of junctions and the distance between junctions became positive, and the contribution of the latter to the model decreased. This model predicted density estimates very well (adjusted R
                        2 = .925) and also reduced the number of significant predictors to four (see Table 2 stage 3).

The variable 'average distance between junctions' had the lowest partial correlation and standardized beta values. Therefore, we chose to eliminate it from the model. Reducing the number of predictors to three (see Table 2 stage 4) lowered the model fit only slightly (adjusted R
                        2 = .923). Notably, the final model includes no hidden variables, and therefore the calculation of the PD is based on direct and visible properties of the map only.

To test the generality and the validity of the model we conducted an additional validation experiment. The experiment was similar to the previous one, using the same system, but with different participants and a new set of 60 maps from different areas in North America. Participants in the first experiment commented that text affects the PD, particularly for the small scale. Therefore, we used the validation study to examine the influence of the configuration of the GIS on the PD and decided to simplify the small scale configuration. We presented the maps with the smaller scale with a different map design (i.e., layers) than the one used in the previous experiment, creating a simpler view (see Fig. 5
                        ) with reduced text and road widths. This design may reduce the perceived map density, compared to the previous design. The layers of the other scales were identical to those used in the previous experiment. Scales were 2 m/pixel [1:6770] for the large, 4 m/pixel [1:13,540] for the intermediate and 6 m/pixel [1:20,300] for the small scale. Participants were 44 students (21 female, 23 male, ranging in age from 23 to 34 with an average of 25.47 ± 1.91).

We validated the model by applying the reduced model (with only three variables) to the PD estimates for the new set of maps. Model predictions were significantly correlated with users' ratings, with an explained variance of adjusted R
                        2 = .445. To determine the fit of the model predictions and the data we computed the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), which is the square root of the sum of squared differences between model predictions and observations. We found that RMSE = 2.362 (see Fig. 6
                        ). Although the model predicted density estimates quite well, the correlations were clearly lower than those in the model development set. A closer inspection of the data revealed that model predictions were too high for the maps displayed with the small scale. Applying the model to maps shown with large and intermediate scales led to similar results as those obtained in the model development, with adjusted R
                        2 = .73 and RMSE = 1.244 and R
                        2 = .833 and RMSE = 1.136 respectively. In a separate analysis of the maps presented at the small scale the model also predicted density assessments for these maps well with adjusted R
                        2 = .727 and RMSE = 3.75 (see Fig. 6). These findings can be explained through the changes in the layers shown in the small scale maps.

We conducted an additional validation of the model by generating new models based on the data from the validation part (shown in Table 3
                        ). One model used all validation data and predicted the PD with adjusted R
                        2 = .643 and RMSE = 1.196. The second model used coefficients from the validation data without the small scale. It predicted the PD without the small scale better, with adjusted R
                        2 = .893 and RMSE = .71 (shown in Table 3).

The model predictions based on the validation data for all three scales were significantly correlated with users' ratings in Experiment 1, with an R
                        2 = .442 and RMSE = 4.69 (See Fig. 7
                        ). Model predictions underestimated the actual PD, due to the different configurations. We therefore analyzed the users' ratings again with the second model (computed without data for the small scale in the validation experiment). This model provided better predictions with an R
                        2 = .794 and RMSE = 2.80 (See Fig. 7). It also predicted the responses for all three scales in the first experiment well (with R
                        2 of .68, .789 and .797 for the large, intermediate and small scales, respectively). Thus there are high correlations between the model predictions and users' PD ratings, but the configuration of data layers in the map affects the PD assessments.

The logarithms of the number of roads and the number of junctions were significant in all models. These variables are strongly correlated, and therefore their coefficients are likely to change with a new set of data. However, the results for the validation and cross validation models show that these variables can be used to predict the PD.

We developed models for predicting the PD of road maps from map attributes. Although we gave participants no specific definition of PD, the ability of the models to predict the assessments shows that the term was meaningful for them. The primary predictors in the models are the logarithm of the number of roads, and the logarithm of the number of junctions. The models were tested and validated on a new data set with different participants and maps. Generally the model predicted PD assessment well, but as expected, the fit to the model predictions was somewhat lower, particularly when the maps were shown with the small scale and with a different configuration of layers. Our findings support the hypothesis that the PD of a road map can be predicted from a small set of simple map properties, using linear models with visible variables only that are simply obtained from the GIS.

Our results support previous studies on information visualization and related topics. For example, Harrie and Stigmar (2010) showed that the perceived complexity of paper maps depended mainly on object line lengths and the number of objects. It also partly supports Oliva's et al. (2004) argument that the number of objects in an image affects its complexity. However, our models do not explicitly refer to measures used in other studies (e.g., variety, color, symmetry, organization) or to the configuration of the objects in the display. Rather, we assess the general impression of the map density, based on the log value of two of the three variables. Our model simplifies the calculation, compared to other approaches (e.g., Gestalt, feature congestion) that consider the relations between objects and the layout configuration, based on multidimensional measures usually requiring complex calculations.

Display design can influence task performance. More complex and cluttered images are usually associated with longer search and reaction times, and one should generally minimize the quantity and the density of the displayed information (Doyon-Poulin and Robert, 2012; Horrey and Wickens, 2004; Srinivasan and Jovanis, 1997). A potential application of our model is its integration into applications that use visual displays of spatial information (e.g., navigation systems, the control of unmanned ground, or aerial vehicles). The mechanism can help to choose an appropriate display scale according to the situation and to the properties of the depicted region. When the desired PD is known, it is possible to adjust the map scale automatically, so that the map has the desired PD value. This may improve task performance and user satisfaction. For example, road maps used when navigating to work may have a lower preferred PD (i.e., use a larger scale) since users are familiar with the road and are mainly interested in traffic changes or information on congestion. When using the map of the same route for a family trip, the desired PD might be higher, displaying more information along the route. Based on the calculated PD and other information (e.g., the purpose of the journey, specific points of interests to be displayed), the system can decide whether to add layers of information at a given scale as part of a generalization process. Future research should examine these possible implications. It can determine the desired level of PD for different situations and show the benefits from using the preferred PD compared to other PDs. Although we suggest adjusting the scale automatically, it can be useful in future studies to test end users' acceptance of setting their preferred PD. Involving end-users in the process may allow the application to learn user preferences and improve the adjustment.

The models in this study were based on variables that are related to the geometry of the road network and deal with the general appearance of the map and not with characteristics of the layers or the configuration of objects that might also affect PD (e.g., text font, shapes, design). The validation experiment demonstrated the effect of different configurations. We are aware that using the models with a different set of layers will lower the model's ability to predict PD and therefore restricts the applicability of these models. As long as a particular system uses specific sets of layers, the models are applicable. However, further research should examine the effects of additional graphical elements including text font size, color palettes, symbols and include them in the model. This creates the basis for the model-based adjustment of map scales in systems with electronic map displays.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was partly funded by a grant from the GM-UMI foundation. We thank Igor Koupershmidt and Roi Weinberg for their assistance in developing the application.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

