@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Work demands and health consequences of organizational and technological measures introduced to enhance the quality of home care services – A subgroup analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Production system rationalization generates diverse worker responses.


                        
                        
                           
                           Management should be aware of diversity, stimulate worker feedback and implement individually-based corrective actions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Age and perception of tension were early indicators of worker problems.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Rationalization

Musculoskeletal health

Work environment

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study of home care workers in a Norwegian municipality aimed to examine the effect of two measures involving organizational (job checklists) and technological (personal digital assistants) job aids on perceived work demands and musculoskeletal health. Questionnaire data was collected in 2009 (n = 138, response rate 76.2%) and 2011 (n = 80, response rate 54%). Forty-six home care workers responded at both waves. Respondents were assigned into ‘high’, ‘moderate’ and ‘low’ strain groups based on their responses to open and closed survey questions regarding impact of the two measures. One-way ANOVA with post-hoc t-tests and regression analyses investigated group differences and examined development in variables. Perceived work demands and health effects over the two-year study period were unchanged overall, yet significant differences between subgroups were highlighted. Work demands and shoulder-neck pain remained high for high-strain workers, but were reduced for low and moderate strain workers. Management should be aware of diversity in worker responses to rationalizations and give priority to supplementary, targeted measures to counteract adverse effects.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Private and public enterprises are continually striving for higher productivity; in particular, public enterprises attempt to transform rule-based, bureaucratic organizations to organizations efficiently delivering quality services to satisfied users. Municipal home care services (HCSs) is a good example of this trend. In Norway, as in other countries, there is a move towards shifting patients away from institutionalized care to care delivered at less specialized units or (preferably) patients' own home. Accordingly, the work duties of home care workers (HCWs) become increasingly complex, requiring an upgrade of individual nursing skills, as many HCWs were recruited at times when work activities could be less demanding. In parallel HCSs are frequently reorganized to ensure quality and efficiency in care to patients, and cost savings to the municipality. Although many studies report on work intensification of HCWs and musculoskeletal health problems in particular (Brulin et al., 1998, 2000; Cheung et al., 2006; Cloutier et al., 2008; Dellve et al., 2003; Fjell et al., 2007; Ono et al., 1995; Zeytinoğlu et al., 2001), few offer a detailed account of rationalization processes and their consequences for work environment.

The present study is based on the HCS of a large municipality in Norway. HCWs in this municipality have been the subject of an ongoing study by our research group. High sick leave has been the norm since the early 2000s, and the municipality introduced a concerted action plan to reduce this sick leave, following inspection and receiving orders from the Norwegian Labor Inspectorate in 2003 (Andersen and Westgaard, 2013). The orders had a particular focus on job demands generating excessive time pressure. A survey of HCWs in 2009 showed that mentally demanding working conditions, more so than physical work demands, were a source of musculoskeletal pain predominantly centered at the shoulder-neck region and that such pain was mediated by perceived general tension (Andersen and Westgaard, 2014). Physical work demands had an additional, direct link to low back pain. The overall effect of interventions to improve working conditions and reduce sick leave was negligible, due to parallel measures (e.g., merging home care units, changes to unit management) introduced to rationalize the HCS (Andersen and Westgaard, 2013). One cause of low impact of the work environment interventions was large variation in priorities and beliefs within the organization, from practicing HCWs to municipal administrators, which hampered communication across organizational levels and served as a barrier to effective change management (Andersen and Westgaard, Submitted for publication). The result is consistent with production system rationalizations in general, including organizational change: it is difficult to avoid predominant negative effects of such measures on work environment and worker health, unless management pays attention to such secondary effects (Westgaard and Winkel, 2011).

HCWs of the same municipality were from 2009 to 2011 exposed to further measures, primarily motivated to enhance the quality of patient care, but considered by decision-makers to make jobs more fulfilling, standardized and efficient by expanding on job duties and providing organizational (job checklists) and technological (personal digital assistants, PDAs) job aids. The measures involve elements that could be perceived strenuous, such as changes to work procedures and acquiring new skills; however, workers may appreciate the quality-enhancing aspects. The study aims to examine changes in perceived work demands of HCWs from 2009 to 2011, comparing those who have struggled with the changeover process with those who are coping with the new work practices. It is hypothesized that HCWs of the first group are distinguished by higher perceived work demands. A further aim, based on HCWs represented in both 2009 and 2011 surveys, is to examine whether perceived work demands or perceived general tension in 2009 are predictive of musculoskeletal pain in 2011. Such insight is potentially important to establish a best way of minimizing strain when introducing new work procedures.

At study start in 2009, 6 of 11 home care units in the municipality signed up for participation. In the follow-up survey in 2011, one unit was omitted due to low response rate, resulting in five participating units. HCWs with employment fraction ≥50% were invited to fill in a questionnaire on the two occasions. At wave 1 in 2009, 138 HCWs responded to the survey (response rate 76.2%; (Andersen and Westgaard, 2014)). However, 20 HCWs from the unit omitted in the follow-up survey were excluded from the wave 1 survey in the present analysis to enable a more correct comparison of the two waves, leaving 118 respondents (90% female, 78% with professional health care education as either registered nurse or enrolled nurse). At wave 2 in 2011, 80 HCWs responded (response rate 54%; 90% female, 78% with professional health care education). Forty-six respondents filled in the questionnaire at both occasions. Thirty-four respondents, who participated in 2011 but not in 2009, included 23 HCWs who were employed in 2009 but did not respond at the time, 8 HCWs had been employed between 1 and 2 years, and 3 HCWs employed less than 1 year.

In the present HCS, the municipality constitutes the superior ‘administrative’ authority responsible for ensuring overall good quality of services. Being the decision-making body, the commissioning of organizational changes and quality-enhancing measures resides at the municipal, administrative level. Table 1
                         includes a description of the new work program (i.e. organizational measure involving job checklists) and the technological device introduced to the HCS, and shows anticipated positive effects and potential negative impact, as described by the decision-makers. Improved quality of care and efficiency were stated objectives for both measures. Supplementary measures implemented at changeover to the two new procedures were offered to all employees to ensure positive effects and reduce negative impact. These included a two-day training course, close follow-up by unit staff to ensure compliance, and assistance and additional individual training if individuals indicated such needs. Specifically for the new work program, these activities were embedded in a separate project focusing on competence and quality improvement, to ensure successful implementation. We were not in a position to observe these activities, which took place over a limited period and at different times at each unit. The new work procedures were well established at time of the wave 2 questionnaire.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Initial conversations were carried out to gain insight in aspects of the HCS relevant for the composition of questionnaires, such as the organization of work duties, organization-specific work demands and significant changes and events. Prior to the data collection, one of the researchers participated on staff meetings at each unit to present the study and give practical information about participation.

At wave 1, questionnaires in paper format were put in an envelope together with a letter of information and an informed consent form, and placed in each employee's personal shelf at work. Filled-in questionnaire and informed consent form were to be placed in a sealed mail box in the staff room within two weeks. Two reminders were sent by letter to increase participation. Data collection was carried out between March 26 and May 4 2009, and was finally closed on June 29 2009. At wave 2, questionnaires and informed consent forms were placed in individual envelopes and sent to the units where the unit leaders handed them out to the HCWs. The HCWs individually returned the filled-in questionnaire and informed consent form to one of the researchers by mail. The data collection was carried out between May 31 2011 and December 8 2011, and was finally closed on February 22 2012. In both waves the HCWs were remunerated with NOK 200 (=24€) for participating. The study was approved by the municipal executive, the Regional Committees for Medical and Health Research Ethics (REC) (no. 4.2009.19) and Norwegian Social Science Data Services (NSD) (no. 21036).

The distributed questionnaire of 2009 comprised altogether 129 items; the questionnaire of 2011 was a short-version consisting of 52 items. The present study is based on a selection of items measured at both occasions and new questions concerning changes to the work situation succeeding the previous wave. Items measured twice to enable comparisons included VAS scales quantifying occupational exposure in terms of perceived physical, mental, social and emotional work demands, and VAS scales quantifying perceived general tension and pain in the shoulder-neck and low back regions. Respondents were asked to assess work demands in terms of putative precursors to health symptoms, by including the phrase “… demands at work have resulted in tiredness, stress or tension in daily life the past six months”. Respondents were asked to place a mark wherever appropriate on 10 cm lines with end points 0 (not at all) and 10 (to a large extent). Organization-specific examples of each demand were placed in brackets. Physical demands was exemplified as heavy lifting, unpleasant postures, physical layout of work place, high work pace, lack of necessary equipment and car driving. Mental demands was exemplified as fear of making mistakes, task overload and frustrations regarding equipment and facilities. Social demands was exemplified as relations to colleagues and unit manager, discussions regarding distribution of work assignments, poor social climate and difficulties regarding cooperation. Emotional demands was exemplified as lack of self-belief, feeling unable to yield enough care, having a bad conscience, emotionally demanding patients and being too involved in patients' situation. Responses to the first wave were reported by Andersen and Westgaard (2014). Similar VAS-based measures of work demands have been used in previous studies (e.g., Holte and Westgaard, 2002; Vasseljen et al., 1995).


                        Perceived general tension was scored on a 10 cm VAS scale by asking the respondents to consider the average level the past six months, with end points 0 (very low) and 10 (very high). Pain in shoulder-neck and low back regions were separately scored on 10 cm VAS scales by asking the respondents to consider the intensity of pain at the worst period of pain the past six months, with end points 0 (no pain) and 10 (unbearable pain). In the first wave, VAS pain scores were related to an earlier pain scale with scores anchored to behavioral measures such as the respondents' ability to carry on working and assessed in terms of likelihood of doctors' visit (Andersen and Westgaard, 2014; Westgaard and Jansen, 1992).

An item regarding perceived changes in time pressure the last 2 years was included. Response categories ranged from 1 (considerable less) to 5 (considerable more) with a neutral mid-point, recoded to a dichotomous variable with values ‘increased time pressure’ and ‘not increased time pressure’. Further, respondents were asked to provide comments regarding the perceived impact of the new work program on their work situation. Based on a straight-forward categorization of comments as either negative or positive, the dichotomous variable “Impact of work program” with values ‘negative impact’ and ‘no negative impact’ was computed. Finally, respondents were asked to evaluate what effect the new technological device had on level of time pressure. Response categories ranged from 1 (considerable less) to 5 (considerable more) with a neutral mid-point, recoded to a dichotomous variable with values ‘increased time pressure PDA’ and ‘not increased time pressure PDA’. The question “If change, why?” enabled open comments. Responses are not presented in the results section, but briefly referred to in the discussion section to illuminate results.

Analyses were performed using the IBM Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS), version 20. Descriptive analyses of perceived change in time pressure, impact of the new work program and the new technological device were carried out, based on wave 2 data. Respondents expressing clear views as to such impacts were included in the analysis, regardless of duration of employment. Further, descriptive analyses of work demands, perceived general tension, pain, age and seniority were carried out separately for wave 1 and wave 2.

Respondents of the wave 2 questionnaire were assigned into groups based on their responses to closed items and open questions regarding change in time pressure the last two years and impact of the quality-enhancing measures (i.e. the new work program and the new technological device), to distinguish HCWs who have struggled from those who have been coping with the changeover process. The combination of ‘increased time pressure’/‘not increased time pressure’ and ‘negative impact of changes’/‘no negative impact of changes’ resulted in three groups; Group 1 respondents perceived an increase in time pressure and negative impact of at least one of the two changes to work procedures (“high strain group”; N = 28). Group 2 respondents either perceived an increase in time pressure, but no negative impact of changes or no increase in time pressure, but negative impact of at least one of the two changes to work procedures (“moderate strain group”; N = 34). Group 3 respondents perceived neither an increase in time pressure nor negative impact by the two changes to work procedures (“low strain group”; N = 17).

One-way ANOVAs, based on responses to the 2011-survey, were executed to investigate if work demands, perceived general tension and musculoskeletal pain were reported differently by respondents in the three groups. Post-hoc t-tests were carried out to further investigate identified group differences. Respondents participating at both waves were analyzed according to a pre-post design, with group 1 respondents (n = 18) compared to groups 2 and 3 (n = 28) due to few members in each group. Independent samples t-tests were used for between-groups comparison and paired-samples t-tests to examine development in variables between waves. Significance was set at p < 0.05.

Multilinear regression analyses were carried out to examine the potential explanatory power of age and 2009-scores of work demands and 2009-scores of perceived general tension on 2011-scores of shoulder-neck and low back pain, respectively. Logistic regression was used to determine predictive power of 2009-scores of work demands and perceived general tension of membership in high vs. low and moderate strain groups. The SPSS bootstrap function with 1000 iterations was used to determine 95% CI of mean values for perceived work demands, perceived general tension, and shoulder-neck and low back pain.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Forty-five of 80 2011-respondents (56%) considered time pressure to be increased from 2009 to 2011. Thirty-one respondents evaluated the new work program to have negative impact on their work situation. Twenty-eight respondents perceived increased time pressure due to the PDA. Twenty respondents reported very severe pain (VAS cut-off point ≥7) in 2011 while additional 29 respondents reported severe pain (VAS cut-off point ≥5) in the shoulder-neck. In the low back, nine reported very severe pain and additional 26 respondents reported severe pain. Mean scores of perceived work demands, perceived general tension, and shoulder-neck and low back pain were unchanged from 2009 to 2011 (Fig. 1
                     ). Respondents participating in both surveys (N = 46) were neither distinguished from the overall result (apart from slightly higher pain scores), nor did mean scores of these variables differ from 2009 to 2011 (analyses not shown).

One-way ANOVAs, based on all participants in the 2011-survey, were executed to investigate if work demands, perceived general tension and musculoskeletal pain were reported differently by respondents in the three subgroups. Group differences were found for physical demands F(2, 76) = 3.33, p < 0.05; mental demands F(2, 76) = 5.27, p < 0.01; perceived general tension F(2, 76) = 3.20, p < 0.05; and age F(2, 71) = 4.28, p < 0.05. Independent-samples t-tests showed that for physical demands the high strain subgroup scored significantly higher than the moderate strain subgroup (p < 0.05); for mental demands the high strain subgroup scored significantly higher than the low strain subgroup (p < 0.05); for perceived general tension the high strain subgroup scored significantly higher than the moderate strain subgroup (p < 0.05). Scores for social demands were significantly lower for the low strain subgroup than for the other two subgroups, although ANOVA statistics were not significant for this variable. The low strain subgroup was younger (mean 31.8, 95% CI: 27.5–36.0) than the moderate (mean 39.7, 95% CI: 35.4–44.0) and high (mean 41.6, 95% CI: 37.0–46.3) strain groups. Fig. 2
                      shows mean values with 95% CI of the three subgroups for perceived work demands, perceived general tension, and pain in the shoulder-neck and the low back.

Forty-six HCWs participated in both surveys; 18 from the high strain subgroup, 20 from the moderate strain subgroup, and 8 from the low strain subgroup. In view of small group sizes and the high strain subgroup distinguished from the other two subgroups for work demands with high scores (Fig. 2), the high strain subgroup was compared to the other two subgroups combined. Fig. 3
                      presents mean with 95% CI for work demands, perceived general tension and pain scores in 2009 and 2011 for HCWs with low or moderate work strain (A) and high work strain (B). A trend towards lower scores was observed for the low and moderate strain subgroup, significant in case of mental, social and emotional work demands (p < 0.05). In contrast, scores for the high strain subgroup were stable or showed a non-significant increasing trend from 2009 to 2011. Comparing subgroups, the only difference in 2009 was perceived general tension (higher for the high strain subgroup; p < 0.05). HCWs with low or moderate strain scored significantly lower than the high strain subgroup in 2011 for physical and mental demands (p < 0.05), perceived general tension (p < 0.01), and shoulder-neck pain (p < 0.05).

Finally, the predictive power of work demands and perceived general tension scored in 2009 was tested for membership in the high vs. low and moderate strain subgroups (by logistic regression) and for shoulder-neck and low back pain in 2011 (by multi-linear regression). The effect of age was examined by including or excluding age in the analyses. Perceived general tension predicted subgroup membership (odds ratio 1.68, p < 0.05; 95% CI: 1.00–2.85), excluding age from the model. Age was substantially different between the high strain (mean 47.9 years; 95% CI 44.9–50.9 years) and low and moderate strain subgroups (mean 37.9; 95% CI 34.3–41.4 years). Including age in the model, age was the only significant predictor (odds ratio 1.17, p < 0.01; 95% CI: 1.04–1.33) while perceived general tension tended towards significance (odds ratio 1.76, p = 0.07; 95% CI: 0.96–3.22). When testing whether work demands and perceived general tension in 2009 were predictive of shoulder-neck and low back pain in 2011, the model with shoulder-neck as dependent variable was significant (F(5,38) = 3.23, p < 0.02) with perceived general tension the only significant variable (β = 0.41, p < 0.03; 95% CI: 0.04–0.93). Including age in the model did not change this result, perceived general tension remained the only significant variable (β = 0.42, p < 0.05; 95% CI: 0.01–0.98). In the similar analysis with low back pain in 2011 as outcome variable, age was the only significant independent variable (β = 0.47, p < 0.01; 95% CI: 0.04–0.20).


                     Fig. 4
                     A–C illustrates by way of scatterplots the development of scores from 2009 to 2011 for perceived general tension, social demands and shoulder-neck pain. There was clear differentiation in perceived general tension from the high strain to the low and moderate strain subgroup and no time-trend in scores over the observation period (Fig. 4A). Social demands were clearly elevated from 2009 to 2011 for the high strain subgroup, and clearly reduced for the low and moderate strain subgroup (separated by line of identity, Fig. 4B). Subjects in the high strain subgroup scored shoulder-neck pain higher in 2011 than in 2009, with the opposite trend for most subjects in the low and moderate strain subgroup. An exception is three subjects with very low scores in 2009 who indicated moderately higher shoulder-neck pain in 2011 (Fig. 4C). Finally, Fig. 4D shows the regression of shoulder-neck pain in 2011 on perceived general tension in 2009, based on subjects represented in both surveys. If data is dichotomized by split for VAS scores ≤5 vs. >5, 81% (25/31) of those scoring perceived general tension >5 in 2009 recorded shoulder-neck pain >5 in 2011, while the corresponding ratio for perceived general tension ≤5 in 2009 is 50% (7/14).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The study detected differences in perceived work demands and health indicators between subgroups of HCWs, based on experiencing problems, or not, with time pressure and new work procedures. The subgroup with most problems reported unchanged, high work demands over the two-year study period, while HCWs with fewer problems or without problems showed a clear reduction in perceived work demands. HCWs experiencing adverse working conditions were older and were distinguished by higher perceived general tension at the start of the two-year period. Perceived general tension at start of the study was predictive of shoulder-neck pain two years later, independent of the HCWs' assessment of their working conditions, and independent of age. Conversely, age was the only variable predictive of low back pain.

Mean scores of cross-sectional surveys in 2009 and 2011 concealed improvement of perceived work demands and health for HCWs with little or moderate problems with time pressure and new work procedures, supporting the suggestion by Semmer (2006) that results of intervention studies should be carefully analyzed with regard to subgroups. All work demands showed reduced scores at the end of the study period for the low and moderate strain subgroup, significantly in case of mental, social and emotional demands. Improved score for social demands is not an obvious result of the intervention. Possibly, if new job aids or procedures are experienced as beneficial and/or HCWs are able to cope with time pressure, energy may be directed towards their social work environment. The same explanation, the other way round, may apply to the high-strain subgroup. With both indicators negative, high strain HCWs are put in a complex situation whereby time pressure at work ensures there is little capacity to learn procedures that are not initially mastered. Not mastering new work procedures may lead to inefficient individual work practices, thereby resulting in increased time pressure and possibly less (positive) energy towards the social work environment.

An important point is that subgroup membership is easily determined by simple, context-specific questions. However, subgroup allocation presupposes experience with new work procedures. An unresolved question is how much experience with new procedures is required for reliable allocation to subgroups. We posit that necessary experience is established soon after introduction to the new procedures, thereby providing a window for introducing targeted corrective measures. The combination of relatively advanced age and high score of perceived general tension is additional helpful to identify candidates to receive enhanced training or other support.

Perceived general tension in 2009 had predictive value for shoulder-neck pain in 2011. This is an interesting supplant to the results of a hierarchical regression analysis based on 2009 data, which showed perceived general tension as mediating variable between perceived work demands and shoulder-neck pain (Andersen and Westgaard, 2014). A hierarchical regression analysis based on 2011 data gave similar results: perceived general tension had full mediating effect of physical and mental demands on shoulder-neck pain (analysis not shown). The present study is the first to show not just association of perceived general tension to shoulder-neck pain, but also that this variable has predictive value. The similar variable “perceived muscle tension” is shown in several studies to have predictive value for shoulder and/or neck pain (Hanvold et al., 2014; Huysmans et al., 2012; Wahlstrom et al., 2004). The two variables likely represent aspects of the same underlying phenomenon, but perceived general tension seems to better reflect subjects' perceived stress level (Wærsted et al., 2013). Perceived general tension was described by autonomic (abdominal, respiratory, circulatory) as well as muscular signs (81% reported “elevated shoulders”) in a previous study (Holte et al., 2003).

There is considerable interest in understanding individual variation in responses to organizational change, focusing aspects such as personality factors, coping ability or individual resilience. Concepts like “openness to change” (Wanberg and Banas, 2000), “readiness for change” (Armenakis et al., 1993) and “resistance to change” (Coch and French, 1948; Oreg, 2003) comprise both individual dispositions and contextual factors, and point at variations in human reactions to changes initiated in an organizational setting. Oreg et al. (2011) list antecedents of change responses including change recipient characteristics (personality traits, coping styles and needs), internal context (supportive environment and trustworthy management, organizational commitment, and organizational culture and climate) and change process (participation, communication, principal support, and interactional and procedural justice). Factors relating to context and organizational culture seem the most relevant ones to improve processes in the present study, especially communication of change and trust in management. A parallel study, based on the same case material, showed that communication across organizational levels, particularly bottom-up messages concerning HCWs' responses, did not function well and was a barrier to achieve effect of the quality-enhancing changes to work procedures (Andersen and Westgaard, Submitted for publication). In planning the new procedures, additional individual training was to be offered if such needs were indicated. Thus, there was awareness of individual variation to implementation, and a stated intention to remedy problems, conditional on incoming signals. However, expressing the need for additional help may be uncomfortable, and requires that HCWs are attentive to their own needs. It is unclear whether the offer was apprehended by the HCWs, and such help may be difficult to prioritize in times of stress. Communication of bottom-up messages (concerning employee uncertainty, questions, etc.) depends on organizational norms and values that welcome open exchange of opinions and reactions (Saksvik et al., 2007). Cross-level communication channels need to be open, and filtering of messages avoided. Although decision-makers in the present case expressed some awareness of HCWs' perceptions, they did not seem to fully understand or acknowledge them as true, but rather referred to them as “phrases” (Andersen and Westgaard, Submitted for publication). To ensure a healthy process of implementing changes, it is crucial that employee concerns are taken seriously and not brushed aside as irrational (Saksvik et al., 2007).

Adopting the perspective of decision makers, who were committed to improve the work and health situation of HCWs among their other duties, to what extent should negative feedback regarding the new procedures be considered and corrective measures given higher priority? Employee reactions depend on the extent to which they embrace the changes imposed on their work situation (Vakola et al., 2013). The PDA, being a digital tool, involved acquisition of technical skills and new working methods. Open comments accompanying scores were specific regarding problems with new work procedures (e.g. unstable device, lack of technical skills) and increased workload (e.g. documentation), and come forth as the immediate cause of negative feedback. Some HCWs described reporting requirements as a time thief, which may be ameliorated by procedural adjustments. Simple questions regarding functioning and mastering of the new tool should identify HCWs who would benefit from extended training. Technical difficulties are major irritants and should be corrected with minimal delay. Other concerns were more an issue of trust between workers and management: some HCWs regarded the PDA as a tool intended to monitor their work pace, fearing consequences such as a reduction in time allocated to work assignments. Some HCWs described the new work program as time-consuming and stressful due to additional work duties, work tasks and responsibilities (Andersen and Westgaard, Submitted for publication). Stress is a common response to change (Jimmieson et al., 2004) and often cause resistance (Henry, 1997), especially among those who mentally distance themselves from the new work procedures (Sauter and Murphy, 2004). Negative worker feedback thereby consists of a mix of specific irritants and open-ended misgivings. In the present case, there is a basic need to build trust across organizational levels, as a prerequisite for successful implementation of change-specific measures. Proper explanation of reasons for decisions that may be considered negative in their consequences is in order, and such consequences should be alleviated to the extent possible in a participative process. Information must reach HCWs in such a way that it is properly understood. Good two-way communication across organizational levels help adopt a process tailored to specific needs, such as additional tutoring, more time, temporary change in work duties and so on.

The present study is explorative in its design. Small sample sizes cause low power to statistical tests and results should therefore be treated with caution. Small sample size was unavoidable in consideration of high turnover of HCWs and the need to limit sample size due to labor-intensive collection and analysis of qualitative interviews and register information (Andersen and Westgaard, 2013, 2014, Submitted for publication). High turnover may introduce a risk of selection or attrition bias; however, HCWs participating at both waves were not distinguished from the whole group. Future intervention studies should include measures that aim to further understand individual variation in responses, perhaps by including instruments measuring person characteristics. It is felt that specifying working conditions in terms of subjectively perceived work demand and itemizing these in broad, but well-defined subcategories has contributed to insight. Single-item variables are generally considered problematic in surveys; however, single-item variables in this study represent concepts that seemed well understood. Open comments were well matched to the different dimensions of work demands, supporting our trust in the construct validity of data. Perceived general tension appears an intuitive concept that is well understood and easily scored, similar to the experience from previous studies using this variable. The approach allowed identification of meaningful associations between work demands and health effects, whereby perceived general tension may be identified as an intermediate, early-responding indicator of health risk. This result was not evident using more “neutral” characterization of working conditions from the relative limited material of the present study (Andersen and Westgaard, 2014).

Study strengths include a longitudinal design with scores two years apart and securing deep insight in issues by supplementary interviews and open comments in surveys, including an organizational-level perspective. Organizational and technological rationalizations take place in most private and public enterprises, and responses likely vary among workers. In this perspective, findings of the present study should be of general interest and support the position held by Nielsen and Abildgaard (2013) who suggest that intervention research should move beyond the evaluation of outcomes by merely reporting overall effects. Scrutinizing the data in search of elements that hinder or facilitate anticipated intervention outcomes allows better understanding of intervention impact and effect, and individual variations in such, ultimately offering deeper insight as to why interventions frequently fail in reaching their stated objectives (Westgaard and Winkel, 2011).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Consideration of diversity in worker responses to rationalizations is crucial to ensure an implementation process that is gentle to both workers and organization. Management should give priority to supplementary, targeted measures to counteract adverse side effects and thereby secure successful implementation of rationalizations. Studies to document impact of rationalizations or other interventions benefit from approaching the data material in a way that enables identification of such diversity, as mean values alone may cause insufficient or misleading conclusions.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

