@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Aircraft passenger comfort experience: Underlying factors and differentiation from discomfort

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The eight experiential aspects of passenger comfort are validated including ‘peace of mind’, ‘physical wellbeing’, ‘proxemics’, etc.


                        
                        
                           
                           The factors impacting passenger comfort experience may be considered the same as those impacting discomfort.


                        
                        
                           
                           Aircraft passengers may not experience privacy and control on a conscious level.


                        
                        
                           
                           It is suggested to evaluate the overall comfort experience of passengers using one single rating scale ranging from extreme discomfort to extreme comfort.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Passenger

Comfort

Discomfort

Experience

Aircraft interior

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Previous studies defined passengers' comfort based on their concerns during the flight and a set of eight experiential factors such as ‘peace of mind’, ‘physical wellbeing’, ‘pleasure’, etc. One Objective of this paper was to determine whether the factors underlying the passengers' experience of comfort differ from those of discomfort. Another objective was to cross-validate those factors. In the first study, respondents provided written reports of flight comfort and discomfort experiences separately and gave ratings on the impact of the eight factors on each experience. Follow up interviews were also conducted. Significant difference was found between comfort and discomfort ratings for two factors of ‘pleasure’, denoted by one's concern for stimulation, ambience and exceeded expectations, and ‘physical wellbeing’ characterized in terms of bodily support and energy. However, there were no significant differences between the comfort and discomfort ratings on the other six factors. The evidence does not support the proposition that passenger comfort and discomfort are underline by different sets of factors. It is therefore suggested that the evaluation of overall passenger comfort experience, as a whole, employ one spectrum ranging from extreme comfort to discomfort. In study two, a pool of comfort descriptors was collected. Those that were less relevant to passenger comfort were eliminated in a number of steps. Factor analysis was used to classify the remaining descriptors, using respondents' ratings on their potential impact on passenger comfort. Seven factors corresponded to the pre-determined passenger comfort factors from previous research, validating those with an exception of ‘proxemics’ (concerning one's privacy and control over their situation) but it was argued that this is due to the nature of the factor itself, which is context dependent and generally perceived unconsciously.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Understanding the construct of passengers' comfort experience and its implications for the design of the aircraft interior is becoming a competitive edge in the aerospace industry. Previous research implicated that cabin environment highly contributes to an airline's image among passengers and at least 35% of passengers on intercontinental flights base their choice of airline on comfort, placing it after flight schedules (Brauer, 2006). Therefore understanding different aspects of passenger comfort experience is crucially important for the profit margin of airlines and aircraft manufacturers.

Two main issues motivate investigation on the subject of passenger comfort experience in this paper. The first is rooted in that the notion of comfort naturally entails discomfort. As a consequence, attempts to differentiate the two experience or the factors associated with each have resulted three main lines of argument. The first, an operational definition based on archival studies, holds that comfort and discomfort are two discrete states in the sense that comfort is only experienced in the absence of discomfort (Hertzberg, 1972). In other words, that view only identifies two states of ‘discomfort present’ and ‘discomfort absent’ and introduces comfort as a neutral state, which does not entail a positive effect such as pleasure. The second line of argument considers comfort a bipolar phenomenon whereby comfort is positioned at the extreme positive end, and discomfort at the extreme negative end of a continuum with a neutral point in between. According to that argument, different levels of comfort are achieved when there are more positive effects than expected (Vink et al., 2005). Along similar lines, Richards et al. (1978) argued in favor of developing a continuous scale for evaluating various degrees of passenger comfort. Although they provided no empirical support for the argument, Richards (1980) asserted that the fact that passengers rated comfort across the entire continuum offers evidence that comfort encompasses the positive state of a bipolar dimension.

The third line of argument holds that comfort and discomfort are two different entities, which are influenced by different variables and thus should be quantified independently (Helander and Zhang, 1997; Helander, 2003; de Looze et al., 2003). Consequently that view rejects the use of a single scale for evaluation of comfort and discomfort, proposing instead to use separate scales for each. In a series of empirical studies, Helander and Zhang (1997) showed that users perceived chair comfort in relation to factors such as aesthetics, relief, wellbeing and relaxation, while discomfort was related to fatigue, restlessness, pain and stress. Helander (2003) suggested that comfort and discomfort should be examined with a view clearly to differentiate the two in comfort studies, in particular studies that involve sitting comfort. This applies to passenger comfort since experience in the aircraft interior is highly influenced by, although not limited to, the seat. Passengers spend several hours seated in aircrafts while they are also exposed to numerous other stimuli e.g. social, environmental and physical. It is reasonable to assert that the research should be expanded to incorporate additional aspects of passenger comfort. The fist objective of this paper was therefore to examine whether or not passengers evaluate comfort on the basis of the same factors as discomfort in the aircraft cabin. This is addressed in Study 1 in this paper, whereby descriptions of flight comfort and discomfort experience were separately investigated and then compared.

The second issue demanding more research is that despite the studies on the construct of aircraft passenger comfort experience since the 1970s (Richards et al., 1978), only few publications have proposed a framework for its subjective and experiential aspects. For instance, Kremser et al. (2012) defined passengers' wellbeing in relation to their sitting posture based on ten subjective descriptors categorized as postural sensation, spatial perception, privacy and mood. Those were then linked to the optimum seat pitch range and the eye-height level which provide a comfortable visual impression. Rossi et al. (2012) and Greghi et al. (2012) used survey and observation techniques to address passenger comfort in terms of postural discomfort experienced while performing different activities (e.g. eating, working, etc.) during the flights and therefore appropriating the allocation of physical space to each passenger. Vink and Brauer (2011) and Vink et al. (2012) prioritized the impact of several environmental factors on passenger comfort during the flight, and though not directly linked to comfort, Chen (2008) investigated passenger satisfaction in terms of service quality, perceived value and behavioral intention.

An overall classification of the factors underlying passenger comfort as a subjective construct, one that is influenced by perception of the environmental elements, is lacking from the above literature. An example of such descriptions is the comfort factors in using hand tools (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004) in form of 28 descriptors classified into six factors e.g. functionality (being easy to use, reliable, etc.), aesthetics (described in terms of styling, nice color, etc.) and so on. Likewise, seat comfort experience was formalized in terms of a series of descriptors such as feelings relaxed or refreshed (Helander and Zhang, 1997; Helander, 2003). In those cases, the elicited factors were first validated in order to ascertain their effectiveness in capturing the users' experiences and then used for developing tools (e.g. questionnaires) to assess comfort experience. Following that line of research, we introduced eight factors describing the comfort experience of passengers in an earlier study (Ahmadpour et al., 2014a), which form the basis for the present research.

In our earlier study, 155 participants reported their experience of comfort in the aircraft cabin during the flight. Content analysis was used to reduce those reports into smaller descriptions each addressing one aspect of the experience. Participants’ concerns were then elicited from those and then grouped and categorized based on similarities. As the result, 19 types of concerns were isolated and then categorized into eight factors, each describing one aspect of the flight experience. Those are summarized in Fig. 1
                     . The implication is that passengers hold certain concerns about their flight experience and depending on how those are fulfilled, certain aspects and a level of comfort are experienced.

The factor ‘peace of mind’ implicates a state of psychological ease and corresponds to concerns for security, tranquility and relief. ‘Physical wellbeing’ indicates the physical aspect of comfort concerning bodily support and energy. ‘Proxemics’, previously introduced by Hall (1963) in the field of environmental psychology, is defined in relation to concerns for autonomy, control, and privacy that the passengers potentially achieve within the limits of their seat in the aircraft. ‘Satisfaction’ represents an experience of gratification once concerns for accessibility, adequacy, and quality of design are fulfilled. ‘Pleasure’ is reminiscent of a joyful experience concerning cabin ambience, the stimulation offered to the passenger and the level to which their anticipations are exceeded. ‘Social’ is the between-person experience of passengers in the aircraft concerning their tolerance for others' behaviors and attitudes as well as empathy (i.e. connectedness) towards them. ‘Aesthetics’ refers to the sensory pleasantness offered to the passenger in terms of the neatness and style. Finally, ‘association’ is concerned with evocation of familiar memories and symbolism. The second objective of this paper was to cross-validate the above eight factors in terms of their influence on passengers' comfort experience. In order to do so, the descriptors related to passenger comfort experience from study 1 were collected and classified into factors in Study 2 of this paper. The salience of the resulted factors and their compliance with the previously determined eight factors were assessed in that study.

@&#METHOD@&#

A questionnaire comprising eight questions was designed. It included five demographic questions about age, gender, height, disability, and number of previous flights in total (never/1–5 times/more than 5 times) followed by an open-ended question prompting respondents to describe (in detail) one flight experience characterized by a sense of comfort, and the other by a sense of discomfort. The question focusing on discomfort was presented first, as the pattern of responses in a previous survey study had revealed a tendency to begin reports with negative accounts of their experience. Next, a list of the eight comfort-related factors was presented along with a short (operational) definition of each. Using a 5-point scale respondents were asked to identify the degree to which each factor had influenced their respective sense of (dis)comfort in the experiences just described (1 being slightly influential on comfort, to 5 being highly influential on comfort). Finally, a blank section invited them to add and rate additional influencing factor not included in the list.

A convenience sample of 27 participants (12 female), all aged 18–55 years (18–34, n = 20; 35–55, n = 7), with average height of 174 cm (median = 176 cm) was recruited through personal contacts in Montréal, Canada. The selection criteria for participants were to have had more than five flight experiences in the past (similar to studies by Ahmadpour et al., 2014a) and to agree to share information about two flights undertaken within the past two years. Of the 54 reports collected, 44 involved long flights (>4 h) and the rest were short haul flights. Each participant received an email with a link to the online questionnaire and the informed consent form. They were told that they would be contacted for follow-up interviews after completing the questionnaire. All responses were collected in two weeks. Once a report had been submitted, the first author contacted the respective respondent for an interview held at their work or study place.

To begin the interview that followed completion of the questionnaire, each respondent was given the following definition of comfort: ‘a pleasant state of wellbeing, ease, and physical, physiological and psychological harmony between a person and the environment’. The following definition of discomfort was also provided: ‘a state where one experiences hardship of some sort which could be physical, physiological or psychological’ to ensure a common understanding of the two concepts. The above were formulated based on discussions of Ahmadpour et al. (2014a). The respondent was prompted to give more information about the reported flights along with their feelings, physical state, impressions, and reactions to the environment and social situations. Adopting the laddering technique, the researcher asked “why” in response to every statement about an aspect of the flight in order to capture the motives behind it (Jordan, 2000) until she had gained an understanding of the underlying factors of each experience. At the end of the interview, the respondent reviewed their earlier ratings and was asked to provide additional information to justify them.

The survey and interview transcripts from each respondent were merged into one coherent and detailed report of the comfort and one of the discomfort experiences. The analysis was then conducted in two steps. In the first step, each (dis)comfort experience report was divided into several descriptions, each unique in content. Similar to Ahmadpour et al. (2014a), a description was considered a statement about an aspect of one's experience bearing a clear impact on the respondent's (dis)comfort during the flight. The descriptions that emerged more than once in a report were only accounted for once. This yielded a total of 269 descriptions (137 related to comfort; 132 to discomfort). Next, these were sorted by topic and arranged into the set of 19 semantically different concern types (e.g. security, tranquility, etc.) identified in the previous study by Ahmadpour and colleagues and then placed into the eight factors (e.g. peace of mind, etc.). For instance, the description “A group of people were partying and drinking, making loud noises which I found quite disturbing” in a discomfort report was associated with concern for social tolerance and assigned to social factor.

Next, the consistency between the factors elicited by authors and those rated by participants' was assessed in order to test the assumption that the ratings did, in fact, capture passenger experiences and could be used as a basis for the second step. That was done by assigning arbitrary ratings to the factors elicited from each report whereby the presence of a factor was rated 1 and its absence was rated 0. A Wilcoxon signed rank test was conducted to examine whether or not the assigned ratings were different from the ratings given by respondents.

In the second step, we looked for differences between the respondents' ratings in the comfort reports and discomfort reports. A Wilcoxon signed rank test was conducted on those ratings to examine if there were any significant differences between comfort and discomfort ratings within each factor.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results of the first step are shown in Table 1
                        . The numbers of descriptions (generated by authors) associated with each factor within comfort and discomfort reports are displayed separately (column two and three) and the mean (SD) of the ratings of the same factor given by respondents is reported next to them. When a respondent had not rated a factor and expressed that factor as not being influential on their (dis)comfort experience later in the interview, a value of zero was assumed. The total number of descriptions (plus their percentage across comfort and discomfort reports) is reported in the forth column. The Wilcoxon signed rank test indicated that the ratings assigned to the comfort and discomfort factors are not significantly different from the ratings given by respondents.


                        Table 1 shows that the number of comments and the mean rating of ‘pleasure’ were higher in comfort reports compared to discomfort, and that the reverse was true for ‘physical wellbeing’. The factor ‘Peace of mind’ was equally important to both comfort and discomfort and rated the second highest in both experiences (see column two and four in Table 1). The factors satisfaction, social, aesthetics and association received low mean ratings <2. This could be linked to the retrospective nature of the inquiry in this study (as opposed to a real-time inquiry) and the possibility that one's memory of those experiences was diminished over time. This is discussed further in Section 4.

The results of the second step revealed significant differences between respondents' ratings on two factors in comfort and discomfort reports, namely ‘physical wellbeing’ and ‘pleasure’ (both p < 0.001). Similar to the previous step, ‘pleasure’ was highlighted as being more relevant to comfort while ‘physical wellbeing’ was more related to discomfort. This trend implies that comfort is greatly reduced in the presence of negative physical conditions, while an experience of joy enhances passengers' experience of comfort. However, due to the complex and dynamic context of a flight, experience of comfort and discomfort are not limited to these two factors but involve six other factors. The results indicate that those six factors could influence comfort and discomfort in similar ways. Therefore, the data does not support the argument that passengers evaluate comfort and discomfort experiences based on different sets of factors. Instead, the data could suggest that passengers evaluate both experiences based on a universal set of eight factors, conforming to the proposition that comfort is a bipolar phenomenon extending from extreme positive to negative. This is discussed further in the Section 4.

@&#METHOD@&#

Following the results from Study 1, comfort and discomfort descriptions were combined for each factor, yielding 161 descriptors each describing an aspect of the experience. A literature review was conducted to identify comfort descriptors that were not already included in the set of 161 items from Study 1.

The above was followed by two independent sessions of brainstorming to assert the comfort requirements from experts in the field of designing aircraft interiors at Bombardier Aerospace in Montréal (Canada). In order to organize the ideas and define descriptors with a natural relationship to the concept of passenger comfort, a technique called ‘affinity diagram’ was used (Foster, 2010). The brainstorming topic was ‘what are the aspects of the experience that make passengers comfortable?’ in response to which participants wrote their ideas on post-it notes and stuck them on the wall. Following a discussion of the contents, they organized the ideas into groups and subgroups. The first session included eight members (6 male) of an industrial design team. The second session included five participants, two of whom were from the customer relations group, one from human factors and one from the advanced design group at Bombardier Aerospace. They were not informed about the results of the first session. The results of each session were compared to the initial inventory of 161 descriptors from Study 1 in order to potentially add new items to it.

The next step included removing irrelevant descriptors to passenger comfort from the inventory. A convenience sample of 27 participants (20 male, 25–61 years of age, M = 37, median = 32) was recruited. Using a questionnaire respondents were asked to indicate the relevance of each of the 161 descriptors to passenger comfort on a 3-point scale (related, not related and do not know). Items selected as relevant were then used in a subsequent survey in which 41 new respondents, (22 male) 22–58 years of age (M = 36, median = 33), rated the potential impact of each descriptor on flight comfort using a 5-point scale ranging from no impact to strong impact. The items presented to this sample were intentionally formulated to reflect comfort as a positive state. This was in light of the results obtained from Study 1 and assuming that comfort and discomfort are underlined by the same set of factors and descriptors.

The literature review did not reveal any additional descriptors to the initial 161 descriptors identified in Study 1. In the first brainstorming session, the design experts introduced 113 descriptors, organized into seven comfort groups. These corresponded nicely to the initial comfort factors with an exception of the ‘social’ factor (i.e. a passenger's experience of relatedness and their tolerance for behavior/attitudes of others in the cabin). From the second brainstorming session 63 descriptors were obtained consistent with six of the pre-determined comfort factors with the exception of ‘social’ and ‘proxemics’ (denoting the experience of privacy and control over surrounding) factors. Overall, the experts' insights did not disclose any additional items that were not readily listed in the initial inventory.

In the next step, items rated as relevant to comfort by at least 70% (N = 19) of respondents were isolated, yielding 60 descriptors. Those were then used for the next survey whereby respondents' ratings on their potential impact were obtained. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) with varimax rotation was then used to classify them into a number of factors.

@&#RESULTS@&#

From the PCA respondents' ratings on the impact of descriptors on passenger comfort were arranged into eight factors (each with eigenvalue>1), in total accounting for 70.25% of the variance. The eigenvalues and factor loadings greater than 0.4 (in descending orders) are shown in Table 2
                        .

Two descriptors with factor loadings below 0.4 were eliminated. Upon closer scrutiny, seven of the previously introduced comfort factors clearly matched the emerged factors (as labeled in Table 2) except for Factor 6. This factor, expected to correspond to ‘proxemics’, contained only three descriptors among which only one (i.e. I can store my belongings properly) had an established connection to autonomy and control concerns. Other descriptors, predicted to fall under Factor 6, were distributed among factors labeled ‘peace of mind’ (e.g. my activity is not interrupted, I am able to adjust my immediate space to my liking), ‘pleasure’ (e.g. I feel I have a degree of freedom to make choices), and ‘physical wellbeing’ (e.g. I have no physical contact with my neighbors). This issue is discussed further in the next section.

Some descriptors were loaded on more than one factor, in which case they were categorized under the factors to which they matched most reasonably, based on the interview transcripts in Study 1 to result in a coherent definition to each factor. For instance “the cabin interior looks clean” was loaded on both Factor 1, labeled ‘aesthetics’, and Factor 2, ‘satisfaction’. In a previous study (Ahmadpour et al., 2014a), ‘aesthetics’ was operationally defined as a pleasant experience linked to one or more sensory perception. Therefore it was more appropriate to categorize that descriptor under Factor 1. Similar logic applied to descriptors related to temperature and odor that followed, all validating passenger concerns for neatness. The ‘aesthetic’ concern for style was validated by the descriptor regarding visual clutter.

The factor ‘peace of mind’ was validated based on descriptors contributing to concerns for security (e.g. being taken care of), tranquility (e.g. feeling content, satisfied with expectations met) and relief (e.g. feeling relaxed and not restless). ‘Pleasure’ was validated by concerns for anticipation (e.g. pleasant surprises), ambience (e.g. soothing environment), and stimulation (e.g. being entertained). ‘Satisfaction’ concerns for accessibility (e.g. space to stretch legs), adequacy (e.g. controls found effective and easy to use), and quality (e.g. finding the space reasonable) were validated. The factor ‘physical wellbeing’ was validated for concerns with regard to bodily support (e.g. not feeling stiff, not having heavy legs) and energy (e.g. feeling refreshed). ‘Association’ was found validated in terms of evocation (e.g. feeling like sitting in a car) and symbolism (e.g. finding the atmosphere cozy) concerns. Finally the factor ‘social’ was validated through the descriptors that concern tolerance (e.g. the service was courteous) and connectedness (e.g. the ease to interact with other passengers).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Study 1 examined the possibility of differentiating the factors determining passenger comfort from those determining discomfort experiences. To that end, respondents described their flight comfort and discomfort experiences separately and provided ratings on eight factors corresponding to each of those two experiences. The evidence did not suggest a significant difference between six of the underlying factors for those two states, except for the differences between the ratings on the factors ‘pleasure’ and ‘physical wellbeing’ in comfort and discomfort reports. Moreover, ‘pleasure’ received higher ratings in comfort reports, and ‘physical wellbeing’ was rated higher in discomfort reports. This supports Helander (2003) argument that chair comfort is related to one's wellbeing and pleasure whereas discomfort is related to biomechanics issues and physical pain, but it contradicts those results in that unlike the chair experience, other generated factors e.g. ‘peace of mind’, ‘social’, etc. corresponded to both passenger comfort and discomfort. In addition, previous research (Helander and Zhang, 1997; Helander, 2003) showed a transition between chair comfort and discomfort; higher levels of physical discomfort prevent one to experience the pleasant aspects of the seat. This could be linked to the differences found in our study in relation to physical wellbeing and pleasure. It must be noted that Helander's arguments on chair comfort concern a less complex experience compared to that of aircraft passengers', which includes variables such as ‘proxemics’ and ‘social’ aspects involving human interactions in the flight context.

Our study also showed that passenger discomfort cannot be considered purely physical, as was suggested for seat discomfort by de Looze et al. (2003) and Helander (2003). Our results indicated the factor ‘peace of mind’, representing psychological ease, was rated as the second most influential factor in the discomfort reports (see Table 1) followed by six other factors. In other words, the results imply that although eliminating discomfort requires attention to physical pain and health issues, it is crucial to eliminate the sources diminishing ‘peace of mind’ such as safety issues and/or annoyance (e.g. loud noises, sudden movements, broken or dysfunctional elements in the cabin, sight of wears and tears, etc).

Finally, the mean ratings of factors satisfaction, social, aesthetics and association were lower than the overall average. This, we argue, is linked to the method of data collection. The data in Study 1 were obtained post flight experience as opposed to real-time inquiry during the flight. Moreover, Helander and colleagues showed significance of aesthetics and satisfaction for seat comfort, which is in turn, linked to passenger comfort (Ahmadpour et al., 2014a; Vink et al., 2012). Similar factors were previously proposed as being significant for comfort in using hand tools (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). Vink et al. (2012) showed the importance of aesthetics (characterized in terms of hygiene) and social (characterized in terms of neighbors and crew) factors for passenger comfort while the significance of spatial perception for comfort proposed by Kremser et al. (2012) could be linked to ‘association’. Therefore, it is proposed to keep those factors within the collection of eight in this study.

Based on above arguments, we conclude that passenger comfort and discomfort are not evaluated by two different sets of factors but they share the same set of factors. Consequently a single graded scale ranging from comfort to discomfort, similar to Vink and Brauer (2011), would suffice for evaluation purposes. Note, however, that overall passenger comfort is a multifaceted experience influenced by a combination of physical, psychological, semantic, and social variables, some of which diminish discomfort more than others (e.g. physical wellbeing) whereas some enhance comfort more saliently (e.g. pleasure).

The objective of Study 2 was to validate the eight previously proposed comfort factors by Ahmadpour et al. (2014a). This objective contributes to a better understanding of the experiential aspects of aircraft passenger comfort and could potentially helps designing an assessment tool in the future. Passenger comfort descriptors were collected from study 1 and several follow-up studies, classified into eight factors using PCA and inspected for their representation of the comfort factors proposed by Ahmadpour and colleagues. From the results, seven factors logically corresponded to the pre-determined factors, with an exception of ‘proxemics’. The descriptors expected to represent that factor were scattered across three other factors namely ‘pleasure’, ‘peace of mind’, and ‘physical wellbeing’. This may suggest that descriptors such as ability to move about, adapting a desired posture with reasonable distance from neighbors and performing desired activities without interruption may in fact represent the above three factors (respectively) and not proxemics concerns such as control and privacy. A consequence of such assumption is that there are only seven factors associated with passenger comfort experience instead of eight. We argue that the evidence from PCA does not necessarily dismiss the factor ‘proxemics’ all together for two reasons.

The first reason is that the in-depth interviews in Study 1 indicated pronounced proxemics concerns when respondents were recounting their flight experiences. The fact that proxemics descriptors did not stand out as a factor in Study 2 could be due to lack of relevant context when the surveyed respondents rated the potential impact of descriptors. Passengers may have not recalled the impact of proxemics issues, whereas faced with a situation in which their privacy was respected or violated, their comfort experience may have changes accordingly. Similar conclusions about proxemics were reached by other researchers. Hall (1963, pp.1003) suggested that proxemics concerns (and behavior) are in fact ‘unconscious’, i.e. they are instinctual and automatized experiences without the individual being aware of those, therefore they are not accessible to us by demand (Kihlström, 1987). Note that our use of the term ‘proxemics’ is somewhat different from that of Hall. While he used it to refer to human behavior in organizing surrounding personal space and unintentional reactions to the sensory fluctuations (e.g. change of postures), we applied an operational definition to the term to refer to the experience of privacy and control when one is seated in the aircraft. Nevertheless, it appears that Hall's theory of unconscious proxemics behavior is not in essence different from our interpretation of ‘proxemics’ as a comfort factor; they both indicate that a person cannot purposefully decide or be aware of their proxemics reactions because those are highly driven by the context.

The second reason for recovering ‘proxemics’ as a comfort factor is that in dismissing this factor and incorporating its descriptors into factors such as ‘physical wellbeing’ or ‘peace of mind’, we may entirely dismiss an important aspect of comfort. Addressing ‘proxemics’ (signified by concerns for privacy and control) in research and design of aircraft interior space serves a difference purpose compared to addressing ‘physical wellbeing’ or ‘peace of mind’. Robson (2008) argued that regulating privacy in public places offers a person more control and subsequently reduces the stress levels while Ewans and Wener (2007) showed that a lack of personal space or impression of privacy for seated passengers in trains results in a feeling of not having control over the situation and an increased stress level. Therefore translating the proxemics descriptors into design solutions when they are classified under physical wellbeing would miss an opportunity to address the privacy and control concerns (and potentially reducing stress level).

Other factors emerging from the PCA showed a good fit to the comfort factors in general. Some descriptors were loaded on more than one factor, implying association to different types of experiences. However, those do not disrupt factors validation; the majority of descriptors within each PCA factor showed a good fit to the assigned comfort factor. Overall, the results support the factors elicited in a previous study and it is proposed that could adequately explain the comfort experience of passengers as a whole.

As airlines compete to attract more passengers and provide better experiences for them, the effectiveness of the design efforts become more important. The knowledge about the underlying factors of aircraft passenger comfort could support the cabin design efforts in that they could be used as a guide for delivering an enhanced level of passenger experience. Future research should address the potentials of using the proposed comfort factors (and the descriptors associated with them) as a basis for assessment of passenger comfort experience.

Study 1 bears a limitation in that respondents were asked to start their reports with describing an experience of discomfort. Further counterbalancing investigation comparing those results to reports in which comfortable experiences precede report of discomfort may resolve any potential bias in responses. It is also suggested to use additional techniques to measure physical discomfort for further validation of the differences between comfort and discomfort in future studies. The results of PCA used for validating factors in Study 2 were not conclusive, which was argued to be due to lack of context. Future research should address these limitations by performing real-time inquiries within the flight context. Moreover, it is advised to investigate the implications of using the eight proposed factors for assessment of passenger comfort experience.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this paper, we employed eight factors pertaining to aircraft passenger comfort from a previous study and aimed to uncover whether or not those describe passengers' comfort and discomfort experiences in similar ways. We conclude that while it is necessary to eliminate sources of physical discomfort to achieve comfort, the eight comfort factors generally apply to both experiences. The factor ‘peace of mind’ was found to be an important indicator for both states while ‘pleasure’ highly influences comfort and influence of ‘physical wellbeing’ are more salient for discomfort. This suggests that passenger comfort experience involves various degrees from extreme comfort to extreme discomfort and that the overall effect could be evaluated using one single scale. Seven factors were clearly validated using their core descriptors with an exception of ‘proxemics’ but it was argued that this is due to lack of context in Study Two as well as the nature of the factor itself, which is generally perceived and acted upon on an unconscious level. We proposed that ‘proxemics’ should still be considered as a factor in order to address the aspects of privacy and control in comfort experience.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This research was funded jointly by 
                     Fonds Québécois de la Recherche sur la Nature et les Technologies (FQRNT), 
                     Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and Bombardier Aerospace (grant number 163709).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

