@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#When is job rotation perceived useful and easy to use to prevent work-related musculoskeletal complaints?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We interview employers and workers from the construction industry.


                        
                        
                           
                           We examine facilitators and barriers to usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Job and organizational factors influence usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Individual factors influence usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Job rotation

Musculoskeletal complaints

Qualitative research

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Job rotation is often recommended to optimize physical work demands and prevent work-related musculoskeletal complaints, but little is known about possible facilitators and barriers to its usefulness and ease of use. Following a qualitative research design, semi-structured interviews with employers (n = 12) and workers (n = 11) from the construction industry were conducted. Organizational climate, job autonomy, job characteristics and work processes were mentioned as either facilitators or barriers on an organizational level. Worker characteristics, work behavior and attitude were mentioned as either facilitators or barriers on an individual level. Following a structured approach to assess usefulness of job rotation to optimize physical work exposures and identifying barriers to usefulness and ease of use in relevant stakeholder groups is necessary in order to select or develop strategies to overcome these barriers, or to reject job rotation as a useful or easy to use intervention in the given context.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Since musculoskeletal complaints contribute to reduced work productivity (Meerding et al., 2005), sick leave (Bergstrom et al., 2007) and early retirement (Van den Berg et al., 2010), there is growing interest for the potential of interventions to prevent musculoskeletal complaints and promote sustainable working life. Job rotation is a commonly used organizational measure for preventing work-related musculoskeletal complaints through changes in physical work exposures (Jorgensen et al., 2005). The principle of job rotation is rotating workers between activities with the purpose of minimizing accumulated exposures on a particular body region (Jonsson, 1988). This may be achieved by following exposure guidelines or, if this is not feasible, by alternating load on different body regions during a workday. However, little is known about job rotation practices. This includes a lack of research on its effects, practical guidance for practitioners and researchers, as well as knowledge about facilitators and barriers to successful implementation.

Application contexts of job rotation are varied. For example, research has been done among meat cutters (Arvidsson et al., 2012), supermarket cashiers (Rissen et al., 2002), refuse collectors (Kuijer et al., 2004) and office workers (Fernström and Aborg, 1999). Most of the field studies on job rotation show inconsistent effects. For instance, studies found rotation to decrease physical workload (Kuijer et al., 1999; Fredriksson et al., 2001; Arvidsson et al., 2012) and physical work demands (Kuijer et al., 2004), but also to increase physical workload (Kuijer et al., 1999). Furthermore, studies found rotation to increase shoulder pain (Rissen et al., 2002), upper extremity complaints (Fredriksson et al., 2001) and low back complaints (Fredriksson et al., 2001; Kuijer et al., 2005), while one study found rotation to decrease upper extremity complaints (Fernström and Aborg, 1999).

Shortcomings in implementation and evaluation of job rotation may partially explain the inconsistent effects on both exposures and musculoskeletal complaints. Often little attention is paid to possible facilitators and barriers to perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation in the given context. The modified Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) theorizes that influencing factors on intention to use any technical or organizational measure are mediated by perceived usefulness and ease of use (Aggelidis and Chatzoglou, 2009). Perceived ease of use also influences perceived usefulness, as the easier a system is to use, the more useful it can be (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000). Also, when attempting to improve health, practitioners often seek to gain acceptance of changes to the workplace or of alternative methods of working (Haslam, 2002). In this study, perceived usefulness is defined as the degree to which someone believes that using job rotation will be effective for the intended purpose (i.e. prevent musculoskeletal complaints or minimize accumulated exposures); perceived ease of use as the degree to which someone believes that job rotation will be easy to apply in the workplace. More insight into the factors that influence perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation may contribute to more successful implementation.

Work-related musculoskeletal complaints may be caused or worsened by physical job demands. This is especially true for workers in the construction industry, as they are exposed to high cumulative physical demands and they start working at an early age (approx. 16 years old). This means they will have worked for 50 years when reaching retirement age. In the Netherlands, 72% of construction workers perceived their job as physically demanding, with 38% of workers reporting musculoskeletal complaints (Arbouw, 2014). In addition, back complaints accounted for 43% of all lost workdays in the construction industry in 2011 (Economisch Instituut voor de Bouw, 2011). Elimination of adverse physical work demands is not always feasible for construction trades, so minimizing accumulated exposures through job rotation is often recommended by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Health and Safety Executive (HSE) as an alternative to technical measures. In addition, implementing an intervention in the construction industry is considered a challenge (Boschman et al., 2013; Oude Hengel et al., 2011). Therefore, we expect this industry particularly able to provide considerations for researchers and practitioners who are planning to conduct job rotation interventions.

We aim to identify possible facilitators and barriers to perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation among workers and employers, since these two key actors have the knowledge and ability to influence both processes and outcomes of an intervention. By using a qualitative approach we addressed the following research questions:
                        
                           1.
                           What are possible facilitators and barriers to perceived usefulness of job rotation to minimize accumulated exposures, prevent musculoskeletal complaints and promote sustainable working life?

What are possible facilitators and barriers to perceived ease of use of job rotation in the construction industry?

@&#METHOD@&#

A qualitative research method was used, based on semi-structured face-to-face interviews that aimed to identify possible facilitators and barriers to perceived usefulness of job rotation to minimize accumulated exposures, prevent musculoskeletal complaints and promote sustainable working life and to perceived ease of use of job rotation in the construction industry.

Interview participants were recruited from different construction organizations using a purposive sampling procedure and snowballing, with variation in trades and organization size as selection criteria. We included employers and workers from three trades: one trade from the building and development industry, one trade from the roads and civil engineering industry and one trade from the finishing and maintenance industry. The trades had to fulfill the following inclusion criteria: (1) there are opportunities for rotation between tasks and/or activities, and (2) the trade has high prevalence of musculoskeletal complaints of specific body regions.

In every trade, we interviewed employers and workers from a small organization (<21 workers), a medium-sized organization (21–100 workers), and a large organization (>100 workers). The three trades included in this study were carpenters (building and development), pavers (roads and civil engineering) and painters (finishing and maintenance).

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants were recruited through several strategies, such as via information leaflet, via telephone, via email and through networking. The first author conducted the interviews (female, 25 years old, MSc), with a maximum duration of 45 min (range 13–43 min) and at a location convenient for the participant, usually an office or worksite. Each interview was audio taped and when the location allowed it additional notes were made. All interviews were conducted October through December 2013. The same interview protocol was used for all participants, but employers and workers were interviewed separately for confidentiality purposes. Incidentally, a team of workers was interviewed together due to time and practical constraints. Before the start of each interview, the interviewer gave a brief explanation about the purpose of the study and some examples to illustrate our definition of job rotation: workers rotating between tasks (combinations of actions comprising functional operations) within a job or between activities (postures and/or movements to perform tasks) as a means to minimize accumulated exposures. We assumed data saturation was achieved when no new facilitators or barriers were cited and expected this to occur after 8–10 interviews per trade.

The interview questions covered the following topics: (1) facilitators and barriers in the organizational and individual context to perceived usefulness of job rotation to minimize accumulated exposures, prevent musculoskeletal complaints and promote sustainable working life, and (2) facilitators and barriers in the organizational and individual context to perceived ease of use of job rotation in the construction industry. Our interview model was based on the modified ‘Technology Acceptance Model’ (TAM) from Aggelidis and Chatzoglou (2009); the topics used were perceived usefulness and ease of use in the organizational and individual context. A pilot interview with a carpenter was conducted and feedback was incorporated into the final interview protocol (see appendix interview items).

Audiotapes of the interviews were transcribed verbatim and organized using MAXQDA11, software for qualitative data-analysis. The analysis of the interviews followed a purpose-driven approach, aiming to distinguish all citations relating to our two topics: (1) facilitators and barriers to perceived usefulness of job rotation to minimize accumulated exposures, prevent musculoskeletal complaints and promote sustainable working life, and (2) facilitators and barriers to perceived ease of use of job rotation in the construction industry. First, each interview was open coded. In this inductive step, all examples of facilitators and barriers were highlighted. During the coding procedure, we aimed to be as inclusive as possible. Second, the highlighted segments were categorized through the following code system: (1) coded into ‘usefulness’ or ‘ease of use’, then (2) coded into ‘facilitator’ or ‘barrier’, and finally (3) coded into organizational subtopic or individual subtopics. Third, codes were refined and reduced within a process of re-reading and constant comparison. Only topics that were either a barrier or facilitator to both perceived usefulness and ease of use were used for the results. The main researcher (PL) performed the coding of the data; subsequently, the other researchers checked the coded data of each interview. A preliminary analysis was conducted on a subset of each trade to determine whether data saturation was reached.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Characteristics of the study population are shown in Table 1
                     . Twelve employers were interviewed: five employed carpenters, five employed pavers and two employed painters. Eleven workers were interviewed: four carpenters, four pavers and three painters. No large organization from finishing and maintenance was willing to participate. One interview with a paver was excluded from data analysis due to lack of audio. Through the iterative process of thematic analysis, the research team concluded that data saturation (O'Reilly and Parker, 2013) was reached after 15 interviews.

Seven themes influencing both perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation in the construction industry were identified (Table 2
                     ). The organizational themes were: organizational climate, job autonomy, job characteristics and work processes. The individual themes were: worker characteristics, worker behavior, and attitude.

With regard to organizational climate, participants expected an employer aware of adverse physical work demands and favorable towards job rotation to find rotation useful as a preventive measure. Second, an employer interested in prevention of sick leave and early retirement was expected to find job rotation useful for workers with musculoskeletal complaints. With regard to job autonomy, most participants expected high decision latitude for individual workers and teams to contribute to both perceived usefulness and ease of use. The suggestion was that control over when and how to perform the job facilitates workers in rotating between activities or with co-workers, either pre-emptively or to reduce musculoskeletal complaints. With regard to job characteristics, most participants stated that their jobs already provided automatic rotation between tasks and/or activities. Thus, a job in itself may facilitate ease of use of job rotation. Some participants also suggested that rotation schemes for workers with musculoskeletal complaints are only useful if they provide tasks and/or activities with lower physical work demands. With regard to work processes, both individual and team work was expected to facilitate usefulness of job rotation to minimize accumulated exposures and prevent musculoskeletal complaints. The suggestion was that individual workers could rotate within their job and co-workers could rotate between each other. In addition, most participants stated that workflows might facilitate ease of use of job rotation due to following certain task sequences in order to complete the work to be performed.

In summary, a facilitative organizational climate, job autonomy, favorable job characteristics and flexible work processes were expected to be facilitators in the organizational context to perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.

With regard to worker characteristics, an all-round skilled workforce was expected to facilitate usefulness of job rotation as a preventive measure. In addition, all-round schooling and training in tasks outside the job description may promote rotation scheme possibilities. The suggestion was that workers would be able to perform a larger repertoire of work tasks. Participants also mentioned that more knowledge about physical work exposures might incline workers to adopt job rotation as a preventive work style. With regard to worker behavior, good communication and cooperation with co-workers were expected to facilitate ease of use of job rotation. With regard to attitude, workers favorable towards job rotation were also expected to facilitate ease of use of job rotation. It was also mentioned that workers with musculoskeletal complaints willing to do alternative tasks might find job rotation useful to prevent sick leave or early retirement.

In summary, favorable worker characteristics, facilitative worker behavior and supportive attitude were expected to be facilitators in the individual context to perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.

With regard to organizational climate, participants expected employers believing the job does not have adverse physical work demands to find job rotation useless as a preventive measure. With regard to job characteristics, job requirements that cannot be adjusted were regarded a barrier to usefulness of job rotation as a preventive measure. The suggestion was that workers with musculoskeletal complaints couldn't refuse to perform tasks that are part of their job description. Participants also stated that a lack of variation in tasks and/or activities within the job might hinder possibilities for devising rotation schemes. With regard to work processes, most participants stated that inflexible workflows loading the same body region(s) might hinder ease of use of job rotation. The suggestion was that adjustments in task sequence or length might be impossible due to the nature of the work to be performed.

In summary, an impeding organizational climate, unfavorable job characteristics and inflexible work processes were expected to be barriers in the organizational context to perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.

With regard to worker characteristics, it was suggested that lack of knowledge about tasks within the job description might limit rotation possibilities for workers. With regard to worker behavior, lack of communication with the employer and co-workers was expected to be a barrier to both perceived usefulness and ease of use. The first suggestion was that lack of communication might impede rotation within teams. The second suggestion was that workers failing to mention musculoskeletal complaints might impede support from the employer and co-workers in reducing these complaints. A physically demanding work style (i.e. not rotating activities or tasks) was also regarded a barrier to usefulness of job rotation. The first suggestion was that some workers with musculoskeletal complaints continue to overload the affected body region. The second suggestion was that some workers in general do not wish to rotate during a workday. With regard to attitude, workers unfavorable towards job rotation were expected to be a barrier to ease of use job rotation. It was also mentioned that workers believing the job does not have adverse physical work demands might not find rotation useful as a preventive measure.

In summary, unfavorable worker characteristics, impeding worker behavior and unsupportive attitude were expected to be barriers in the individual context to perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

From the perspective of workers and employers, perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation relies on a facilitative organizational climate, job autonomy for workers and teams, favorable job characteristics, flexible work processes, favorable worker characteristics, facilitative worker behavior and supportive worker attitude. On the contrary, perceived usefulness and ease of use may be hindered by an impeding organizational climate, unfavorable job characteristics, inflexible work processes, unfavorable worker characteristics, impeding work behavior and unsupportive worker attitude. Some of these themes have been found to influence intervention outcomes. For example, a positive organizational climate and training of workers during implementation resulted in an increased use of a new working method in the floor laying trade and satisfaction among participants (Jensen and Friche, 2007). Also, supportive management and positive attitude among workers towards the intervention contributed to higher satisfaction and participation of aging hospital workers with a worksite health promotion program (Strijk et al., 2011). Conversely, an unaccommodating organizational climate and modest engagement among workers resulted in very low attendance rate of construction workers at the job-specific workers' health surveillance (Boschman et al., 2013). In addition, most construction workers had not undertaken the advised preventive actions, because they perceived the (future) effect as limited. Also, a tool to raise awareness of the importance of rest breaks was considered irrelevant or non-applicable for existing work processes, resulting in most construction workers neither filling in the tool nor using the advice in daily practice (Oude Hengel et al., 2011).

First, none of the participants had actual experience with job rotation. Because none of our participants had actual experience with job rotation, the interviewer did notice that some participants found it difficult to answer some of the questions. However, we do believe that we were sensitive to their perspectives, because most participants had a very outspoken opinion about job rotation. In addition, since TAM focuses on beliefs in relevant stakeholder groups (Aggelidis and Chatzoglou, 2009), a group in (pre)contemplation of implementing job rotation seems most appropriate to answer our research questions. A consequence was that some workers found it difficult to suggest facilitators and barriers. This was not the case for employers; most citations used for the results came from them. But those workers interviewed at their worksite were better able to provide suggestions. So future qualitative research on job rotation could use worksite interviews in order to obtain relevant information more efficiently. Second, data saturation was achieved after 15 interviews, with subsequent interviews failing to provide any new information. However, only one employer from a small painting organization was among the first 15, so we chose to continue. No relevant differences between the trades or organization sizes regarding perceived facilitators and barriers were found. However, it was never the intention to explore differences, but merely to achieve variation through different populations. This may improve the transferability of the findings to other occupations with similar physical work demands and musculoskeletal complaints.

Researchers and practitioners should investigate whether perceived usefulness and ease of use of job rotation is influenced by factors that can be reasonably modified in occupational settings. First, all activities and associated exposures comprising the job should be assessed (Leider et al., 2015), taking into account peak and cumulative loads (Frazer et al., 2003; Coenen et al., 2013) with relevant exposure limits (e.g. Health Council of the Netherlands 2011;). Consequently it can be assessed whether job rotation may be useful to minimize accumulated exposures and prevent musculoskeletal complaints. If the barriers relating to job characteristics and work processes (Table 2) are present, then job rotation should be rejected as a useful or easy to use strategy in the given context or intervention on these barriers should be considered.

If job rotation could be potentially useful in the given context, facilitators and barriers will determine whether it can be implemented successfully in the workplace. In making recommendations to prevent work-related musculoskeletal complaints, practitioners tend to focus largely on the physical aspects of work (Whysall et al., 2004). However, the extent to which workers and employers are both psychologically and behaviorally prepared to implement change is thought to contribute to effective implementation (Holt et al., 2010). The Transtheoretical Model (Prochaska and DiClemente, 1983) proposes that change occurs in five stages: precontemplation (not considering change), contemplation (thinking about change), preparation (making concrete plans to change), action (actually engaged in change) and maintenance (working to prevent relapse and consolidate gains made). In the context of job rotation, those at the precontemplation stage need information to be persuaded of the potential usefulness of job rotation to prevent work-related musculoskeletal complaints. However, for those at the contemplation and preparation stage, awareness of present facilitators and barriers to potential usefulness and ease of use of job rotation becomes more relevant. A study within 16 organizations comprising of 24 interventions suggested that stage-matched interventions are more effective in producing behavior change and reducing musculoskeletal complaints than standard approaches (Whysall et al., 2006). Although the absolute order of these stages can be discussed, exploring the stage of change in workers and employers is an important component of job rotation interventions, in order to address the specific concerns or needs in the different stages.

Practitioners to assess the stage of change could use the proposed facilitators and barriers (Table 2) as a checklist. Beliefs among workers and employers that the job has no adverse physical work demands and a negative attitude towards job rotation indicate precontemplation. In this case, graphic information or case studies can be used to underline potential consequences if no action is taken to prevent musculoskeletal complaints. If facilitators relating to organizational climate and attitude are present, this indicates contemplation. In this case, potential usefulness and ease of use of job rotation can be highlighted with examples of case studies or statistics documenting success cases, in order to reinforce motivation to implement job rotation. In the preparation stage, a multi-criteria genetic algorithm (Asensio-Cuesta et al., 2012) can be applied to design job rotation schemes considering ergonomic, organizational and individual criteria. The presence of facilitators relating to job autonomy, worker characteristics and worker behavior can function as some of these criteria and contribute to potential ease of use. However, if barriers relating to job autonomy, worker characteristics and worker behavior are present, it should be checked whether these barriers could be removed. Possible strategies for overcoming these barriers could be skills training, workshops, tailored advice or focus groups with relevant stakeholder groups. In conclusion, the proposed facilitators and barriers to perceived usefulness and ease of use together with a staged approach offer a practical framework for practitioners and researchers towards successful implementation of job rotation.


                     
                        
                           (1)
                           do you have any experience with job rotation, and if so, can you tell us how you implement this in practice;

do you think job rotation could be useful to minimize accumulated exposures and prevent musculoskeletal complaints;

what do you perceive as facilitators and barriers to usefulness of job rotation to achieve these purposes;

do you think job rotation could be easy to use in practice;

what do you perceive as facilitators and barriers to usefulness of job rotation to achieve this purpose.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

