@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Recovery and well-being among Helicopter Emergency Medical Service (HEMS) pilots

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Helicopter Emergency Medical Service pilots reported high levels of well-being.


                        
                        
                           
                           Well-being decreased during night shifts.


                        
                        
                           
                           The association between disruptive events and decreased well-being was intensified during night shifts.


                        
                        
                           
                           It took a longer time to recover from night shifts than from day shifts.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Shift work

Distress

Circadian rhythm

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study investigated the effects of a compressed working week with high cognitive and emotional work demands within the population of Dutch Helicopter Emergency Medical Service (HEMS) pilots. Work stressors were measured and levels of well-being were examined before, during and after a series of day and night shifts. Results revealed that (i) the start of a series of day shifts was more taxing for well-being than the start of a series of night shifts, (ii) there were no differences in the decrease in well-being during day and night shifts, (iii) distress during shifts was more strongly related to a decrease in well-being during night than during day shifts and (iv) it took HEMS pilots more time to recover from a series of night shifts than from a series of day shifts. It is concluded that HEMS pilots should not start earlier during day shifts, nor have longer series of night shifts.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Shift work is associated with a higher risk of accidents and ill health (Åkerstedt, 1990). These negative effects of shift work especially apply to night work and are mainly attributable to circadian disharmony (Åkerstedt, 1990; Costa, 1996; Smith et al., 2010). Night work disrupts the natural circadian rhythm because it requires people to be active at times when they would normally be sleeping, and vice versa. During night work, adaptation in circadian rhythm is limited (Ferguson et al., 2012). As a consequence, performance decreases (Burgess et al., 2013) and many shift workers suffer from insufficient and suboptimal sleep, resulting in incomplete recovery between shifts (Geurts et al., 2013). As feeling recovered is beneficial for performance during the next work day (Volman et al., 2013) and recovery has been argued to be a vital link between demanding work characteristics and employee health (Geurts and Sonnentag, 2006), incomplete recovery could be an important factor in the association between shift work and a higher risk of accidents and ill health.

The adverse effects of shift and night work could be particularly pronounced in the presence of additional demanding shift characteristics such as long work shifts (Rosa, 1995), varying workload that is either too low or too high causing passivity or high strain (Karasek, 1979), and high emotional (Maslach, 1982) and cognitive demands (Paas et al., 2003). These demands may deplete energy resources and thereby intensify the load effects and negative emotions caused by work stressors (Zohar et al., 2003). Such a combination of demanding shift work characteristics can be expected among employees working for ambulatory emergency services. In the current study, we examine a national population of such employees, that is, pilots working for the Dutch Helicopter Emergency Medical Service (HEMS). HEMS provides 24/7 on-scene assistance to trauma patients. To provide this assistance, HEMS employees work a compressed work schedule of circa 40 h in three consecutive day or night shifts, with at least three free days between the series of shifts. HEMS pilots do not work a fixed pattern in the sequence of a series of day and night shifts, but generally their series of day and night shifts are alternated. The duration of one shift is long: almost 13 h with a maximum duration of 15.5 h per shift. During their shifts, they are called upon when an emergency happens and this makes their workload highly variable and unpredictable. During a mission, pilots are continuously interpreting information and making decisions that require high cognitive effort (Watson et al., 1996). In addition, HEMS employees are confronted with high emotional demands as they often encounter emotionally taxing situations such as driving accidents, heart attacks and falls (Blau et al., 2012). It is possible for HEMS employees to sleep during night shifts when they are not called upon.

The aim of the current study is to examine the effects of a compressed working week with high cognitive and emotional work demands in relation to well-being and recovery within the population of HEMS pilots. Although there are studies examining the economic costs and benefits of HEMS as a facility (for a review see Taylor et al., 2010), studies examining well-being and recovery of HEMS pilots themselves are rare. To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine well-being and recovery in this population. Four focal issues are central in this paper: (1) well-being at the start of a series of shifts, (2) well-being during a shift, (3) work characteristics and well-being during a shift, and (4) recovery after a series of shifts.

Dutch HEMS personnel start their day shifts at 6:30 AM and their night shifts at 6:30 PM. The early start of day shifts requires an advancing of the body's timing system while the start of a series of night shifts requires a delaying of the body's timing system. Research shows that advancing, instead of delaying the body's timing system, is associated with more health complaints such as head-ache, irritability, gastrointestinal disorders, fatigue and loss of concentration (Waterhouse et al., 1997). Therefore, we expect that the start of a series of day shifts is associated with lower levels of well-being. More precisely, we hypothesize that at the start of a series of day shifts, well-being is lower than in the morning on a preceding day off. The start of a series of night shifts is not associated with lower levels of well-being when compared to levels of well-being on the evening of a preceding day off (Hypothesis 1).

Empirical literature on long work hours has shown that long shifts increase fatigue and cause a higher risk of accidents and reduce performance (Rosa, 1995). Previous research has shown that these disadvantages seem to be most pronounced for night shifts (Smith et al., 1998; Rosa, 1995) and toward the end of long shifts (Folkard, 1997). As HEMS personnel work day and night shifts of almost 13 h, we expect a significant decrease in well-being during individual shifts (Hypothesis 2a), and a higher decrease in well-being during night shifts when compared to day shifts (Hypothesis 2b).

The decrease in well-being during shifts is not only determined by the length of a shift, but also by the work content and experiences during a shift. HEMS pilots can be expected to face relatively demanding work characteristics such as highly variable and unpredictable workload and emotional stressors. In previous research, such demanding work characteristics have been associated with low levels of well-being (de Jonge et al., 2008; Van der Doef and Maes, 1999). Moreover, the cognitive-energetic model of affective reactions posits that negative emotions following disruptive events are intensified when limited energy resources are available (Zohar et al., 2003). As night shifts cause a significant loss in sleep and deplete energy resources (Rosa, 1995), the negative emotions caused by work stressors could be intensified during the night. Therefore, our third hypothesis states that during night shifts, job stressors (workload as well as distress during shifts) are more strongly associated to a decrease in well-being than during day shifts (Hypothesis 3).

Over the last decades, awareness has risen that recovering from stress, during work or leisure, is important to preserve performance (Volman et al., 2013) and health (Geurts and Sonnentag, 2006). The small adaptations in circadian rhythm during night work (Ferguson et al., 2012) could result in a longer time needed to recover from a series of night shifts than from a series of day shifts. This longer recovery time could explain the adverse effects of night work (Åkerstedt, 1990; Costa, 1996; Smith et al., 2010), as slow and incomplete recovery impedes health and well-being (Meijman and Mulder, 1998). Our fourth hypothesis states that HEMS pilots need a longer time to recover from a series of night shifts than from a series of day shifts (Hypothesis 4).

@&#METHOD@&#

All 27 employees working for the Dutch HEMS were approached for participation. During an introductory meeting, the general purpose of the study and the importance of participation were explained to the HEMS employees. Twenty-four employees agreed to participate (89% of the total population). The data of 23 employees will be reported because one employee took part in a pilot study to test the procedure. Mean age of the participants was 44.1 years (SD = 5.97) and one of them was female. All participants had a college or university degree. In a compressed work schedule participants worked 37.7 contractual hours per week (SD = 1.39), with a minimum of 32 h and a maximum of 39 h.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

For a schematic overview of the procedure see Fig. 1
                        . Two to three weeks before a random series of day or night shifts, participants received an e-mail in which they were informed in detail about the study procedure. This e-mail included an overview of the measurement dates and an individual log-in code to complete online questionnaires. Participants were also invited to complete the online general questionnaire with questions concerning age, gender, education level and contract hours. When the participants agreed with the measurement dates, they received a tailor-made time schedule of their individual measurement occasions.

Before, during and after a series of day and night shifts, participants completed short online questionnaires measuring daily well-being, number of flight missions, workload and distress during shifts. During night shifts, on-job sleep quality was also measured. To be more precise, daily well-being was measured in the morning and evening on a free day (1 day*2 measurements) before a series of three consecutive shifts. During a series of shifts, participants completed a short questionnaire both at the start and at the end of each shift (3 days*2 measurements). Daily well-being was measured at the start and the end of each shift whereas number of flight missions, workload and distress during shifts were measured at the end of a shift. On-job sleep quality was only measured at the end of a night shift. After a series of shifts, daily well-being was measured in the morning and evening on two consecutive free days (2 days*2 measurements). This makes a total of 12 measurements of daily well-being and three measurements of number of flight missions, workload and distress during shifts. Because the same procedure was followed for a series of day and night shifts, the total number of measurements of daily well-being was 24 and number of flight missions, workload and distress during shifts were measured six times.

Participants received an e-mail with a link to the questionnaire at the exact moment when they had to complete the questionnaire. In addition, participants received a text message on their cell phones to remind them to fill out the questionnaire. One and a half hour after sending the e-mail and text message, it was checked whether participants had completed the questionnaire. If they had not, they received a second text message wherein they were reminded to complete the questionnaire. After participants filled out the last questionnaire, they were thanked for their participation and informed when preliminary results were expected. This procedure resulted in a total score of 99% completed questionnaires. The only two questionnaires that were not completed were a questionnaire at the end of night shift two and a questionnaire at the end of night shift three. The data were collected from March to August 2012.

For daily measurements, we adapted response-scales based on the basic Dutch grade notation system ranging from 1 (extremely low/negative) to 10 (extremely high/positive) and anchored the first and the last grade. The Dutch grade system considers a six as the lowest satisfactory score and a score below six is considered ‘unsatisfactory’. Single-item measures were used to minimize the effort required from the participants and maximize user-friendliness. When one-dimensional unambiguous constructs are measured, single-item measures are a legitimate alternative to multiple-item measures (e.g. Van Hooff et al., 2007). The wording and face validity of the items were discussed with peer researchers and the participant who took part in the pilot study and a few ambiguous items were reformulated.

Well-being was measured 24 times using six items. These items were adapted from the Health & Well-being measurement used by De Bloom et al. (2013). The items were: ‘At this moment, I feel [energetic] [happy] [relaxed] [tired] [stressed out] [irritated]. Items were rated on a 10-point Likert scale (1 = not at all, 10 = very much). The items [tired] [stressed out] and [irritated] were reverse scored and a mean well-being score was calculated per measurement moment. The items showed good reliability (Cronbach's α = 0.67–0.92, # of Cronbach's α < 0.75 = 4, # of Cronbach's α > 0.75 = 20).

Participants indicated per shift how much flight missions they had, by answering the question: ‘How many times did you actually fly during your shift?’ Number of flight missions was measured six times.

Workload was measured six times using the following item: ‘How busy were you during the shift?’, and rated on a 10-point Likert scale (1 = not busy at all, 10 = very busy).

Distress during shifts was measured six times using the following item: ‘How distressing was your shift?’. The item was rated on a10-point Likert scale (1 = not distressing at all, 10 = much distressing).

On job-sleep quality was measured after each night shift resulting in a total of three measurements. Participants indicated on a 10-point Likert scale (1 = extremely poor 10 = extremely good) how well they slept during the night shift by answering the question: ‘How well did you sleep during your shift?’.

The first hypothesis – at the start of a series of day shifts, well-being is lower than in the morning on a preceding day off, whereas the start of a series of night shifts is not associated with a decrease in well-being – was examined using a 2 (Day shifts: well-being at a free morning before a series of day shifts vs. well-being at the start of a series of day shifts) × 2 (Night shifts: well-being at a free evening before a series of night shifts vs. well-being at the start of a series of night shifts) repeated measures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA). A significant interaction effect would indicate that the development of well-being, from a free day before a series of shifts to the start of a series of shifts, differed between day and night shifts. Post-hoc paired t-tests were used to further explore a significant interaction effect.

The second hypothesis – well-being decreases during individual day and night shifts with a higher decrease in well-being during night shifts – was examined using paired t-tests. Levels of well-being at the start of each shift were compared to levels of well-being at the end of each shift. To examine whether the decrease in well-being during night shifts is significantly higher than during day shifts, difference scores were calculated for each day shift (well-being at the end of a day shift – well-being at the start of a day shift) and each night shift (well-being at the end of a night shift – well-being at the start of a night shift). These difference scores for day and night shifts were compared using paired t-tests.

The third hypothesis – a stronger association between job stressors and decreases in well-being during night shifts than during day shifts – was examined using multilevel analysis. Multilevel analysis is a very useful analysis method for repeated measures because it corrects for the correlations between measurements within individuals (Hox, 2010). MLwiN 2.23 was used to conduct the analysis and all variables were standardized. Because we were interested in the decrease in well-being during a shift, we added well-being at the start of a shift as a covariate and well-being at the end of the shift was the dependent variable. Other covariates were number of flight missions and sleep quality (only for night shifts). Because the number of participants was small and we did not want to lose too much power, we had to be parsimonious in the estimated parameters. Therefore, we did not estimate the covariance parameters between day and night shifts which reduced the estimated parameters with nine (3 day shifts × 3 night shifts). We also assumed that the association between the independent variables and the dependent variable was the same during the three day shifts and during the three night shifts. By this means we reduced the estimated parameters with a factor three for day and night shifts: five parameters estimates instead of fifteen for day shifts (reduction of 10) and six parameter estimates instead of eighteen for night shifts (reduction of 12). Thus, in total we added thirty-one degrees of freedom per multilevel model. To examine whether the associations between job stressors and well-being differed for day and night shifts, three models were defined. Model A assumed that the associations between job stressors and well-being were different for day and night shifts. Model B assumed that the associations between workload and well-being were the same for day and night shifts. Model C assumed that the associations between distress during shifts and well-being were the same for day and night shifts. When Model B and/or C showed a decrease in model fit, the associations between job stressors and well-being for day and night shifts were considered to be different. The decrease of model fit was examined using χ
                        2-test.

To examine the fourth hypothesis – it takes a longer time to recover from a series of night shifts than from day shifts – we applied four steps. First, we calculated a baseline score for well-being before a series of day shifts by averaging levels of well-being on a free morning before a series of day shifts and levels of well-being on a free evening before a series of day shifts. The same method was used to calculate baseline levels of well-being before a series of night shifts. Second, we calculated the standard deviations for these two variables. Third, we estimated per participant how many hours it took them to recover after a series of day and night shifts. Participants were considered to be recovered when their levels of well-being was at minimum a half standard deviation below their baseline level of well-being. This means that during day shifts, it took participants 12 h to recover when well-being reached baseline levels in the morning after a series of day shifts. It took them 24 h to recover when well-being reached baseline levels in the evening after a series of day shifts and it took hem 36 h to recover when well-being reached baseline levels the second morning after a series of day shifts. The same method was applied to night shifts. It took participants 12 h to recover when they reached baseline levels of well-being the evening after a series of night shifts. When levels of well-being reached baseline levels the free morning after a series of night shifts, it took participants 24 h to recover. It took them 36 h to recover when they reached baseline levels of well-being in the evening of a free day. Because our recovery measurements were limited to a period of 36 h after the series of shifts, we assumed that it took participants 48 h to recover when they were not recovered within 36 h. Fourth, a paired t-test was used to examine whether it took longer time to recover from night shifts as compared to day shifts.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Table 1
                         shows the descriptives of well-being before, during and after a series of day and night shifts. The descriptives of on-job sleep quality (only during night shifts), number of flight missions, workload and distress during shifts for both a series of day and night shifts are shown in Table 2
                        . Tables 3 and 4
                        
                        
                         show the crude correlations between well-being, on-job sleep quality (only during night shifts), number of flight missions, workload and distress during shifts for day shifts (Table 3) and night shifts (Table 4). Levels of well-being during day and night shifts are depicted in Fig. 2
                        .

The descriptives in Tables 1 and 2 and Fig. 2 show that in general, HEMS employees experienced high levels of well-being (Day shifts: M > 7.67; Night shifts M > 7.45). During their shifts, participants experienced moderate levels of workload (M range 3.41–5.04) and low levels of distress (M < 3.09). Sleep quality during the night shift was satisfactory during the first two night shifts (M > 6.0) but less satisfactory during the third night shift (M = 5.86).

RM-ANOVA revealed a significant interaction effect (F(1, 22) = 5.19, p = 0.033): the change in well-being from a free day before a series of shifts to the start of a series of shifts, differed between day and night shifts. Paired t-test showed that levels of well-being were lower at the start of a series of day shifts (M = 7.91) when compared with levels of well-being at a free morning before a series of day shifts (M = 8.36; t(22) = 1.88, p = 0.037). Levels of well-being at the start of a series of night shifts (M = 8.13) did not differ significantly from levels of well-being at a free evening before a series of night shifts (M = 7.90; t(22) = −1.19, p = 0.13). Our first hypothesis received support.

There was no significant decrease in well-being during the first day shift (Start M = 7.91, End M = 7.78, t(22) = 0.19) or the second day shift (Start M = 8.17, End M = 7.83, t(22) = 1.49, p = 0.08). There was a significant decrease in well-being during the third day shift (Start M = 8.29, End M = 7.67, t(22) = 4.00, p < 0.001). Post-hoc analysis revealed that the significant decrease in well-being during the third day shift is more attributable to the relatively high score of well-being at the start of the shift than to a low level of well-being at the end of the shift. The level of well-being at the start of the third day shift was significantly higher (t(22) = −1.95, p = 0.032) than the level of well-being at the start of the first day shift whereas the level of well-being at the end of the first day shift did not differ from that at the end of the third day shift (t(22) = 0.57, p = 0.29). During all night shifts, levels of well-being significantly decreased (First night shift: Start M = 8.13, End M = 7.67, t(22) = 1.71, p = 0.05; Second night shift: Start M = 8.22, End M = 8.00, t(20) = 1.92, p = 0.034; Third night shift: Start M = 8.10, End M = 7.44, t(20) = 2.55, p = 0.01). Hypothesis 2a was thus supported for night shifts. It was partly supported for day shifts, as only during the third day shift participants showed a significant decrease in well-being.

Paired t-tests were used to examine Hypothesis 2b. The non-significant decrease in well-being during the first day shift (M = −0.13) did not differ from the significant decrease in well-being during the first night shift (M = −0.46, t(22) = 1.25, p = 0.12), just as the non-significant decrease in well-being during the second day shift (M = −0.34) did not differ from the significant decrease in well-being during the second night shift (M = −0.21, t(20) = −0.44, p = 0.33). Also, the significant decrease in well-being during the third day shift (M = −0.59) did not differ from the significant decrease in well-being during the third night shift (M = −0.66, t(20) = .22, p = 0.42). Hypothesis 2b was not supported because the decrease in well-being during day shifts did not differ from the decrease in well-being during night shifts.


                           Table 5 shows the estimates of the multilevel models for both day and night shifts with well-being at the end of a shift as dependent variable, well-being at the start of the shift, number of flight missions and sleep quality (only for night shifts) as covariates, and workload and distress during shifts as predictors. Model A shows that during day shifts, workload was significantly associated with a decrease in well-being (b = −0.50, p < 0.05). During night shifts, workload (b = −0.27, p < 0.05) and distress during shifts (b = −0.23, p < 0.05) were significantly related to a decrease in well-being. Model B shows that model fit did not decline when the estimates of workload for day and night shifts were considered to be the same (χ
                           2(1) = 1.83, p = 0.18). This suggests that the effects of workload on decrease in well-being during day and night shifts were comparable. Model C shows that model fit did significantly decline when the estimates for distress during shifts during day and night shifts were considered to be the same (χ
                           2(1) = 3.99, p = 0.046). This result, combined with the finding that distress during shifts was significantly related to lower levels of well-being only during night shifts and not during day shifts, suggests that the effect of distress during shifts on the decrease in well-being is stronger during night shifts than during day shifts. Thus, hypothesis 3 did not receive support for workload but was supported for distress during shifts.

It took HEMS pilots more hours to recover after a series of night shifts (M = 19.83, SD = 10.62) than after a series of day shifts (M = 15.13, SD = 8.26, t(22) = −1.99, p = 0.030). Accordingly hypothesis 4 was supported.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study's aim was to examine the effect of a compressed working week with high cognitive and emotional work demands in relation to well-being and recovery within the population of HEMS pilots. Not only is research examining well-being and recovery among HEMS pilots rare, this study also adds to the understanding of the effects of compressed work weeks and demanding work characteristics on well-being and recovery.

In support of our first hypothesis, results revealed that the start of a series of day shifts was more taxing for well-being than the start of a series of night shifts. This finding is in line with earlier research showing that advancing, instead of delaying the body's timing system, is associated with more health complaints (Waterhouse et al., 1997). It also suggests that HEMS personnel could be more fatigued and at risk for accidents at the early start of their day shifts. A reason that employees feel fatigued at a very early-in-the-morning start of the workday is that they sleep less hours in the preceding night (Åkerstedt et al., 2010). Advancing the bedtime in order to sleep 8 h anyway, does not guarantee a good night sleep because most people cannot sleep when they go to bed earlier. The few hours prior to the onset of the nocturnal sleep period has even been referred to as the ‘forbidden zone’ for sleep (Lavie, 1986). During this time period, sleep propensity is markedly reduced due to a wake-promoting signal generated by the endogenous circadian pacemaker (Fuller et al., 2006). An alternative approach could be to postpone the start of the day shifts. Delaying the start of a workday has a strong impact on sleep length, with 70% of the extra time used for sleep (Ingre et al., 2008). However, delaying the start of the day shifts also implies that the end of the night shifts needs to be delayed which might increase levels of fatigue at the end of the night shifts. Against this background, it could be considered to start day shifts somewhat (but not much) later, for example at 7.00 AM instead of at 6.30 AM. It cannot be recommended to start day shifts earlier than 6.30 AM.

Our second hypothesis was partly supported. HEMS employees did report a significant decrease in well-being during their night shifts and during the third day shift. This finding, combined with findings from earlier shift research (Folkard, 1997; Smith et al., 1998; Rosa, 1995), suggests that, especially during night shifts, HEMS employees could be more fatigued at the end of a shift which could reduce performance and increase the risk of accidents. The decrease in well-being during the third day shift is mainly attributable to the relatively high well-being score at the start of that shift. Possibly this increase in well-being could be due to the adaptation of the body's timing system to the earlier wake times which made it easier for HEMS employees to go to sleep and get up early. Although night shifts did cause a significant decrease in well-being during all three shifts, the decrease in well-being was not significantly higher than during day shifts. This finding is not in line with previous research that consistently showed the higher burden of night shifts when compared to day shifts (Costa, 1996). An explanation for this paradox could be the opportunity of HEMS pilots to sleep during night shifts when they are not called-upon. Power naps during night shifts have been shown to partially off-set the negative effects of night work (Tucker, 2003). Even though the decrease in well-being during shifts did not differ between day and night shifts, after-effects did differ. The results with respect to our fourth hypothesis showed that it took HEMS pilots a longer time to recover from a series of night shifts than from a series of day shifts. As Effort-Recovery theory posits that health is at risk when recovery is slow and incomplete (Meijman and Mulder, 1998), it is possible that in the long run this longer recovery time caused by demanding night work is a risk factor for ill health.

In line with our expectations and previous research (Zohar et al., 2003), distress during shifts was more strongly related to a decrease in well-being during night shifts than during day shifts, even though levels of distress during night shifts were actually lower than during day shifts (see Table 2). Other occupations such as nurses or police officers face emotional demands during the night as well. These results suggest that these nightly emotional demands might cause a higher burden for them too. Future research could examine whether these results apply to other service sector occupations as well, and how such differential effects on well-being during day and night shifts emerge.

HEMS pilots reported low levels of distress during their shifts even though they are regularly confronted with emotionally demanding situations such as driving accidents (Blau et al., 2012). It is possible that their demanding work causes a selection for more resilient or hardy persons (Semmer, 2003), in other words, contribute to a healthy worker effect (Shah, 2009). It is also possible that HEMS employees learned to cope with emotional situations, for instance, by withdrawing from the trauma scene as they themselves do not need to give medical assistance. Future research could examine whether such person characteristics or behaviors are related to these low levels of distress.

A strength of this study is that our sample covered almost the entire population of HEMS pilots in the Netherlands. Nearly all HEMS employees agreed to participate and there was no attrition: none of the participants dropped out during the study. In addition, the response rate was about complete with 99% completed questionnaires. This low level of attrition is probably due to the proper introduction of the study, and also to the short and user-friendly questionnaires that we designed with unambiguous and straightforward items to measure our constructs. The limited selection bias and the absence of attrition support the validity of our results. Another strength is that we also measured well-being during free time. Effort-recovery research presupposes adequate data collection during work, as well as before and after work, and we did not restrict the measures of well-being to the series of shifts. Finally, our data collection period covered a substantial part of the year. This makes it unlikely that our results were influenced by specific holidays or weather conditions.

Research in applied psychology is challenging and complex, because researchers have limited control over the research conditions in natural settings (Griffiths, 1999), and we too had to make some concessions in designing our study. To minimize the interference with daily and nightly working life we limited our measurement method to self-reports. Data triangulation, for example, the combination of self-reports with biological measures of stress or valid measures of performance, for example, standardized tests of executive functioning, would be a means to further improve the knowledge about the effects of shift work. Another limitation is that, in our measure of distress during shifts, we did not disentangle the ‘objective’ and ‘subjective’ experience of distress during the shifts (see also Kompier, 2005). Because we asked participants to report their subjective experience of distress during the shifts, we cannot conclude to what extent the actual distressing events affected well-being, or whether also other factors were involved influencing the perception of distress such as job satisfaction. We also could not fully counterbalance the sequences of the series of day and night shifts. Nine pilots completed their measurements starting with a series of night shifts followed by a series of day shifts, whereas 14 pilots started with a series of day shifts followed by a series of night shifts. However, it is unlikely that the sequences of shifts have influenced our results because there was at least three free days between the series of shifts, making it improbable that there were spillover-effects from one series of shifts to another. A last limitation is that our cut off point (>M − 0.5 SD) for considering pilots to be recovered was somewhat arbitrary. However, when a stricter cut off point was used in a sensitivity analysis (>M − 0.25 SD), the results remained the same. It still took pilots a longer time to recover from night shifts than from day shifts (Day shifts: M = 17.22, SD = 10.12; Night shifts: M = 22.24, SD = 13.20; t(22) = −1.80, p = 0.044).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study was one of the first to examine the effects of a compressed working week with high cognitive and emotional demands in relation to recovery and well-being among HEMS pilots. Their relatively high levels of well-being suggest that they feel competent to do their job even in the face of demanding work characteristics. Although general levels of well-being were high, day and night shifts had differential effects on well-being. When compared to a free morning, well-being was lower at the start of the series of day shifts, possibly due to sleep deficit. In general, compressed work weeks with demanding work characteristics caused the highest burden during the night. Each night shift caused a significant decrease in well-being, subjective sleep quality decreased during the series of night shifts and it took a longer time to recover from a series of night shifts. In addition, distressing shifts caused a higher decrease in well-being during night shifts than during day shifts. It is concluded that from an occupational health and performance perspective, it would not be warranted for HEMS employees to start earlier during day shifts, or to have longer series of night shifts. It is also important to guarantee enough recovery time after a series of night shifts.

There were no conflicts of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The research was supported by a grant of The Netherlands Organization of Scientific Research (NWO Grant 400-08-048). We thank Fanne Taken for her dedicated help in collecting the data for this study. We also would like to thank Pieter van Groenestijn and Pierre Souren from the Radboud University for helping in digitalizing the diaries and analyzing the data sets.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

