@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Can a glass cockpit display help (or hinder) performance of novices in simulated flight training?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Flight naïve participants performed more poorly with a simulated glass cockpit display than a traditional flight display.


                        
                        
                           
                           This was largely the case irrespective of whether they had previous experience with the glass cockpit display or not.


                        
                        
                           
                           Participants preferred the glass cockpit display and associated it with better performance.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cockpit displays

Flight performance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The analog dials in traditional GA aircraft cockpits are being replaced by integrated electronic displays, commonly referred to as glass cockpits. Pilots may be trained on glass cockpit aircraft or encounter them after training on traditional displays. The effects of glass cockpit displays on initial performance and potential transfer effects between cockpit display configurations have yet to be adequately investigated. Flight-naïve participants were trained on either a simulated traditional display cockpit or a simulated glass display cockpit. Flight performance was measured in a test flight using either the same or different cockpit display. Loss of control events and accuracy in controlling altitude, airspeed and heading, workload, and situational awareness were assessed. Preferences for cockpit display configurations and opinions on ease of use were also measured. The results revealed consistently poorer performance on the test flight for participants using the glass cockpit compared to the traditional cockpit. In contrast the post-flight questionnaire data revealed a strong subjective preference for the glass cockpit over the traditional cockpit displays. There was only a weak effect of prior training. The specific glass cockpit display used in this study was subjectively appealing but yielded poorer flight performance in participants with no previous flight experience than a traditional display. Performance data can contradict opinion data. The design of glass cockpit displays may present some difficulties for pilots in the very early stages of training.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Glass cockpit avionics first started to appear in light aircraft towards the end of the twentieth century as non-certified systems installed in amateur-built aircraft (NTSB, 2010). They were then formally introduced into Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)-certified light aircraft by the Cirrus Design Corporation in 2003 (NTSB, 2010). The glass cockpit displays quickly became standard equipment for the Cirrus Design Corporation and eventually other manufacturers including Piper, Cessna and Mooney followed suit (NTSB, 2010). By 2005, even basic training aircraft such as the Cessna 172 and Piper Cherokee were shipped with glass cockpits as options (McDermott, 2005). The majority of customers opted for the glass cockpits over traditional dials, while customers purchasing the newest general aviation aircraft (e.g. Diamond DA40; Cirrus SR20) are no longer given the option (McDermott, 2005).

The glass cockpit replaces the traditional electro-mechanical cockpit dials (altimeter, airspeed indicator, turn and bank indicator, vertical speed indicator, attitude indicator and heading indicator) with two large (6′–10″) LCD screens; the primary flight display (PFD) and the multifunction display (MFD). The PFD displays all of the information provided by the separate dials found in the traditional cockpit. Most notably, altitude and airspeed information are conveyed by moving vertical tapes instead of circular dials. Electronic displays were first developed for military aircraft starting with the F-18 (Liggett, 2010). The differences between the conventional ‘six pack’ of electro-mechanical instruments and the electronic display can be seen in Figs. 1 and 2
                     
                     . These changes represent a major alteration in general aviation aircraft design with important human factors implications (Smith, 2008).

Whilst these new electronic displays have generally been greeted with enthusiasm by commercial and military pilots (Hopkins, 1992) concerns have been raised about the potential for attentional capture by large, visually compelling displays. Some eye-movement data obtained from pilots flying an Airbus A330 simulator showed that much (35%) of the pilot's attention was focused on the PFD compared with the navigation display (18%) and other areas (Anders, 2001). Most research on the ‘glass cockpit’ however has been concerned with the human factors of the associated automated systems (e.g., Sarter and Woods, 1995; Baxter et al., 2007) and advanced display technologies such as head-up displays (HUDs), helmet mounted displays (HMDs) and synthetic vision systems (Liggett, 2010; Schnell et al., 2004).

A preliminary study (NTSB, 2010) found that between 2002 and 2008 light single-engine aircraft equipped with glass cockpit displays experienced higher fatal, but lower total, accident rates, than the same aircraft types fitted with traditional cockpit displays. Accidents involving aircraft equipped with traditional cockpit displays were more likely to be linked with shorter flights, instructional flights and two-pilot operations. In contrast, accidents involving glass cockpit equipped aircraft were more likely to be associated with longer flights, instrument flight plans, personal business flights and single pilot operations. Furthermore, pilots involved in accidents with glass cockpit equipped aircraft were found to have higher total flight experience and pilot certification than those involved in accidents with traditional cockpit equipped aircraft.

Manufacturers claim that the new glass cockpits are designed to enhance situational awareness and make flying simpler and easier. Pilots tend to agree with these assertions as shown by survey studies (Mitchell et al., 2009). However, few empirical studies comparing pilot performance between glass and traditional cockpits have been published. McCracken (2011) surveyed flight training students who underwent a check flight in a glass cockpit aircraft a semester after a previous check flight in a conventional aircraft. Nearly half (43%) found the glass cockpit aircraft more difficult to fly than the conventional aircraft and over half the students obtained a lower check ride score in the glass cockpit aircraft than in their previous check ride. McCracken (2011) also cites an unnamed study that showed that “students training in glass cockpit aircraft with no prior experience were forced to repeat more lessons and had a greater number of setbacks …than those students who trained in analog cockpit aircraft” (p.6).

Previous research suggests that general aviation pilots may have difficulty with the interpretation of glass cockpit displays leading to diminished situational awareness (Adams et al., 2001). A specific glass cockpit display that pilots find problematic is the vertical tape display used to show airspeed and altitude (Hiremath et al., 2009). Hiremath et al. (2009) examined pilots' unusual attitude recovery performance using either traditional or glass cockpits. The results showed that pilots using the glass cockpit took longer to recover from unusual attitudes than pilots using the traditional cockpit. Hiremath et al. (2009) proposed that in the traditional cockpit the position of the airspeed and altitude indicator needles can be picked out at a glance. In contrast, glass cockpit tape displays do not present the whole data range, so to get an idea of the airspeed or altitude, the pilot has to focus longer on the numerical readout thus, increasing workload and subsequently reducing situational awareness (Hiremath et al., 2009).

Since most current general aviation pilots were trained with older analog displays, it is important to determine what human factors issues these pilots might encounter when they transition to glass displays. At the same time, as many new pilots are now trained on glass cockpits, it becomes equally important to find out what issues these pilots might face when they transition to traditional displays as would be the case of total electrical failure where the pilots would have to rely on the standby traditional instruments alone. It is also likely to be the case for some time to come that many pilots trained on glass cockpit aircraft will be asked to fly older generation aircraft as they build hours in the general aviation (GA) sector.


                     Lindo et al. (2012) compared the performance of low time instrument-rated pilots on a simulated flight flown in either a conventional display simulator (Elite) or a glass cockpit simulator (Frasca). Half of the pilots had received their instrument training in conventional cockpits and half in glass cockpits. It should be noted however that some of those trained in glass cockpits also had up to 40 h instrument time in conventional cockpits. The test flight involved carrying out a simple instrument landing system (ILS) approach. The results showed that performance in the glass cockpit simulator was significantly better overall than performance in the conventional simulator with significant differences in control of airspeed, altitude and glideslope. The authors interpret this to suggest that the transition from glass cockpit back to conventional displays may be especially problematic. Unfortunately the use of two different simulators to test performance; the non-random assignment of subjects to the training conditions, and the potentially confounding effects of pilot experience with both types of display present major threats to the internal validity of these findings.

To address the issues of transitioning between glass and traditional cockpit displays, the present experiment was designed to measure flight performance, situational awareness and workload using both cockpit display types. Participants were given training on a simulated Cessna C172 equipped with either a Garmin G1000 glass cockpit display configuration or a conventional display configuration. Performance was then measured in a criterion flight with either the same cockpit display configuration used in training or a different cockpit display configuration.

Previous work has suggested that traditional cockpit instrument displays may be inherently slightly easier to use than modern glass cockpit displays although this may be moderated by training and experience (Hiremath et al., 2009). Since familiarity with a display also affects its ease-of-use it is predicted that participants will find the glass cockpit displays slightly harder to use but that this will be moderated by previous experience with the same type of display. In other words we expect to find an interaction between display type used in training and that used in the criterion (test) flight on a range of dependent variables including flight performance, situational awareness and workload.

It should be noted that several different manufacturers produce glass cockpit displays for GA aircraft. There are some differences between the primary flight displays (PFDs) produced by different companies that might affect user performance. Despite these differences there are substantial similarities in layout and instrument design (e.g. use of linear-tape displays for altitude and airspeed) that make glass cockpit PFDs as a whole markedly different from conventional cockpit displays. Van west and Lane-Cummings's (2007) observation about the Garmin G1000 glass cockpit that: “It's actually a little more intuitive to read in some ways and a bit harder in others” (p. 249) could also apply to the glass cockpit displays of other manufacturers.

@&#METHOD@&#

The participants were 62 first and second year Psychology students with no previous flight training experience. Participation in this study enabled the students to gain extra credits towards their first or second year Psychology internal grades. There were 18 males and 42 females with a mean age of 20.35 years (SD = 3.32, age range = 18–43). Institutional ethical approval was obtained.

To maximize internal validity we used flight naïve undergraduates with no previous experience of aircraft flight displays. Their exposure and familiarity with both kinds of display was thus completely controlled. Using non-pilots clearly involves a potential trade off with external validity or the ability to generalize the results to the population of licensed pilots. This is a trade-off made in other studies of display use (e.g., Rogers et al., 2012). Given the deficiencies in the existing literature as outlined above the priority was to conduct a valid experimental study comparing the inherent limitations of glass and traditional displays and the costs and benefits of transitioning between them.

The flight simulator was set in a grey fibreglass cabin, with an overhead light and display illumination. The flight simulator was run using the commercially available Microsoft Flight Simulator X (FSX) software with the inclusion of ‘Southern Lakes Adventure: Wanaka and Tekapo’ and ‘Real New Zealand Marlborough’ scenery add-ons (“Godzone Virtual Flight”, n.d.). These scenery updates enhanced the quality and realism of the flight simulator visual graphics by ensuring that the simulated scenery matched aerial photographs.

The simulated aircraft was controlled by Cirrus II precision flight controls (PCATD). These fully functional analog flight controls were analogous to those of a real aircraft featuring all electrical switches, flaps, gear, carb heat, and throttle quadrant, along with a heavy-duty metal yoke. The simulated aircraft was a Cessna 172S as it is the most widely used single-engine general aviation aircraft in New Zealand (Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand, 1999). In addition, Microsoft Flight Simulator X allows the Cessna 172S to be flown using either analog dials or the Garmin G1000 glass cockpit. Not all real G1000 functions (such as advanced engine instrumentation) are available in the FSX simulation (Van-West and Lane-Cummings, 2007).

The glass cockpit or traditional cockpit flight instruments were presented on two 15″ Viewsonic LCD flat panel monitors. The LCD screens had a contrast ratio of 400:1; fine resolution of 1024 × 768; a 75 Hz refreshment rate and 250 cd/m2 brightness. In the glass cockpit condition, both 15″ screens showed a basic Garmin G1000 glass cockpit without synthetic vision technology (SVT™) as used in the Cessna 172 aircraft. The left hand screen (see Fig. 1) showed the primary flight display (PFD), while the right hand screen showed the multifunction display screen (MFD). The PFD presented the basic flight instruments, such as the airspeed indicator, the altimeter, the attitude indicator, heading indicator and vertical speed indicator. The MFD presented a moving map display on the right side and engine instrumentation on the left.

In the traditional cockpit condition, the left hand screen presented the traditional “6 pack” gauges, which included an airspeed indicator, altimeter, attitude indicator, heading indicator, vertical speed indicator and tachometer (see Fig. 2). The right hand screen contained a moving-map GPS to show the required flight route. This was used to keep the navigation requirements between the glass and traditional conditions as similar as possible.

The external view was produced by a high-resolution NEC WT600 short-throw projector. The image was then projected onto a white background to create an image 167 cm by 125 cm located in front of the participant. This image could then be viewed through a glass windshield of the fibreglass cabin. The simulator seat was repositioned for each participant to ensure they could see the entire simulated image through the windshield of the simulator cab.

Flight data were recorded using Burlingame software's Flight Data Recorder version 1.4 (http://www.software.burlingames.com/recorder.php). This software used flight simulator universal inter-process communication (FSUIPC) to record and analyze data directly from Microsoft Flight Simulator X. The recorded data included longitude, latitude, altitude, heading, bank, pitch and indicated airspeed. Each parameter was recorded every second and was presented on a spreadsheet.

The simulated aircraft's longitude, latitude, altitude, heading, bank, pitch and indicated airspeed were recorded once per second. Participants' flight performance was then assessed by measuring flight technical error performances: (1) Heading Deviation Error (HDE) which measures the deviation of the aircraft's actual heading from the designated heading in degrees; (2) Altitude Track Error (ATE) was measured by comparing the aircraft's actual altitude with the instructed altitude in feet, and (3) Airspeed Deviation Error (ADE) which measures the variation between the aircraft's actual airspeed and the specified airspeed in nautical miles per hour (knots).

Workload was measured in two different ways. Perceptions of workload were measured with the widely used NASA-TLX scale (Hart and Staveland, 1988). In addition a secondary task measure known as the concurrent duration production (CDP) method was employed (Zakay and Shub, 1998). This has been previously employed in flight simulator studies involving naïve participants (Rhind and Head, 2004).

At two predetermined intervals during the test flight, the participants were required to complete the CDP task (Zakay and Shub, 1998). For this secondary task, participants were asked to produce a fixed time interval of 17 s (without counting) while flying the plane. The initiation of the task was signaled by a loud beep. Once the estimated 17 s had elapsed they were required to push a button located below the right-hand side of the right LCD monitor. To eliminate the possibility of silent counting, a distracting question (e.g., “what is your middle name?”) was asked during each interval.

A Situational Awareness Global Assessment Technique (SAGAT) questionnaire was used (Endsley, 1995b). This required the test flight to be paused at three predetermined points. During each pause, participants were given six queries about their perceptions of the situation at that time. These queries covered all three components of Endsley's (1995a) definition of situational awareness; perception of data, comprehension of meaning and projection of the near future. To eliminate the possibility of practice effects, each questionnaire contained different queries. The administration of SAGAT is inherently intrusive although studies continue to support its validity compared to non-invasive techniques such as SART (Salmon et al., 2009).

At the conclusion of the test flight a NASA-TLX was given to measure perceived workload. The NASA-TLX is a multidimensional rating procedure that assesses a participant's subjective workload on six 100-point scales related to a different aspect of workload: Mental Demand, Physical Demand, Temporal Demand, Performance, Effort, and Frustration (Hart and Staveland, 1988). Ratings for each subscale were summed and averaged to provide an overall workload score. Prior to completing the NASA-TLX, participants were instructed to ignore any of the effects the secondary tasks may have had on their flight experience.

This was designed to obtain subjective opinions of the cockpit/cockpits used in the flights. Participants were also asked to rate the ease with which they could use different aspects of each cockpit on a six-point Likert-scale e.g., “Estimate your ability to maintain awareness of your aircraft's situation and your surroundings”; “How easy was it to read your altitude using the altimeter” (1 = very easy, 6 = very hard) etc. For those participants who used both cockpits during the experiment, the next section of the post-flight questionnaire required them to indicate which cockpit they preferred (either traditional or glass). In the last section, all participants were required to indicate whether there was anything they did not like about the cockpit or cockpits they used.

The experiment was a 2 × 2 factorial design with two independent variables. The first independent variable was the cockpit display used during training which was either glass cockpit or traditional cockpit. The second independent variable was the cockpit display used during the test flight which was also either glass cockpit or traditional cockpit. Dependent variables included flight control performance, situational awareness, workload and opinions and preferences for the displays.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

As novices with no previous flight training were used it was imperative to provide the participants with a basic understanding of how to fly an aircraft. The basics of flight, flight controls, cockpit layout (Glass or traditional, depending on experimental condition) and weather were all briefly covered in a PowerPoint presentation. Participants were advised to read through the PowerPoint presentation at their own pace (with an experimenter present to answer any questions) with the expectation of a short test to follow. The simple five-item test covered basic use of the flight controls (e.g., “when you pull back on the yoke does the nose of the plane go up or down?”) and identification of the cockpit instruments. All participants passed the test.

After successful completion of ‘ground school’, participants were taken to a separate sound-proof room and seated in the flight simulator. Participants were then given a briefing sheet which included the mission objectives and a map of the flight. Training Flight 1 required each participant to takeoff from a runway and fly near five hot air balloons. To successfully fly near each balloon, the participant had to make a number of banking turns and altitude adjustments. Before a participant could advance to Training Flight 2 they had to successfully fly near each of the five balloons within three attempts or they would be excluded from the experiment. The software provided an audible ‘beep’ sound whenever the criterion was achieved.

While still seated in the simulator, participants were given a briefing sheet for Training Flight 2 containing the mission objectives and flight map. Training Flight 2 started in the air and required participants to fly through six numbered gates in sequence. Once again the software provided an audible ‘beep’ sound whenever the criterion was achieved.

Training Flight 2 involved a greater degree of difficulty than Training Flight 1 as the gates were closer together, thus requiring steeper turns, climbs, descents and greater use of the throttle. As with Training Flight 1, the experimenter was present for the duration of the flight to ensure that the participants were controlling the aircraft in the correct manner and understood the flight instruments. Before a participant could advance to Training Flight 3 they had to successfully fly through each of the six gates in sequence within three attempts. In total two participants were removed from the study as a result of failing to pass the first two training flights.

After the successful completion of Training Flight 2 participants were given the Training Flight 3 briefing which included the mission objectives, flight map and information on each in-flight measure (CDP task, and SAGAT). The right hand screen showed the aircraft's location and navigational waypoints. These waypoints directed the participants from Woodbourne airport (NZWB) towards Picton airport (PCN). Participants were also instructed to take-off and climb to 2000 feet, while maintaining an airspeed of approximately 80 knots and then to level out and maintain an airspeed of 100 knots. After reaching an area of hilly terrain participants were instructed to descend to 1500 feet while maintaining an airspeed of 100 knots.

Due to its similarity to the test flight, Training Flight 3 provided an optimal opportunity to familiarize the participants with the test flight procedures. The CDP task was used once to measure workload and to familiarize participants with the CDP procedure. The flight was paused at a predetermined point to provide the participants with one SAGAT questionnaire containing six queries. Following Endsley and Garland's (2000) recommendations participants were aware that a SAGAT questionnaire would be given at some point. The training flights took approximately 30 min to complete.

Following the flight simulator training flights, participants were taken back to the initial training room to receive another PowerPoint presentation. This PowerPoint presentation provided detailed information on the cockpit to be used in the test flight. Half the participants transitioned from one cockpit to another and therefore were given information on the cockpit that they were not trained on. The other half did not change cockpits between training and test so they received a “refresher” on the same cockpit they were trained on.

Immediately following cockpit transition training, the participants received a briefing for the test flight. Participants were asked to imagine themselves as a search and rescue pilot searching for a downed plane and its survivors. The fictional scenario stated that a small plane carrying 3 passengers had taken off from Queenstown airport on a sightseeing flight around the shores of nearby Lake Wanaka. Partway through the flight, radio contact with the aircraft was lost. Minutes later a temporary emergency beacon signal was picked up indicating that the crash was most likely located somewhere along the plane's original flight path. Unbeknown to the participants, the crash site would be visible by objects on the ground and smoke from a fire.

Participants were instructed to fly along the crashed plane's original planned route, locate the crash site and subsequently relay this information to the experimenter seated on the outside of the simulator. Participants were also told to adhere to specific altitudes and airspeeds in each of the three sections (Climb, Cruise & Descent) of the flight. For example, after takeoff they were instructed to climb out on a specific heading to an altitude of 4,500 ft. This was sufficient to maintain at least 700 ft clearance from terrain. Flight performance data were sampled 30 s after takeoff for 90 s. After flying straight and level for a period, the aircraft was to descend over lowering terrain into the valley where the crash site was located. Flight recorder data were sampled for 2 min of level flight immediately after leveling out and for 90 s after reaching the designated search area. As in the third training flight, participants were informed of the in-flight and post-flight measures during the briefing. The in-flight measures included two CDP tasks and three SAGAT questionnaires which were administered during three predetermined pauses. After the flight, participants were given a NASA-TLX Questionnaire and a specifically created post-flight questionnaire.

@&#RESULTS@&#

If the participant allowed the aircraft to touch the ground post take-off, this was classified as a crash. Crashes occurred in both the cruise and descent phases of the flight. A chi-square test of independence was performed to examine the relation between the display used on the test flight and the number of participants who crashed. The relation between these variables was significant (χ
                        2 = 5.455, df = 1, p = 0.02). Participants were more likely to crash in the test flight while using the glass cockpit (9 crashes) than the traditional cockpit (2 crashes). In comparison, there was no statistically significant difference in the incidence of crashes between those who were trained on the glass cockpit (7 crashes) and those who were trained on the traditional cockpit (4 crashes). Interestingly, far more (50%) than would be expected (25%) of the crashes involved participants trained and tested on the glass cockpit. In contrast far fewer (9%) than expected of the participants trained and tested on the traditional displays crashed.

Participants were given specific airspeed, heading and altitude instructions for each of the three sections (Climb, Cruise, Descent) of the test flight. Flight Technical Errors (FTE) were calculated by measuring how much each participant deviated from these specific instructions. Each section of the flight required participants to maintain a set airspeed. Two sections involved a set heading and one section required a set altitude. Root mean square errors (rMSE) were then calculated from these FTEs. The rMSE values for each applicable flight parameter (airspeed, heading, and altitude) were calculated for each participant for each section of the flight. Those variables that showed significant differences in variance between the experimental groups were transformed with either logarithmic or square root transforms. The reported results are based on the transformed data (where specified) but all descriptive statistics are given using the original raw values.

Values ranged from 2.38 to 42.24 (M = 15.31, SD = 8.3) in the climb; 2.92 to 53.39 (M = 18.28, SD = 11.04) in the cruise, and 5.18 to 36.84 (M = 14.18, SD = 7.26) in the descent. The two-way between-subjects ANOVA performed on raw climb phase airspeed revealed a statistically significant main effect of test display type on flight performance (F(1,56) = 10.0, p = 003, eta2 = .152). Participants were able to maintain the instructed airspeed more successfully in Section 1 of the test flight while using the traditional cockpit (M = 12.12, SD = 7.46) than the glass cockpit (M = 18.5, 7.97).

A two-way between-subjects ANOVA was performed to examine the impact of training and test display type on flight performance, as measured by the square root transformed rMSE of cruise phase airspeed. This analysis revealed a statistically significant main effect of test display type on flight performance (F(1,56) = 11.19, p = 0.001, eta2 = .167). Participants were able to maintain the instructed airspeed more successfully in the cruise phase of the test flight while using the traditional cockpit (M = 14.21, SD = 8.43) than the glass cockpit (M = 22.34, SD = 11.95).

A two-way between-subjects ANOVA was conducted to explore the impact of training and test display type on raw airspeed rMSE values in the descent phase. This analysis revealed a significant main effect of test display type on flight performance (F(1,56) = 5.57, p = 0.022, eta2 = .09). Participants were able to maintain the instructed airspeed more successfully in the descent phase of the test flight while using the traditional cockpit (M = 12.08, SD = 5.7) than the glass cockpit (M = 16.28, SD = 8.09). Moreover, participants who were trained and tested on the traditional cockpit (condition 1) showed the best performance (M = 11.38, SD = 5.07), whereas those who were trained and tested on the glass cockpit (condition 3) showed the worst performance (M = 18.62, SD = 8.58).

Values ranged from 0.28 to 95.85 (M = 15.02, SD = 17.25) in the climb, and 3.63 to 48.74 (M = 13.68, SD = 9.42) in the descent phase. A two-way between-subjects ANOVA was conducted to explore the impact of training and test display type on log transformed climb heading rMSE values. This analysis revealed no significant main effect of training display type or test display or any interaction on climb phase heading rMSE values. A two-way between-subjects ANOVA was conducted to explore the impact of training and test display type on log transformed descent phase heading rMSE values. This analysis revealed a significant interaction between training display type and test display type (F(1,56) = 9.78, p = 0.003, eta2 = .149). This analysis also revealed a significant main effect of test display type on flight performance (F(1,56) = 5.57, p = 0.022, eta2 = .089). Overall performance was worse when using the glass display (M = 15.71, SD = 10.03) compared to the traditional display (M = 11.66, SD = 8.46) in the test flight but this difference was reversed for those trained on the traditional displays (see Fig. 3
                           ).

Values ranged from 24.71 to 992.97 (M = 230.73, SD = 194.69). A two-way between-subjects ANOVA performed on log transformed cruise phase altitude revealed a statistically significant main effect of test display type on flight performance F(1,56) = 4.19, p = 0.045, eta2 = .07. Participants were able to maintain the instructed altitude more successfully in the cruise phase of the test flight while using the traditional cockpit (M = 183.98, SD = 148.76) than the glass cockpit (M = 277.48, SD = 224.64). In particular, those who were trained and tested on the glass cockpit (condition 3) showed much the worst performance (M = 315.3, SD = 226.14).

SAGAT questionnaire data were compared to the actual aircraft and situation data. To be coded as ‘correct’, responses had to be within the following ranges: Heading ± 50° from the actual heading; Airspeed ± 10 knots from the actual airspeed; Altitude ± 150 feet from the actual altitude. The number of correct responses was calculated for each of the three SAGAT questionnaires and summed to give an overall SAGAT total for each experimental condition. SAGAT totals ranged between 2 and 17 (M = 10.63, SD = 2.84). An analysis of the distribution of SAGAT scores showed the data were normally distributed with no outliers greater than three standard deviations away from the mean.

A two-way between-subjects ANOVA showed no main effect of training display type, or test display type and no significant interaction between training display type and test display type on overall SAGAT scores or on scores on Level 1, 2 or 3 scores. However, it is interesting to note that participants who were trained and tested on the traditional cockpit had the highest overall SAGAT scores (M = 11.12, SD = 2.35), whereas those who were trained and tested on the glass cockpit had the lowest overall SAGAT scores (M = 9.40, SD = 2.74).

At the conclusion of the test flight each participant completed one NASA-TLX questionnaire. The NASA-TLX questionnaire required participants to score six questions concerning the mental, temporal, performance, effort, physical demands and frustration levels of the flight on a 100-point scale. Ratings for each subscale were summed and averaged to provide an overall workload score for each participant in each of the four experimental conditions. Scores ranged between 33.33 and 83.33 (M = 56.43, SD = 10.94). The NASA-TLX score data were normally distributed with no outliers.

A two-way between-subjects ANOVA showed no main effect of training display type or test display type on NASA-TLX scores. Furthermore, there was no significant interaction between training display type and test display type. However, participants who used the glass cockpit in the test flight had a slightly higher mean workload score (M = 57.99, SD = 11.76) than those who used the traditional cockpit (M = 54.85, SD = 10.03).

An average time discrepancy for both CDP tasks was calculated to give a total CDP value for each participant. One outlier greater than three standard deviations away from the mean was removed from the data set. A two-way between-subjects ANOVA showed no main effect of training display type or test display type. Moreover, there was no significant interaction between training display type and test display type.

A series of paired-samples t-tests were performed to examine whether there was a significant difference between the ratings given to the glass and traditional cockpits over each of the five Likert-scale questions. Participants rated the glass cockpit as requiring significantly less mental effort to use (M = 4.47, SD = 0.97) than the traditional cockpit (M = 4.97, SD = 1.12; t (29) = −2.715, p = 0.011). They also rated the glass cockpit altimeter as significantly easier to read (M = 2.27, SD = 1.23) than the traditional cockpit's altimeter (M = 3.67, SD = 1.21; t (29) = −4.232, p = 0.0001) and the glass cockpit's airspeed indicator as significantly easier to read (M = 2.23, SD = 0.89) than the traditional cockpit's airspeed indicator (M = 3.03, SD = 1.32; t (29) = −2.766, p = 0.01).

The ratings of ability to maintain awareness and perception of aircraft's orientation showed the same trend but were not significantly different between the glass and traditional cockpit. For the 30 participants who experienced both cockpits during the experiment two-thirds (20) preferred the glass cockpit to the traditional cockpit. In response to the question: “is there anything you did not like about the glass cockpit?” 37% of participants responded ‘yes’ and 63% responded ‘no’ compared with 67% responding yes to the same question regarding the traditional cockpit.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The performance of flight naïve participants was significantly worse on the simulated Garmin G1000 glass cockpit aircraft than the simulated traditional cockpit aircraft. Both the number of crashes and deviations from target airspeed, heading and altitude were greater when flying the glass cockpit. Previous training made little difference except in the accuracy of flying the heading in the third (descent) stage of the flight where prior training on the conventional cockpit displays negated the negative performance effect of the glass display in the test flight. There were no statistically significant differences between the glass and traditional cockpits in situational awareness or workload. From the subjective data obtained in the post-flight questionnaire, there was a clear preference for the glass cockpit over the traditional cockpit. Participants rated the glass cockpit as superior to the traditional cockpit on every question. The glass cockpit was perceived as the most awareness-enhancing, the least mentally demanding, the easiest to interpret, and had the fewest disliked features.

Participants using the glass cockpit had more difficulty maintaining the instructed airspeed heading and altitude. Traditional cockpits present airspeed and altitude on circular analog displays, whereas glass cockpits present airspeed and altitude on linear tape displays. Besides the obvious differences (analog vs. digital and circular vs. vertical) both airspeed and altitude indicators vary in another aspect. Hiremath et al. (2009) proposed that the position of traditional cockpit airspeed indicator needles were easier to pick out at a glance due to the whole data range being visible. In contrast, tape displays as used in the glass cockpit do not present the whole data range so to get an idea of the airspeed or altitude the pilot has to focus longer on the numerical readout. Glass cockpit altimeters use a fixed pointer to show only a relevant portion of the display scale and the scale moves when necessary. More specifically, higher altitudes are shown at the top of the display and the scale moves downwards to indicate increasing altitude. Presenting higher altitudes at the top of the scale supports the notion of pictorial realism, however a downward scale movement to represent increasing altitude violates the principle of the moving part (Roscoe, 1968).


                     Tole et al. (1982) suggest that the conceptual transformation of digital data to an analog representation will result in longer visual fixations and processing time and may increase the probability of error. The detrimental effects of increased duration of visual fixations have been demonstrated by Williams (2002) and Snow and French (2002) while assessing the highway-in-the-sky (HITS) instrument display. These studies showed that pilots increased their gaze time towards the HITS instrument display at the cost of monitoring other instruments and their immediate surroundings, thus reducing situational awareness. This increase in visual fixations was assumed to result from the cognitively capturing nature of the HITS display. In contrast, Beringer and Ball (2001) found no differences in dwell time between a head-down highway-in-the-sky (HITS) display and conventional instrumentation. The use of a head-up display (HUD) however was shown to affect dwell time on primary flight instruments and looking outside the cockpit.

It is possible that the glass cockpit altimeter in the present study may have led to an increase in visual fixations limiting the time available to monitor other instruments and the surrounding terrain. The accuracy of this speculation could be determined with the use of eye tracking equipment to identify which (if any) instruments are particularly capturing or under viewed (Beringer and Ball, 2001; Van de Merwe et al., 2012).

Although the analyses of workload and situational awareness did not reveal any significant effects, they did reveal a similar trend to that found in the flight performance and crash data. Participants who were trained and tested on the glass cockpit had the lowest levels of situational awareness and highest subjective workload, whereas participants who were trained and tested on the traditional cockpit had the highest levels of situational awareness and lowest subjective workload.

A potential explanation for the weak training display findings could be the restricted training time participants received. In real-world situations, pilots are trained for months, if not years, on one particular cockpit allowing a pilot to become very familiar and accustomed to that particular cockpit. Typically, pilots will not transition between traditional and glass cockpits until receiving their private pilot license requiring at least 50 h of flying. The training received in the present experiment, therefore may simply not have been long enough to elicit a substantial training effect. Although training can compensate to some extent for inherent deficiencies in design (O'Hare and Stenhouse, 2009) it is important that designers be aware that this is the case.

Another potential reason for the weak training display findings could be the age of the participants. Wiener (1985) suggested that younger pilots are able to adapt to advanced technology faster due to greater familiarity with computers. The participants used in the present experiment had a mean age of 20.35 years, which would certainly include them in this “younger pilot” bracket. Therefore, the transition from traditional to glass displays in the present study may not have been as detrimental as previously predicted due to the age of the participants in the study.

The strong preference for the glass cockpit over the traditional displays represents another example of the ‘preference performance dissociation’ often found in human factors research (Andre and Wickens, 1995). The key factor may have been the role of color in the glass cockpit displays as users have been found to prefer color displays even where the use of color confers no performance advantages (Reising and Calhoun, 1982). The use of bright, saturated colors in high-contrast displays are viewed positively (Sanders and McCormack, 1987) and may have contributed to the appeal of the glass cockpit displays used in the present study.

The present results are consistent with the findings of much less well-controlled field studies (e.g. Lindo et al., 2012; McCracken, 2011) of qualified pilots. Taken together the studies suggest that marketing hype should not obscure potential human factors issues with the presentation and use of flight information in electronic formats on the PFDs of ‘glass cockpit’ equipped light aircraft. Human factors studies of flight displays have been conducted since the 1950s but the new glass cockpits provide an additional layer of complexity as the displays are rendered electronically in vivid color, increasingly with the option of adding terrain information onto the PFD. Whether the earlier findings (e.g. round displays versus linear tape displays) can be generalized to these modern formats is an open question. The introduction of glass cockpit displays into the light GA fleet represents one of the most significant design changes in decades. The need for well-designed research into the associated performance issues is clear.


                     Campbell and Stanley (1963) point out that whilst problems of internal validity in experimental design can be solved, problems of external validity or generalizability are not logically solvable. They point out that in principle we cannot generalize at all from the specific conditions (participants, tasks, equipment etc) of any study. This is a particularly important issue in human factors research. The use of flight naïve participants in the present study increases the internal validity of the findings but reduces the potential generalizability of the results to pilots in training. The fact that most of our participants were female might also be considered a threat to generalizability to the predominantly male pilot population. We would recommend extreme caution in generalizing the results to the design of flight training curricula for example.

The present study utilized a simulation of the Garmin G1000 ‘glass cockpit’ PFD. Although this is a popular and widely-used model in GA there are differences between different ‘glass cockpits’ just as there are between ‘glass’ and traditional cockpit displays. It is important to note that there is much more to glass cockpit systems than the PFDs that were the focus of the present study. Schvaneveldt et al. (2001) identify the critical issues with modern integrated panel display systems as “what information to display…as well as how to display it” (p. 254). Hamblin et al. (2006), for example, found that a simulated glass cockpit provided much more information to the pilot than a simulated traditional cockpit. However, some of that information became increasingly difficult to access. The authors suggest that as glass cockpits become more widespread in the GA community increasing attention needs to be paid to the usability issues that are uncovered through research.

Future research should further investigate the exact sources of the initial training and transition issues that appear to be associated with training GA pilots on the ‘glass cockpit’. Eye-movement data (Anders, 2001; Van de Merwe et al., 2012) would be a valuable additional source of information to evaluate the hypothesis that the ‘glass cockpit’ displays are inherently more cognitively compelling than conventional instrumentation. More detailed analyses should be conducted on the different designs adopted in different ‘glass cockpit’ displays to determine if there are performance differences between them. Studies should include pilots at various stages of training as well as pilots transitioning back to conventional displays following initial training on ‘glass cockpit’ aircraft.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

