@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of overhead guide sign sheeting materials to increase visibility and safety for drivers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We compared three retroreflective sheeting materials used for overhead guide signs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Diamond Grade sheeting provides the highest sign visibility for drivers at night.


                        
                        
                           
                           We didn't find statistical difference between Diamond Grade and High Intensity.


                        
                        
                           
                           High Intensity is considered an alternative solution for DOTs with limited budgets.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Overhead guide sign

Retroreflectivity

Retroreflective sheeting

Safety

Cost analysis

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Overhead guide sign visibility must increase to improve driver safety on roadways. Two methods increase overhead guide sign visibility: sign illumination and use of retroreflective sheeting materials. This paper compares three types of retroreflective sheeting: Engineering Grade (type I), Diamond Grade (type XI), and High Intensity (type IV). A field experiment was conducted at night using licensed drivers to determine the optimum retroreflective sheeting material that increases sign visibility and legibility. Results showed that, of the three types of retroreflective sheeting, Diamond Grade (type XI) sheeting requires minimum illuminance to be visible, followed by High Intensity (type IV) sheeting. Cost analysis, including labor, maintenance, and material cost components of the three retroreflective sheeting materials, showed that High Intensity (type IV) could increase sign visibility and legibility at night for Departments of Transportation with limited budgets, consequently increasing driver safety on roadways.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Drivers of all ages often experience increased driving difficulties at night compared to daytime driving. Driver-related issues that may affect road visibility include driver's visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, distance judgment, and color discrimination (Lagergren, 1987). Guide signs, which are typically green in the United States, are located along a roadway to notify drivers of destinations and exit information.

According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's (NHTSA) Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS), a total of 32,719 people were killed in motor vehicle traffic crashes in the United States in 2013 (NHTSA, 2014). Although only 25% of all motor vehicle travel occurs at night, approximately 50% of all traffic fatalities occur during nighttime hours (FHWA, 2008).

As required in the 2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (MUTCD), overhead guide signs must be illuminated or retroreflective (FHWA, 2009). In the United States, Departments of Transportation (DOTs) in several states are considering adding external light sources to current overhead guide signs or replacing current signs' sheeting with retroreflective sheeting to increase sign visibility and legibility for drivers at night.

This paper presents results of a field study that evaluated three types of retroreflective sheeting materials used for overhead guide signs: Engineering Grade (type I), Diamond Grade (type XI), and High Intensity (type IV). Sheeting evaluation included cost analysis for the sheeting materials. The objective of this paper was to determine the optimal, most cost-effective retroreflective sheeting that increases overhead guide sign visibility and legibility for drivers, thereby increasing roadway safety at night. The motivation behind this research was to assist DOTs in finding the best choice of retroreflective sheeting materials for overhead guide signs to increase sign visibility and legibility for drivers at night, consequently increasing overall safety on roadways.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

Vehicle travel on United States roadways can be confusing and challenging for all drivers if driving routes are not easily understood or clearly marked, especially if a driver is unfamiliar with the driving location (Amparano and Morena, 2006). This confusion is amplified for drivers 65 years and older, especially if those drivers have cognitive or physical disabilities (Amparano and Morena, 2006). However, engineering opportunities such as sign placement, legibility of sign lettering, retroreflective sheeting, and sign size can enhance a driver's ability to detect signs and comprehend sign messages.

Based on MUTCD of 2009, guide signs must be visible, and legible to allow for suitable driving response time. Desirable attributes for guide signs include high visibility and legibility during daytime and nighttime hours. Legibility is defined as the readability of a specific font, or writing style (Amparano and Morena, 2006).

Reaction time is a measurement of processing speed of the body's central nervous system (Der and Deary, 2006; Madden, 2001). Reaction time can be divided into three components according to occurrence sequence: mental processing time, movement time, and device response time (Green, 2000). Mental processing time, or perception time, is defined as “the time it takes the responder to perceive that a signal has occurred and to decide upon a response” (Green, 2000, p. 196). Movement time requires certain muscle movements when appropriate response to sign information has been determined (Green, 2000). Device response time, which occurs after the responder acts, is mechanical device's required engagement time (Green, 2000). The estimated time required to perceive and read a sign is 0.7 s (Green, 2000), of which 0.5 s is perception time and 0.2 s is movement time, or time required to release the accelerator and depress the brake pedal (Green, 2000).

Retroreflectivity is an optical phenomenon in which reflected light rays are returned in an opposite direction close to the direction from which they originated (Austin and Schultz, 2009). The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) details sheeting materials that can be used to construct retroreflective guide signs. ASTM D4956-11a standard describes 11 types of retroreflective sheeting materials that can be used on traffic signs, categorized into three sheeting categories: Engineering Grade, Diamond Grade, and High Intensity (ASTM, 2011). According to the United States survey, the most commonly used retroreflective sheeting material for overhead guide sign legends is Diamond Grade (type IX, followed by type XI), and High Intensity (types III and IV) sheeting is the most common retroreflective sheeting used for backgrounds (Obeidat et al., 2014).

One advantage of retroreflective sheeting materials is that these materials do not require electrical power because they rely on efficient passive retroreflection of oncoming illuminance from vehicle headlights and luminance reflected back toward the vehicle. Retroreflective sheeting materials for signs beneficially increase sign visibility, especially in high visual “noise” locations (Amparano and Morena, 2006).

The MUTCD (2009) minimum retroreflectivity requirements refer to sheeting types defined in ASTM D4956-11a. A common problem associated with retroreflective sheeting, however, is that even though a particular type of sheeting may initially meet minimum retroreflectivity levels, it may quickly degrade below minimum retroreflectivity levels due to weather or other environmental causes. MUTCD (2009) contains no instructions regarding longevity of sheeting materials used for overhead guide signs. Transportation agencies may overcome the problem of retroreflectivity degradation by using higher performance sheeting. This sheeting have high initial cost but it will retain the minimum retroreflective requirement longer than sheeting with low initial costs, and it will provide a more efficient life cycle cost.


                     Sivak et al. (1981) studied the effect of drivers' age on highway sign legibility at night. They found that older drivers are more likely to demonstrate shorter highway sign legibility distance compared to younger drivers, and consequently have less time to act on highway sign information (Sivak et al., 1981).


                     Zwahlen et al. (2003) performed nighttime field evaluations for four overhead signs using retroreflective overhead sign sheeting combinations (Zwahlen et al., 2003). These sheeting combinations were tested photometrically under low-beam illumination at distances ranging from 200 to 1000 ft. Sheeting material combinations used in this study were: beaded type III legend on beaded type III background, type IX legend on beaded type III background, type IX legend on type IX background, and type VII legend on beaded type III background. Zwahlen et al. (2003) concluded that external lighting of overhead signs can be discontinued if white legend types VII or IX are used on green beaded type III backgrounds. In a study by Bullough et al. (2008), researchers concluded that measured luminance values, calculated luminance contrasts, and visual response values indicate that, in regards to visual performance, unlighted highway signs and new signs constructed from four types of retroreflective sheeting materials are similar to externally illuminated signs (Bullough et al., 2008).

@&#METHODS@&#

Forty-three participants, comprised of 31 males and 12 females, each with a valid driving license, voluntarily participated in the retroreflectivity experiment. Participant's ages ranged from 20 to 81 years. The following information for each participants was collected and included in the statistical analysis as independent variables: age, gender, use of corrective lenses or glasses, date of the participant's last vision check-up, nighttime driving frequency, and participant involvement as a driver in a nighttime accident in the past three years.

An illumination controlling device for vehicle headlights was built in the electrical engineering laboratory at Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas. In this device, a Pulse-Width-Modulation (PWM) headlight dimmer used PWM to dim vehicle headlights to one of 16 brightness levels. Custom fuse-connector cables connected the illumination controlling device, or PWM headlight dimmer module, to the vehicle's electrical system.

To connect the dimmer to the vehicle, the vehicle headlight fuses were be removed and the dimmer's cable was plugged into the empty sockets. When the PWM headlight dimmer was switched on, the current that typically flows to the headlights was routed through the dimmer's power Metal Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistors (MOSFETs), thus replacing vehicle headlight fuses with voltage-controlled switches. The PWM headlight dimmer module was powered by plugging the dimmer module into the car cigarette lighter if headlight fuses were located in fuse boxes in the driver's cabin. If headlight fuses were located in the fuse box under the vehicle's hood, PWM headlight dimmer module power was obtained by connecting the dimmer to the vehicle's battery terminals.

After connecting the PWM headlight dimmer to the vehicle, the user started the vehicle, and turned on the headlights. The user then turned on the dimmer's power switch and powered the headlights by turning the duty cycle select knob located on top of the dimmer.

Three signs in the field experiment were manufactured from the following retroreflective sheeting materials: Engineering Grade (type I), Diamond Grade (type XI), and High Intensity (type IV). These signs were received from the Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT). One retroreflective sheeting type was used for sign backgrounds and legends. Sign letters consisted of an uppercase initial letter and lowercase remaining letters. Uppercase letters were 6 in high and lowercase letters were 4.5 in, as required in the 2009 MUTCD. Series E (Modified) font was used for the signs' legends. The word on the Engineering Grade (type I) sign was ‘Montegut’, the word on the Diamond Grade (type XI) was ‘Montgall’, and the word on the High Intensity (type IV) sign was ‘Mirabeau’. The size of each sign was 5 ft wide and 1.5 ft high. The sign post is shown in Fig. 1
                        .

Retroreflectivity of each sign background and legend was measured using a 920 SEL retroreflectometer. Retroreflectivity values are shown in Table 1
                        . Measured retroreflectivity values of the three signs were in compliance with minimum retroreflectivity values required by ASTM D4956-11a.

The experiment was performed in an open parking lot in October 2013 after 8:30 p.m. to ensure complete darkness. All lights in the nearby church and parking lot were also turned off to ensure darkness. No moon was present, guaranteeing that the only source of light was the test vehicle's low beam headlights. The vehicle used for the experiment was a 2011 Chevrolet Impala from the Kansas State University Motor Pool.

A post to mount the signs during the experiment was designed in the workshop of the industrial and manufacturing systems engineering department at Kansas State University. The post measured 8 ft high from the bottom of the sign to the road surface. The lateral offset for the post was 6 ft from the edge of the driving lane to the nearest edge of the sign. Post height and lateral offset were in compliance with the MUTCD (2009) requirements. Throughout the experiment, the vehicle was stationary at two locations from the sign on the parking lot driving lane: 240 ft and 180 ft.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The PWM headlight dimmer module, which controlled vehicle low beam headlight brightness at 16 levels, was connected to the vehicle fuse box under the vehicle's hood. Front safety light fuses were removed to ensure that the headlights were the only source of illumination while performing the experiment. The sign post was placed on its specified position according to MUTCD (2009) requirements. The field experiment was conducted in 30-min sessions; only one driver was present at the experiment location in each session.

Before beginning the experiment, instructions were given to each participant:
                           
                              •
                              You will be seated in the driver's seat of a sedan vehicle and one of the experimenters will be seated in the passenger seat.

Initially, vehicle headlights will be turned off and then turned on to level 0 of illumination.

You will be asked to read the legend on the sign without stressing your eyes. If you cannot read the word on the sign without stressing your eyes by intentional focusing or squinting, ask the experimenter to proceed to the next level of illumination.

When you are able to see the word on the sign, read it aloud so the experimenter knows you have read the word and the experimenter can record the reading.

This procedure will be repeated for two additional signs.

After the first stage, you will be taken to the other location and the same procedure will be repeated for a total of three signs.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The Minolta illuminance meter measured the illuminance level for each of the 16 brightness levels. To measure illuminance for each brightness level, three positions on the sign legend were selected: the right side, the center, and the left side. At each position, three illuminance readings were taken. For each brightness level, the average of illuminance readings at each brightness level was calculated, as shown in Table 2
                     . The order of signs presented to the participant was randomized.

Participants' visual acuity was not measured prior to completing the experiment. The only exclusion criterion was if the participant informed the experimenter that he/she had a vision problem but did not use contact lenses or glasses to correct the problem. Refining the collected data resulted in 41 participants instead of 43. Data collected from two participants, ages 22 and 37 years old, were dropped because they had vision problems and did not use corrective contact lenses or glasses. For each sign, the frequency of participants reading the signs' legend at each brightness level (knob position of the PWM headlight dimmer) was calculated, as presented in Table 3
                     .

Repeated measures experimental design was used to analyze collected, and statistical analysis of this paper was generated using Statistical Analysis System (SAS®) Software, version 9.4. Satterthwaite approximation for denominator degrees of freedom was selected in the analysis. The first model included all main effects and interactions between explanatory variables. A significance level of 5% was considered. The backward elimination procedure was carried out to remove interaction of the least significant variable or variables until the final model was obtained. Compound-symmetry covariance structure was selected and Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) was considered; small values for AIC were preferred when using a backward elimination procedure to determine significant variables.

Illuminance level on the sign face at the moment at which the participant correctly read the sign's legend was selected to be the response or dependent variable. Illuminance level in this experiment represented the amount of illuminance at the level of the headlights that enabled the participant to read the sign's legend.

Independent variables included participant's use of corrective lenses or glasses (yes and no), date of the participant's last vision check-up (less than 0.5 year, 0.5–1 years, 1–1.5 years, 1.5–2 years, and 2 years or more), participant's nighttime driving frequency (2 times or less per week, 3–4 times per week, and 5–7 times per week), participant involvement as a driver in a nighttime accident in the past three years (yes, and no), vehicle distance from the sign face (180 ft or 240 ft), and sign sheeting type (Sign 1, Engineering Grade; Sign 2, Diamond Grade; Sign 3, High Intensity). Participants' ages and genders were considered as covariates in the statistical analysis, and age was categorized as 20–29 years, 30–39 years, 40–49 years, 50–59 years, and 60 years and above.

Variables such as use of corrective lenses or glasses, time of last vision check-up, nighttime driving frequency, and nighttime accidents in the past three years were nested within the participant in the experimental design. The covariates, age and gender, were also nested within the participant in the experimental design. In the implemented design, all interactions between any two nested variables within the participant were ignored.

Based on SAS Software output, 230 observations were used in analysis instead of 246. The missing 16 observations were cancelled by SAS Software because some participants could not read the sign legend for all 16 levels of illumination controlling device. For the missing values, an illuminance level could not be fitted as a dependent value using the Minolta illuminance meter because the maximum headlight brightness level was obtained at the last knob position.


                        Table 4
                         presents the first SAS Software output for type 3 tests of the fixed effects, including variables' main effects and the two-way interaction between pairs of non-nested variables. As shown in Table 4, some variables' main effects and two-way interactions were insignificant based on a p-value greater than the significance level of 0.05. The next step in refining the model was to perform the backward elimination procedure to determine significant variables. The backward elimination procedure initially eliminated the variable's main effect or two-way interaction with the highest p-value until the final iteration was obtained. The final iteration was the state at which either all variables' main effect or two-way interactions were significant or all two-way interactions were significant.


                        Table 5
                         shows the final iteration of the backward elimination procedure for type 3 tests of fixed effects for the final model. In this output, all two-way interactions were significant and none of the insignificant variables' main effects could be deleted because their components were presented in one of the significant two-way interactions. Based on a 5% significance level, the significant variables' main effects were distance, sign sheeting type, and age in the final model.

SAS Software output of the least square means of the variables' main effect is shown in Table 6
                        . Based on the p-value for all levels of distance and sign sheeting type variables, all levels were significant at 5%. For the age variable, all levels were significant except the (30–39 years) level.


                        Table 7
                         shows differences of least square means of the significant variables' main effects. This analysis was used to compare the levels of each studied variable and to determine possible statistical differences or similarities between pairs of levels.

Three companies provided valuable information regarding cost and lifespan of Engineering Grade, High Intensity, and Diamond Grade retroreflective sheeting materials used in the experiment. Only the cost of retroreflective sheeting material was considered in the analysis; other costs related to overhead guide signs, such as sign sheet metal and other sign fixture component costs, were ignored. Future value of the money was also ignored.

Labor and equipment costs were identical for the three types of retroreflective sheeting during first-time installation and replacement. Labor and equipment costs were assumed to be $200 for each installation or replacement for each sign sheeting type. This assumption was based on the employment of two workers and one bucket truck to replace or install sign sheeting. A 50-year life cycle was considered to include the replacement effect of the three retroreflective sheeting materials during sheeting lifespan. Table 8
                         compares retroreflective sheeting costs. Cost analysis included initial, labor, and maintenance or replacement cost components of each retroreflective sheeting for a 15 ft × 9 ft sign size per lifespan of each sheeting type.

Initial cost and lifespan information in Table 8 were obtained from manufacturers of retroreflective sheeting materials. Sheeting material cost for the 15 ft × 9 ft sign was calculated. The number of sign sheeting replacements or installations in a 50-year cycle was calculated by dividing 50 by the sheeting material lifespan for each sheeting type. The material cost during a 50-year cycle was calculated by multiplying the number of sign sheeting replacements or installations by the cost of the 15 ft × 9 ft sign. The required labor cost in a 50-year cycle was calculated by multiplying labor cost by the number of sign sheeting replacements or installations. The total cost for each sign sheeting during a 50-year cycle was calculated by adding the material cost in a 50-year cycle to the labor cost in a 50-year cycle. The average annual cost was calculated by dividing the total cost during a 50-year cycle by 50. Based on cost analysis results, High Intensity was the most cost-effective sign sheeting.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

At the moment in which the participant correctly read the sign's legend, the illuminance level was selected as the dependent variable for two reasons. First, the experiment was run from two fixed distances from the sign face and the vehicle was at stationary position, thereby eliminating the option of utilizing responses from previous studies, such as legibility distance or reaction time. Second, the primary objective of this experiment was to identify the retroreflective sheeting that increases sign visibility and legibility. Low light from vehicle headlights produced low illuminance on the sign; if the participant required less light to read the sign, then the sign sheeting had high retroreflectivity and increased visibility.

In this research, a smaller estimate of variable level resulted in a smaller predicted response, or illuminance level; a smaller illuminance level proved that the participant required less light from the vehicle headlights to read a sign's legend. According to Table 6, a comparison of sign sheeting level estimations revealed that the smallest level estimate was for Sign 2, or Diamond Grade (type XI) sheeting, with an illuminance value of 0.04323, meaning that Diamond Grade (type XI) sheeting required less illuminance or less light from vehicle headlights in order to be read by participants. High Intensity (type IV) sheeting had the second smallest estimate value of 0.06078 and Engineering Grade (type I) sheeting had the greatest estimate of 0.09938. The distance variable estimate was 0.06060 at 180 ft, which was smaller than the estimate of 0.07499 at 240 ft. Therefore, participants read the signs' legends at less illuminance when the distance was shorter. For the age covariate, although the age category of 30–39 years was not significant, the estimate of that group was 0.007472, which was the smallest estimate, meaning that participants of this age required the smallest amount of light to read the signs' legends. Data related to the participants of this group were revisited for further investigation and explanation. A total of 10 participants were in the 30–39 years group, and all participants had performed vision tests within a short period before the experiment. For example, three of the participants had vision tests two months before the experiment, four had vision tests within six months of the experiment, and three had vision tests less than one year before the experiment. Because all participants in this age level had recently performed vision tests, their vision was corrected when they participated in the experiment, unlike other groups. Nighttime driving frequency of all participants in the 30–39 years group was in the same frequency category as daily driving. These two factors may explain why participants in this age group were able to read signs with less illuminance. The age levels that ranked next based on estimate value were 20–29 years, 60 years and above, 50–59 years, and 40–49 years. The lower estimate of age level indicated that participants in that age level were able to read the sign with less illuminance (less light), meaning that the sign had high retroreflectivity and high visibility and legibility.

Comparison of the three signs excluding age and distance revealed a statistical difference between the following pairs of signs: Engineering Grade (type I) and Diamond Grade (type XI) with p-value less than 0.05, and Engineering Grade (type I) and High Intensity (type IV) with p-value less than 0.05. A comparison of Diamond Grade (type XI) with High Intensity (type IV) revealed no statistical difference because the p-value was greater than 0.05. Statistical differences between pairs of signs were evident because participants' legibility and visibility of the sign legend were affected by the sheeting used and the amount of illuminance on the sign from vehicle headlights. Because no statistical difference was evident between Diamond Grade (type XI) and High Intensity (type IV), both sheetings were determined to have suitable visibility for drivers at night. For distance levels of 180 ft and 240 ft, statistical difference existed because the p-value was less than 0.05, meaning that sign visibility and legibility were affected by vehicle distance from the sign.

Statistical differences were found between the following age pairs: 20–29 and 30–39, 30–39 and 50–59, and 30–39 and 60 and above. A difference in sign legibility was present because the p-value of those age pairs was less than 0.05. For those three pairs of age levels, the 30–39 years level was covalent. As described previously, participants in that group demonstrated increased visibility and legibility for sign legends compared to other age levels. Therefore, visibility of sign legends depends on participant age.

Comparison of participants in the 60 years and above level with the other age levels did not show any statistical difference, with the exception of participants aged 30–39 years. A possible explanation for this could be that older participants who suffered from vision problems used corrective lenses or glasses to obtain healthy vision, thereby making their vision comparable to younger participants' vision.

Participant frequency data at each brightness level of vehicle headlights, as shown in Table 3, was considered to support statistical analysis. Based on Table 3, the legend of the Diamond Grade (type XI) sheeting was read by all participants at 180 ft and 240 ft. For the Engineering Grade (type I) sheeting, 11 participants could not read the legend at 240 ft and one participant could not read the legend at 180 ft. For the High Intensity (type IV) sheeting, four participants could not read the legend at 240 ft. Therefore, visibility and legibility of the Diamond Grade sign was optimal even though sheeting on the three signs had identical illuminance levels at each of the 16 lighting intensities.

At 180 ft, the highest frequency of human participants reading the legend of the Diamond Grade (type XI) sheeting occurred at knob positions 3 and 4, totaling 27 participants with an illuminance average of 0.035 lux. At 240 ft, the highest frequency occurred at knob positions 4, 3, and 5 in sequence for a total of 29 participants with illuminance average of 0.037 lux. Because only four participants could not read the High Intensity (type IV) sheeting legend at 240 ft, as compared to 11 participants who could not read the legend on the Engineering Grade (type I) sign at 240 ft, the High Intensity (type IV) sheeting visibility was better than Engineering Grade (type I) sheeting visibility. In addition, the highest frequency of human participants who read the legend of the High Intensity (type IV) occurred at knob positions 4, 5, 3, and 6 in sequence totaling 32 participants with illuminance average of 0.05 lux at a distance of 180 ft distance. At 240 ft, the highest frequency occurred at knob positions 4, 5, and 6 in sequence for 24 participants with an average illuminance level of 0.05 lux. For Engineering Grade (type I) sheeting, the highest human participants' frequency at 180 ft occurred at knob positions 5, 7, 6, and 4 in sequence for 25 participants with illuminance average of 0.065 lux. At 240 ft, the highest frequency occurred at 240 ft at knob positions 7, 15, 9, and 10 in sequence for a total of 17 participants with average illuminance of 0.14 lux. A comparison of average illuminance values that enabled participants to read sign legends revealed that minimum illuminance values occurred for Diamond Grade (type XI) sign's legend at 180 ft and 240 ft distances, High Intensity (type IV) sign ranked second. These results were consistent with statistical analysis results that stated that Diamond Grade (type XI) required less illuminance than High Intensity (type IV).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Human frequency data collected when participants read legends of tested signs supported statistical analysis results in which Diamond Grade (type XI) retroreflective sheeting ranked first based on increased visibility and legibility at night. High Intensity (type IV) sheeting ranked second, and Engineering Grade (type I) ranked third. Engineering Grade (type I) sheeting is not recommended for use for overhead guide signs. The difference of least square means did not show statistical difference between Diamond Grade (type XI) and High Intensity (type IV) retroreflective sheeting types.

For DOTs with limited budgets, High Intensity (type IV) could be a solution to increase overhead guide signs visibility and legibility at night, thereby increasing driver's safety on roadways.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Authors gratefully acknowledge the support and generosity of Kansas Department of Transportation (K-TRAN: KSU-11-6) for supporting this research, without which the present study could not have been completed.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

