@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Intense illumination in the morning hours improved mood and alertness but not mental performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           High intensity illumination negatively impacted sustained attention.


                        
                        
                           
                           Melatonin suppression was not altered as a result of the brief bright light exposure.


                        
                        
                           
                           Bright light induced an increase in subjective mood and alertness, which dim light did not.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Sustained attention

Bright light exposure

Melatonin

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Cognitive performance and alertness are two determinants for work efficiency, varying throughout the day and depending on bright light. We conducted a prospective crossover study evaluating the impacts of exposure to an intense, early morning illumination on sustained attention, alertness, mood, and serum melatonin levels in 33 healthy individuals. Compared with a dim illumination, the intense illumination negatively impacted performance requiring sustained attention; however, it positively impacted subjective alertness and mood and had no impact on serum melatonin levels. These results suggest that brief exposure to bright light in the morning hours can improve subjective measures of mood and alertness, but can also have detrimental effects on mental performance as a result of visual distraction. Therefore, it is important that adequate lighting should correspond to both non-visual and visual demands.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

With its increasing economic and social demands, the Western world has developed more and more into a meritocracy, desiring the optimum in almost every aspect of life, no matter the time of day or night, demanding top performance and productivity, particularly in the working sector. Many factors, such as fatigue and the duration and quality of sleep, account for the quality of work performance. Excessive sleepiness is one major cause of sleep-related errors in tasks requiring cognitive performance (Haavisto et al., 2010) and accounts for many accidents in driving professions (Braeckman et al., 2011). Selective attention contributes to mental performance and is therefore decisive for work efficiency (Spaeth et al., 2012) and safety (Rajaratnam and Arendt, 2001). In order to adapt to exogenous factors, most endogenous processes vary in a distinct circadian pattern, determining the quality of psychological and physical performance, including performance that requires alertness (Monk et al., 1997; Carrier and Monk, 2000; Wright et al., 2002).

Blue light with 420–480 nm wavelengths has a strong biological impact (Revell et al., 2006) and influences cognitive as well as physical performance (Dollins et al., 1993; Fraschini et al., 1999; Atkinson et al., 2003). Daytime absence of short wavelength light was proven to phase delay sleep onset (Figueiro and Rea, 2010). However, light of long wavelength seems to have stronger effects on brain activity associated with alertness as compared to short wavelength in the afternoon hours (Sahin and Figueiro, 2013). Light acts in the intrinsic photosensitive ganglion cells of the retina through melatonin and its metabolites (Zeitzer et al., 2000), which are strongly involved in the circadian variations of rhythmic physiological systems (Cajochen et al., 2003), as well as performance (Chellappa et al., 2011). Exposure to bright light (BL) causes cognitive and behavioural changes not only during the biological night (Lockley et al., 2006), but also during the day (Sahin and Figueiro, 2013). Brief exposure to light enhances thalamic and frontal and parietal activities that affect fatigue (Lockley et al., 2006; Vandewalle et al., 2006, 2007a,b). The extent of the physiological changes depends on whether the light exposure occurs before or after the midday hours (Lockley et al., 2006). Dynamical lighting systems with variations in illumination and colour temperature are proposed to benefit productivity and health (van Bommel, 2006; Hoffmann et al., 2008). BL interventions can be effective for treating depressive disorders, especially seasonal ones (Terman and Terman, 2005); they can also positively affect cognitive (Lockley et al., 2006; Vandewalle et al., 2006, 2007a,b) as well as physical (Kantermann et al., 2012) functions in healthy individuals.

Besides those inputs from the circadian system (light and melatonin level), homeostatic factors, and most importantly, the elapsed time since awakening, must be taken into consideration for day-dependent variations; because circadian factors and homeostatic factors interact strongly with one another (Carrier and Monk, 2000). The time of the start of work and/or the time of awakening determine the amount of perceived sleepiness (Kecklund and Akerstedt, 1995; Braeckman et al., 2011).

Recently it was shown that 1 h of exposure to bright, white light in the morning not only advances sleep and wake-up parameters, but also affects cognitive performance and alertness (Corbett et al., 2012), amending previous research and suggesting that an adequately applied light intervention could positively affect alertness, and thus performance, at work. We hypothesised that a brief, early morning BL intervention would effectively enhance attention, alertness, and mood parameters and, additionally, would cause a decrease in serum melatonin levels.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Via the internet 35 study participants between 18 and 45 years of age with occupations requiring high levels of selective attention from the Tiroler Landeskrankenanstalten (Tilak), the Health and Life Sciences University UMIT, and the Tyrolean Confederation of Marksmen were recruited. None of the participants took medications, had ever worked in shifts, had taken a transmeridian flight in the previous 2 months, or suffered from chronic diseases such as chronic headache, migraine, metabolic disease (diabetes mellitus, etc.), cardiovascular disease (hypertension), renal or liver disease, neurologic disease such as epilepsy, mental or psychiatric disease (depression), sleep disturbances, retinal disease, glaucoma, or cataract.

A prospective, explorative crossover design with a wash-out phase of 7 days was chosen. To control for natural daylight, all our investigations were performed in the winter months (15 November 2009–25 February 2010). All participants were sleeping at their homes, waking up at 6:00 a.m. and arriving at the study location at 7:00 a.m. (Table 1
                        ). During the study period, the sun rose at 07:18 h on 15 November, 07:40 h on 1 December, 08:01 h on 1 January, 07:41 h on 1 February, and 07:07 h on 25 February, thus guaranteeing that the sun had not yet risen at the start of the protocol at 07:05 h. Twice, with an interval of 7 days, each study participant was exposed to light for 30 min starting at 07:40 h. One of the exposures was to BL, and the other exposure was to Dim Light (DL). 17 of the participants were randomly assigned to receive the BL exposure first, followed by the DL exposure 7 days later, and the other 16 participants were assigned to receive the DL exposure first, followed by the BL exposure 7 days later. Identical experimental procedures on both days of exposure were applied (Table 1).

Exposure to bright light (BL) was performed in a light cabin having the following light specifications at eye level: the cabin was equipped with fluorescent lamps with a maximum horizontal and vertical light intensity of 5000 lx, a colour temperature of 6500 K and a maximum environmental luminance of 1500 cd/m2. A detailed description of the light device and BL protocol can be seen in Leichtfried et al. (2010). BL exposure was chosen according to pertinent recommendations of BL therapy for seasonal affective disorders (Terman and Terman, 2005). As a result of the innovative light setup used in the study at hand duration and intensity of BL exposure could be diminished (Leichtfried et al., 2010).

Specification of the dim light setup (DL) was chosen according to a conventional office illumination. Study procedures of the DL setup were performed in an office equipped with fluorescent lamps from ceiling luminaire with a light intensity of 400 lx, a correlated colour temperature of approximately 4000 K at eye level, and a luminance of 850 cd/m2.

Sustained attention was the main outcome parameter which was assessed directly after the light exposures using a part of the Vienna Test System® (sustained attention test, version S3, Dr. G. Schuhfried Ltd., Moedling, Austria) given on a computer workstation. Identical workstations were used for all computer based tests (Toshiba laptop, TECRA S10-143). After receiving instructions on the display, the study participants spent a total of 35 min performing a number of time-critical trials: one row of seven white triangles (with 150 cd/m² luminance) appeared on the dark display (with 10 cd/m² luminance), the tips of the triangles pointing either upwards or downwards; whenever a certain number of triangles pointed downwards, the participant pressed a green-coloured button on the keyboard. The accuracy (number of right/false reactions) and speed of the participants' reactions (reaction times during right/false reactions) were recorded. Cronbach's alphas for the test are r = 0.98 for the number of correct reactions and r = 0.97 for the number of false reactions. Norm samples of 302 persons and a sample of 369 neurologic patients are given.

The chronotypes of the participants were evaluated at the beginning of the study using the Morningness–Eveningness Questionnaire (MEQ) (Horne and Ostberg, 1976), a self-assessment instrument consisting of 19 multiple-choice questions which are combined to form a composite score indicating the degree to which the respondent favours morning versus evening. The Cronbach's alpha for the MEQ is reported to be r = 0.837 (Rhee et al., 2012).

Before inclusion in the study, each participant took the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Questionnaire (HADS-D) to determine whether they suffered from depression. This self-assessment questionnaire includes seven intermingled items associated with depression, each receiving a possible rating from 0 to 3 points. The Cronbach's alpha for the German version of the HADS-D is reported to be r = 0.81 (Herrmann, 1997).

The study participants completed the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) self-assessment to estimate their quality of sleep. The PSQI has a total score ranging from 0 to 21 and consists of 19 questions subsumed by seven components: sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep duration, sleep efficiency, sleep disturbances, average consumption of soporifics, and daytime fatigue. Total scores from 0 to 5 are considered ‘healthy sleep’, those from 6 to 10 are considered ‘bad sleep’, and greater than 10 are considered ‘chronic sleep disorder’.

To indicate subjective mood and subjective fatigue and sleepiness, the study participants chose a number on an 11-point visual analogue scale ranging from 0, for ‘absolutely not tired’ or ‘very bad mood’, to 100, for ‘very tired’ or ‘very good mood’, immediately before and after the light exposures.

Blood samples from each study participant were taken via an antecubital vein at 07:05 h, 09:05 h, and 11:05 h (t0, t1, and t2, respectively) at the Central Institute for Medical and Chemical Laboratory Diagnostics in Innsbruck, Austria to assay serum melatonin using a commercially available radio-immunoassay kit (Buehlmann Melatonin direct RIA, Buehlmann Laboratories AG, Schoenenbuch, Switzerland) with analytical sensitivity 0.84 pg melatonin/mL blood. Briefly, the samples, assay controls, and melatonin human-serum matrix calibrators provided by the manufacturer were incubated with 125I-labelled melatonin and a specific rabbit anti-melatonin antibody for 20 h at 4 °C in polystyrene tubes. Then solid base-bound anti-rabbit secondary antibody was added and the tubes were incubated for an additional 15 min at 4 °C to precipitate the antibody-bound fraction. Next, ultrapure water was added and the tubes were centrifuged for 2 min at 2000g and room temperature, the supernatants were discarded, and 125I activity was detected in the precipitates for 2 min in a γ-counter. Unknown samples were calculated using a standard curve generated by the calibrators. All measurements were performed in duplicate and the data was recorded as pg melatonin/mL.

IBM SPSS Statistics, version 20.0 (Chicago, Illinois) was used for all statistical calculations. The data distribution for skew was tested using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, and, accordingly, non-parametric tests for skew data and parametric tests for the normally distributed data were applied. Results from categorical variables are reported as proportions, continuous variables as medians and interquartile ranges (IQR) or means ± standard deviations (SD). Changes in melatonin courses over time were evaluated with a Friedman ANOVA, and the Wilcoxon test for matched pairs was used to further specify the changes. Change scores (deltas) were calculated to elucidate the differences between the two light situations and a Mann–Whitney U-test was performed for unpaired samples on the scores. t-Test and Mann–Whitney-U-test were used for the evaluation of differences in sustained attention, subjective alertness and mood between the light situations, respectively. One-tailed p-values < 0.025 were determined as the threshold for statistical significance in all our tests and a post-hoc power analysis was performed with G*Power 3.1.7 (Kiel, Germany).

@&#RESULTS@&#

33 (16 male, 17 female) participants with an average age of 33.0 ± 7.2 years were included in the analysis; 1 male and 1 female volunteer were excluded because of restricted vision and chronic sleep disorder (PSQI score 13), respectively. The BMI of the included participants ranged from 16.0 to 34.8; 54.5% (18) of the participants were in the normal weight range, 6.1% (2 females) were underweight or suffering from grade-1 obesity, and 33.3% (11) were slightly overweight. With respect to chronotype, 15.2% (5) of the participants were morning type, 12.1% (4) were evening type, and 72.7% (24) were moderate chronotype. Non-smokers made up 72.7% (24) of our sample. One study participant (3.0%) was left-handed, 31 (96.9%) were right-handed, and one did not specify handedness. The results of the HADS-D indicated that 31 (93.9%) of the participants were not depressed (score < 7) and 2 (6.1%) of the participants had marginal signs of depression (score 8–10).

The results of the PSQI indicated ‘healthy sleep’ for all the participants, with a mean score of 3.8 ± 1.8 for the sample. Subjective sleeping quality was ‘very good’ for 11 (33.3%) participants, ‘quite good’ for 20 (60.6%) participants, and ‘rather poor’ for 2 (6.1%) participants. Twenty-seven (81.8%) participants slept more than 7 h/day, 5 (15.2%) participants slept 6–7 h/day, and 1 (3.0%) participant slept 5–6 h/day in the week prior to the first light exposure. Sleeping efficiency was over 85% among the included participants, and no participants reported taking soporifics in the 4 weeks prior to the first light exposure. Twenty-six (83.9%) participants experienced daytime fatigue never or very rarely, and 5 (16.1%) participants reported some problems with daytime fatigue (no daytime fatigue data for 2 participants).

The numbers of correct reactions were higher after exposure to DL compared with those after exposure to BL (p = 0.005). Likewise, the numbers of false reactions were lower after exposure to DL compared with those after exposure to BL. Table 2
                         shows the details of the sustained-attention parameters. The times for correct and false reactions after exposure did not differ between the two illuminations. The post-hoc power analysis for sustained attention (ΔRR) revealed a power of α = 0.952.

Subjective mood and alertness did not change as a result of the DL exposure; however, the BL exposure resulted in an increase in subjective mood (p < 0.001) and subjective alertness (p = 0.006). Table 2 shows the details of the changes in subjective mood parameters after the light exposures. The change scores (deltas) for alertness were similar in both groups, with a tendency for greater changes in the BL situation (p = 0.029). Subjective mood increased more after the BL exposure than after the DL exposure (p = 0.022).

Serum melatonin levels declined over time following each light exposure, and the rates of decline were higher immediately following the respective exposures than they were after more time had elapsed. Table 3
                         shows the serum melatonin levels before and after each light exposure. There were no significant differences in the respective changes in serum melatonin levels between the BL and DL exposures or between the male and female study participants.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The impacts of brief, early morning exposures to light on sustained attention, subjective mood, subjective alertness, and serum melatonin levels in 33 healthy individuals were investigated. The participants had better sustained attention, scoring a higher percentage of correct reactions, after exposure to DL than after exposure to BL. The subjective alertness and mood of the participants, however, improved after exposure to BL, but not after exposure to DL. The serum melatonin levels of the test participants decreased after exposure to both light intensities, and there was no difference between the two situations in their effects on serum melatonin levels. Thus, the present results do not support our hypothesis that an illumination of higher intensity has stronger effects than an illumination of lower intensity on sustained attention and melatonin suppression. The results at hand do, however, suggest that exposure to BL in the early morning hours positively affects subjective alertness and mood.

BL was not better than DL for enhancing objective measures of cognitive performance, despite its effect on the subjective sensation of alertness. The study participants actually scored better on tests of sustained attention after exposure to DL than they did after exposure to BL. Ocular adaptation mechanisms during the administration of the BL (i.e., the brightness contrast ratio between the monitor and the environment was 1:150 under BL and 1:8 under DL) might have interfered with and masked the possible alerting effects of the BL. Decreased sleepiness was associated with increased attention performance in other studies (Phipps-Nelson et al., 2009; Corbett et al., 2012), contrary to our findings. The increase in performance (vigilance) in previous studies was almost immediate, whereas the decrease in sleepiness was time delayed, implying that the impact of exposure to BL varies according to different physiological pathways (Phipps-Nelson et al., 2009).

In the 1970s, performance, as assessed by simple vigilance and reaction-time tasks, was shown to vary in a circadian pattern, mediated by variations in ‘sleepiness’ (Colquhoun, 1971), correlating negatively with cortisol and melatonin levels (Monk et al., 1997). A recent investigation in the Antarctic winter showed that long-term exposure to light of intensities similar to those in the study at hand was able to phase-advance circadian rhythms and increase performance on single-letter cancellation tests (Corbett et al., 2012). A phase delay was shown when daytime exposure to blue light was missing (Figueiro and Rea, 2010). Another study found that performance was better in the evening than in the morning hours; the authors concluded that attention factors depend more on the time since awakening, whereas higher cognitive functions depend more on the circadian timing system (Wright et al., 2006). Homeostatic conditions did not vary in the present investigation, so levels of sustained attention were expected to be higher after the BL than after the DL. This was not found to be the case, however. There is no doubt that performance strongly depends on circadian and homeostatic factors, but performance rhythms do not seem to be a direct result of those same factors (Carrier and Monk, 2000). The results at hand support this idea by showing that performance on attention tasks varied between the two light treatments; whereas melatonin levels did not.

The present results are consistent with previous studies showing positive effects of BL on subjective mood. Many such studies involve patients suffering from various depressive symptoms and mood disorders (Golden et al., 2005) and generally find that BL is effective in remediating the depressive symptoms and alleviating the mood disorders (Rastad et al., 2011). Other studies have found controversial results suggesting that BL has no effects (Rosenthal et al., 1987; Kasper et al., 1990) or has beneficial effects (Partonen and Lonnqvist, 2000; Kaida et al., 2007, 2012) on mood in healthy individuals. Stephenson et al. (2012) recently suggested that the photopigment melanopsin modulates homeostatic sleep processes, acting in addition to circadian variations, influencing the behavioural factors of light (Stephenson et al., 2012). Furthermore, light impacts the amygdala and the hippocampus, which might explain its impact on mood (Vandewalle et al., 2006). The above shown results suggest that a short exposure to BL, with a light regimen that is comparable to that for seasonal affective disorder (SAD; Lam, 1999), can positively affect mood in healthy individuals. The majority of the study participants did not show any symptoms of depression on the HADS-D test and reported moderately high baseline values for subjective measures of mood (Rastad et al., 2011), stressing the potential impact BL can have on subjective parameters like mood.

The present results suggest that exposure to BL immediately increases alertness, which was similarly shown by Sahin and Figueiro (2010) when brain activity and associated alertness was immediately affected when light of long wavelength was applied in the afternoon hours. Ten days of light treatment also decreased sleepiness in patients suffering from SAD and subsyndromal SAD, the effect lasting more than a month after the treatment ended (Rastad et al., 2011). The results at hand are similar to those of two other recent studies reporting that single, multiple-hour light exposures of 1000 lx and 5000 lx, respectively, were effective in decreasing sleepiness (Ruger et al., 2005; Phipps-Nelson et al., 2009).

Light-induced brain activity quickly vanishes after the light is switched off (Vandewalle et al., 2006), but the exact duration of the activity depends on the cortical region. The non-image-forming (NIF) system in the brain is able to respond to very short light flashes, resulting in changes in EEG delta and sigma waves that correlate with subjective and objective measures of alertness (Zeitzer et al., 2011; Sahin and Figueiro, 2013), possibly accounting for at least part of the increase in subjective measures of alertness found in our study. The present results suggest that light-induced enhancement of alertness, mood, and brain activity does not dissipate immediately.

BL in the study at hand did not alter the habitual diurnal suppression of melatonin levels, representing a notable difference from studies of BL exposure during the dark hours (Arendt, 2010). Melatonin secretion is correlated with light at night, causing, at least in part, the occurrence of cancers related to shift work (Schernhammer and Hankinson, 2005; Viswanathan and Schernhammer, 2009). Its levels generally follow a distinct circadian pattern: high values during the dark hours, a nadir at about 04:00 h, and then a continuous decrease to low daytime levels (Arendt, 2006). Uncontrolled exposure to medium-intensity augmented light during the day increased melatonin secretion during the night in elderly persons (Obayashi et al., 2012). Moreover, sleep onset assessed by melatonin was shown to be delayed as a result of the absence of short wavelength light in the morning hours (Figueiro and Rea, 2010). Light was found to enhance the activity of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in animals, activity involving inhibitory mechanisms that stimulate nocturnal melatonin synthesis (Perreau-Lenz et al., 2003). In the present investigation serum melatonin levels were found to be highest at the baseline at 07:00 h and then decreased significantly at every consecutive sample time, reaching the lowest values, around 2 pg/mL, at 11:00 h.

Variation in melatonin levels among individual test participants was very high at the baseline, which is similar to other reports (Chojnacki et al., 2012). Other studies report differences between women and men in the intrinsic circadian period; for example, Duffy et al. (2011) report a difference of 28 min between women and men in the melatonin phase angle, which is also associated with a difference in core body temperature, resulting in a shorter circadian period (Duffy et al., 2011). The baseline was the only sample time point at which a difference between the sexes was found, with females having higher levels than males.

The study at hand was designed, performing it in the winter months, to minimise the impact of natural light in the morning hours. Artificial light before dawn changed cerebral blood flow, as shown by Positron Emission Tomography, in brain areas strongly involved in attention (Perrin et al., 2004). Some evidence suggests that even very low intensity light impacts on human physiology (Trinder et al., 1996; Zeitzer et al., 2011), a phenomenon which the authors hold at least partly responsible for the missing, but expected, differences in melatonin levels between the high-intensity and low-intensity illuminations. The present results substantiate those of Ruger et al. (2005) who found that intense (5000 lx) light reduced sleepiness without suppressing melatonin levels in individuals with high (nocturnal) and low (afternoon) baseline melatonin levels (Ruger et al., 2005). It is therefore concluded that processes apart from melatonin suppression, such as the activity of certain brain regions like the SCN and the NIF system, play a decisive role controlling sleepiness.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

BL failed to increase objective measures of simple performance or alter circadian melatonin courses in our study. It did, however, have positive effects on subjective measures of perception. These unexpected findings might originate from the limitations of the study, such as the uncontrolled light and sleeping conditions prior to the tests. It was the aim to test the effects of BL in conditions similar to those of every-day life, so the uncontrolled conditions could also be regarded as strength of the study.

We suggest that BL has a negative impact on sustained attention and a positive impact on mood and alertness. In future research, it should be determined what effects ocular disturbances resulting from BL have on performance tests that make demands on the visual system.

Christian Bartenbach is the owner of the company (Bartenbach LichtLabor) that designed the lighting device. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to acknowledge the funding received from the ‘Tiroler Wissenschaftsfond’ (TWF) and the Austrian Funding Association (FFG 823004, project name K-Licht intermediate, P-234).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

