@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Interruptions in the wild: Development of a sociotechnical systems model of interruptions in the emergency department through a systematic review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A review and synthesis of the literature on interruptions in the ED was conducted.


                        
                        
                           
                           Gaps were identified in conceptualizing sociotechnical system factors of interruptions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Although interruption outcomes were noted, few were measured.


                        
                        
                           
                           A sociotechnical model of interruptions in complex settings is presented.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Interruptions

Emergency medicine

Sociotechnical systems

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Interruptions are unavoidable in the “interrupt driven” Emergency Department (ED). A critical review and synthesis of the literature on interruptions in the ED can offer insight into the nature of interruptions in complex real-world environments. Fifteen empirical articles on interruptions in the ED were identified through database searches. Articles were reviewed, critiqued, and synthesized. There was little agreement and several gaps in conceptualizing sociotechnical system factors, process characteristics, and interruption outcomes. While multiple outcomes of interruptions were mentioned, few were measured, and the relationship between multiple outcomes was rarely assessed. Synthesizing the literature and drawing on ergonomic concepts, we present a sociotechnical model of interruptions in complex settings that motivates new directions in research and design. The model conceptualizes interruptions as a process, not a single event, that occurs within and is shaped by an interacting socio-technical system and that results in a variety of interrelated outcomes.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Interruptions are unavoidable in healthcare environments and the “interrupt driven” Emergency Department (ED) is no exception (Chisholm et al., 2000). A critical review and synthesis of the literature on interruptions in the ED offers insight into the nature of interruptions in complex real-world environments, i.e., “in the wild.”

The complexity of the ED provides an ideal environment for examining and understanding interruptions in the wild. Wears and colleagues (2002) describe six environmental features that make the ED particularly complex as compared to other health care settings: 1) an “unbounded” potential for patients, 2) simultaneous evaluation of patients with varying characteristics, 3) high levels of uncertainty, 4) extreme time constraints, 5) lack of feedback regarding level of treatment success, and 6) unpredictable need for risky medical procedure. Although this list is not an exhaustive account of the complexities within the ED, it describes some of the key features that make the ED a particularly complex environment (Wears and Perry, 2002; Walter et al., 2014).

Perhaps due in part to the factors just described, the ED is particularly susceptible to preventable medical errors and adverse events (Wears et al., 2010). However, the specific factors contributing to these high rates of error in the ED are not yet known (Wears et al., 2010). Interruptions may be one such factor, but it is difficult to be sure based on the limited current understanding of the outcomes associated with interruptions in complex environments.

Prior reviews note that few studies capture or conceptualize the nature of interruptions in higher-complexity versus lower-complexity environments (Grundgeiger and Sanderson, 2009; Coiera, 2012; Li et al., 2012; Westbrook, 2014). The bulk of general interruptions research has been conducted in laboratory settings, where work system and interruption process factors are controlled or minimized and where certain outcomes (e.g., distal ones that take hours to occur and actual patient or organizational outcomes) cannot be or are not measured (McFarlane and Latorella, 2002; Hodgetts and Jones, 2006; Altmann and Trafton, 2007; Monk et al., 2008; Cane, 2012, Brumby et al., 2013; Altmann et al., 2014; Blumberg et al., 2014; Foroughi et al., 2014; Sasangohar et al., 2014; Altmann and Trafton, 2015; Drews and Musters, 2015; Foroughi et al., 2015; Werner et al., 2015).

Laboratory studies of interruptions have produced a conceptualization of interruptions that assumes a linear process and a singular interruption event (see Fig. 1
                        ). The typical anatomy of an interruption developed from laboratory research consists of a person working on a primary task and then suspending that task to attend to a secondary task (i.e., the interrupting task) (Altmann and Trafton, 2007; Boehm-Davis and Remington, 2009). The interrupting task may or may not be combined with an alert to the need to suspend the primary task. In this conceptualization, when the interrupting task ends, the person returns to the suspended primary task. Much of the practical concern over and documented detrimental effects of interruptions centers on the resumption of the original task – namely the time it takes to resume the primary task and the likelihood of making an error at the point of resumption.

However, a linear one-task-one-person interruption scenario is rarely the case in health care environments (Wears and Perry, 2002; Karsh et al., 2006; Holden et al., 2013; Carayon et al., 2014; Werner and Holden, 2014). Although laboratory models can be useful for understanding “micro”-level process characteristics and potential impact of interruptions, they have not successfully accounted for interrupted task performance in the complex sociotechnical system environment (Carayon et al., 2006; Carayon et al., 2013; Carayon et al., 2014). For example, in health care delivery settings, and in particular the ED, multiple tasks occur in parallel and often involve multiple care providers, patients and sometimes their families. Interruption begets further interruption until the primary task itself may become unclear or forgotten. Primary and secondary task lines become blurred and the intensity and temporal demand of the environment may only create further layers of complexity. For example, a nurse may be providing discharge instructions to a patient and hear another patient calling for her from the other side of the curtain. Meantime, the nurse is remembering to ask the physician to enter orders that she needs for another patient's pain medication request. She also remembers that she has blood vials in her pocket to finish labeling and send to the lab. Another nurse walks in and asks for help with a challenging patient. At that moment, a code is called and both nurses must assist immediately.

Interruptions have been studied in several health care environments including pharmacies, medication administration processes, surgery, primary care, intensive care units, trauma resuscitation, and a myriad other settings (Grundgeiger and Sanderson, 2009; Rivera-Rodriguez and Karsh, 2010; Magrabi et al., 2011; Li et al., 2012). These studies suggest that interruptions occur frequently, can lead to communication challenges, and are associated with errors in some circumstances (Rivera-Rodriguez and Karsh, 2010). Studies of interruptions in the ED can offer unique insight into interruptions in complex settings because the ED is a prime example of a high-paced, high-volume, low-certainty, multiagent, and dynamic—in short, complex—environment (Cosby and Croskerry, 2009, Nugus et al., 2010; Wears et al., 2010).

Another limitation of the currently available interruption literature is that the focus is on the interruption process, to the detriment of considering the context in which the process occurs, how context may shape the process, and the many potential outcomes of interruptions. Sociotechnical work system models (e.g., Fig. 2
                        ) have been used in health care settings to: 1) account for the complexity of the environment, 2) provide a framework for understanding how multiple work system components interact to form and influence health care processes, and 3) understand how system interactions and processes affect multiple outcomes (Carayon et al., 2006; Karsh and Brown, 2010; Carayon et al., 2013; Holden et al., 2013; Carayon et al., 2014; Karsh et al., 2014). Specifically, sociotechnical models such as the Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) model – which depicts a person (or persons) interacting with tasks, tools and technology, physical environment, organization, and external environment to perform processes that produce multiple outcomes – can be used both to describe a specific sociotechnical system and how changes affect the system (Carayon et al., 2006; Holden et al., 2013).

SEIPS 2.0 (Fig. 2) depicts a sociotechnical work system of multiple interacting components that produces performance processes, which in turn result in outcomes for patients, professionals, and the organization. The model portrays change over time in the form of feedback loops that modify the work system and process; thus, it conforms to the cyclical input-transformation-output conventions of open systems and sociotechnical systems models (Katz and Kahn, 1966, Pasmore, 1988; Karsh et al., 2006).

This review sought to determine whether the full sociotechnical complexity of interruptions in the ED work system has been captured in findings from the empirical literature and to combine findings and sociotechnical systems theory to inform a sociotechnical model of interrupted task performance in the ED.

We carried out a focused systematic review of scientific literature on interruptions in ED settings. The objectives of the review were to: (1) understand whether and how interruptions studies in the ED capture the full complexity of interruptions in the wild; (2) synthesize what studies in ED settings reveal about interruption complexity; and (3) propose a formal conceptualization and sociotechnical model of interruptions to guide future research motivated by the model. For each reviewed study and for the studies as a whole, we asked:
                           
                              •
                              
                                 What sociotechnical system characteristics are investigated? What system factors have not been studied? What do studies reveal about how work system factors shape interruptions?


                                 How is the interruption process conceptualized? Do current conceptualizations capture its full complexity? What do studies reveal about the interruption process within the ED?


                                 What outcomes of interruptions are investigated? What outcomes are hypothesized but poorly understood? What do studies reveal about the relationship between the work system, the interruption process, and outcomes?

@&#METHODS@&#

We conducted a systematic review of published scientific literature on interruptions in the ED (Fig. 1). Searches of the PubMed and Web of Science databases were conducted using the terms ‘emergency department’ AND ‘interrupt*’ as well as ‘emergency medicine’ OR ‘accident and emergency” AND ‘distract*’ ‘OR’ ‘disrupt*.’
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           The terms distract and disrupt, although not synonymous with the term interruption, were included in the search because they are often used interchangeably with interruption in the health care literature.
                         We searched bibliographies of each article for additional references.

Inclusion criteria were established by consensus. Inclusion was contingent on the following: 1) empirical qualitative or quantitative; 2) ED-based; 3) peer-reviewed; 4) English language; 5) scholarly journal articles; 5) accepted for publication between 1992 and 2012; and 6) measured some aspect of interrupted task performance. Published conference proceedings were not included in this review, although these are peer-reviewed publications.

Search and analyses were guided by PRISMA guidelines for conducting systematic reviews (Fig. 3
                        ) (Moher et al., 2009).
                           2
                        
                        
                           2
                           We were not able to report bias related to the studies reviewed as there were no interventions measured, no clear outcome variables, no randomized clinical trials, and no blinding.
                        
                     

Search of the PubMed database resulted in 1016 articles. Web of Science resulted in 189 articles, but none novel to the PubMed search that met eligibility criteria. One un-blinded reviewer (NW) trained on the eligibility criteria conducted the title review. Title review excluded off-topic articles, e.g., those not related to interruptions or those not within the ED, and resulted in 48 articles. Two reviewers conducted abstract and full article review (NW, RH). Abstract review further reduced the number of articles to 24. Full article review resulted in 15 articles the met criteria (Table 1
                        ). Articles were excluded if the research question, design, or methodology did not address the topic of this review. For example, some articles mentioned interruptions as an issue in general, but did not include them in their design, analysis, or discussion. Other articles were excluded because the work was not the ED. The final 15 articles were analyzed to address the three research questions described above (Table 1; Chisholm et al., 2000; Chisholm et al., 2001; Coiera et al., 2002; Rhodes et al., 2004; Spencer et al., 2004; France et al., 2005; Fairbanks et al., 2007; Woloshynowych et al., 2007; Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010; Jeanmonod et al., 2010; Westbrook et al., 2010; Chisholm et al., 2011; Kosits and Jones, 2011; Allard et al., 2012).

A data extraction form was created a priori based on PRISMA guidelines, seminal work on interruptions, and sociotechnical system models. The form was tested on a subset of articles until consensus was reached. One independent reviewer (NW) conducted data extraction and a second reviewer (RH) evaluated the data. The review team discussed any discrepancies until consensus was reached. Our analyses informed a conceptual model and future research directions.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The populations studied were variable. Seven studies examined physicians only (Chisholm et al., 2000; Chisholm et al., 2001; France et al., 2005; Jeanmonod et al., 2010; Westbrook et al., 2010; Chisholm et al., 2011; Allard et al., 2012), 2 studied nurses only (Woloshynowych et al., 2007; Kosits and Jones, 2011), and 5 studied a combination (Coiera et al., 2002; Spencer et al., 2004; Fairbanks et al., 2007; Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010). One article examined a rural ED (Chisholm et al., 2001), and one investigated the ED in the community setting (Chisholm et al., 2000), with the remainder conducted in large urban or suburban teaching hospitals. All but one of the articles reviewed, a self-report case study (Allard et al., 2012), were observational designs.

Interruptions take place within and are shaped by a multifactorial sociotechnical system. Table 2
                         reports sociotechnical system factors studied and identified as shaping interruptions in the ED (Croskerry and Sinclair, 2001; Wears and Perry, 2002; Wears et al., 2010).

The ED is a highly collaborative environment “involving extensive multispecialty, and multidepartmental interaction” (Allard et al., 2012). However, only five articles included both physicians and nurses (Coiera et al., 2002; Rhodes et al., 2004; Spencer et al., 2004; Fairbanks et al., 2007; Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010). Two studies focused exclusively on nurses (Woloshynowych et al., 2007; Kosits and Jones, 2011), with the majority concentrating on physicians (Chisholm et al., 2000; Chisholm et al., 2001; France et al., 2005; Jeanmonod et al., 2010; Westbrook et al., 2010; Chisholm et al., 2011; Allard et al., 2012). Studies did not include technicians, medical assistants, or other staff. Furthermore, no study conceptualized of teams as the unit being interrupted or the management of interruptions by committee; i.e., the interruptor and interruptee was always a single individual.

Only two articles described the experience of interruptions from the patient perspective (Rhodes et al., 2004; Jeanmonod et al., 2010), and none explored experiences of patients' families or informal caregivers. One described interruptions occurring often and early in patient communications with their physician (Rhodes et al., 2004), and another found a correlation between patient interruptions and lower patient satisfaction scores; but lower scores were only found when the physician was a resident (i.e., more junior physician) (Jeanmonod et al., 2010).

Several studies investigated how task features correlated with the interruption process (France et al., 2005; Kosits and Jones, 2011; Allard et al., 2012). One found that phone calls were the least likely task to be interrupted (Jeanmonod et al., 2010). Two reported documentation was the most commonly interrupted task (Westbrook et al., 2010; Kosits and Jones, 2011). Medication administration-related tasks received 27% of the total interruptions experienced (Kosits and Jones, 2011). Other studies reported the most common interrupting tasks were responding to electronic communication systems and face-to-face communications such as requests for verbal advice (France et al., 2005; Kosits and Jones, 2011; Allard et al., 2012).

One study postulated that communication devices exacerbate interruptions by obstructing the interrupter's awareness of the interruptee's context or situation, e.g., what task they are performing (Brixey et al., 2010). However, no study measured technology's effect on situation awareness. Other studies described interruption behavior following the implementation of an electronic whiteboard (France et al., 2005; Fairbanks et al., 2007), and one speculated based on comparisons to other ED interruptions studies that the electronic whiteboard resulted in fewer communication-based interruptions (France et al., 2005). Another postulated that interruptions were created by electronic communication systems (Allard et al., 2012). Only one paper reviewed examined the effect of tool availability on interruptions, finding that not having the necessary equipement can cause interruptions to workflow (Brixey et al., 2008). Tools and technology were also suggested as potential interventions for reducing the impact of interruptions (Brixey et al., 2008).

A few studies explored the relationship of staffing and patient load on interruptions with mixed results (Chisholm et al., 2001; Westbrook et al., 2010; Chisholm et al., 2011). However, it was suggested that the unscheduled patient visits feature of the ED led to an unpredictable environment overall (Chisholm et al., 2011). None of the studies described quality improvement initiatives to reduce interruption, or policies or procedures in place regarding interruptions in the ED. However, one article cited the challenge of ED overcrowding as a potential contributing factor of interest in exploring interruptions (France et al., 2005).

The open physical layout of the ED is designed such that interruptions are common (Brixey et al., 2008; Kosits and Jones, 2011). As one described, “interruptions [were] an intrinsic part of the [ED] environment” (Jeanmonod et al., 2010). Another article suggested the possible merit of an environment-based intervention by creating an “interruption-free zone” for certain high-risk activities (Kosits and Jones, 2011). Additional studies reported that senior staff experienced higher rates of interruptions than junior staff (Spencer et al., 2004; Fairbanks et al., 2007).

None of the reviewed studies investigated how external environmental factors such as regulations, economic conditions, industry norms, and socio-cultural expectations may have influenced the interruption process (Wears and Perry, 2002; Holden, 2012; Carayon et al., 2013; Holden et al., 2013; Karsh et al., 2014).

A consistent and comprehensive conceptualization of the interruption process was not provided across the reviewed articles (see Table 3
                        ). Only five articles mentioned primary task suspension (Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010; Westbrook et al., 2010; Kosits and Jones, 2011; Morrison and Rudolph, 2011), a component central to the definition of an interruption in the psychological literature (Altmann and Trafton, 2007; Monk et al., 2008; Boehm-Davis and Remington, 2009; Trafton et al., 2012). Four articles used definitions that resemble what is known in the psychological literature as a distraction, a momentary shift of attention that does not require a suspension of the current task (Chisholm et al., 2000; Chisholm et al., 2001; Chisholm et al., 2011). One article defined an interruption as an event taking longer than 10 seconds (Kosits and Jones, 2011). All of the articles conceptualized interruptions as externally generated events, but two articles also conceptualized internally motivated breaks as interruptions (Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010).

The interruption process was typically conceptualized as an interrupter–interruptee interaction with one person acting as the person receiving the interruption and one as initiating it. Two studies conceptualized an alert to an interrupting task preceding the interruption (Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010). Two studies proposed an interruption process taxonomy in which interruptions could be deferred, accepted, or blocked (Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010). They discovered that interruptions were often not as simplistic as an interrupter–interruptee interaction, with the existence of both unintended and indirect recipients of interruptions. Another study found that 70% of interruptions were accepted, However, the author argued that “ED physicians are highly skilled in judging whether interruptions require their immediate attention and suspension of their current task” and use strategies to later return to suspended tasks (Allard et al., 2012).

One study examined the role of the interrupter in the interruption process. It found that ED clinicians received interruptions more often than they initiated them and that face-to-face interruptions were the most commonly initiated interruption type (Brixey et al., 2010).

Most of the studies followed the standard laboratory-developed conceptualization of the interruption process (Altmann and Trafton, 2007; Boehm-Davis and Remington, 2009), with one person working on one task that is interrupted once. Three studies examined the interruption process as a series of multiple “stacked” interruptions (Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010; Jeanmonod et al., 2010). For example, Brixey and colleagues (2008) found that original tasks were resumed after up to eight separate interrupting tasks. None of the articles conceptualized the team environment of the ED or captured how a group of individuals might shift between multiple ongoing and interleaved tasks as suggested by preliminary studies in other complex healthcare settings (Werner and Holden, 2014).

Several articles explored the process of interruptions as communication events (Coiera et al., 2002; Spencer et al., 2004; Fairbanks et al., 2007; Woloshynowych et al., 2007). One found that one third of communication events observed were interruptions (Coiera et al., 2002). Two studies posited that communication-related interruptions increased overall provider communication load (Coiera et al., 2002; Spencer et al., 2004). Spencer and colleagues (2004) described the potential impact: “clinicians in the ED need to respond quickly and appropriately, and the choice of communication channel will be influenced by the purpose and urgency of the message.” This is pertinent to the finding that interruptions typically occur through synchronous communication. However, none of these articles examined the context or content of the interrupting task (Coiera et al., 2002). That is, they observed the occurrence of the communication and the method used for communicating, but not what was being communicated or characteristics such as urgency(Coiera et al., 2002; Spencer et al., 2004).

Studies mentioned multiple outcomes of interruptions but only a subset of these were measured. Most studies measured frequency but not any downstream effects. Overall, the articles reported a range of 3 to 42 interruptions per hour. This broad range highlights the disparate designs and conceptualizations used between studies. A few articles reported outcomes related to how interruptions affect time on task (Chisholm et al., 2000; Chisholm et al., 2001; France et al., 2005; Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010; Westbrook et al., 2010; Chisholm et al., 2011).

Several studies mentioned the potential for interruptions to lead to an increased time overall spent on the original task (Chisholm et al., 2000; Chisholm et al., 2001; France et al., 2005; Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010; Westbrook et al., 2010; Chisholm et al., 2011). One in particular measured the association between interruptions and the time on task (Westbrook et al., 2010). They found that total task time was shorter when the task was interrupted (Westbrook et al., 2010). The authors postulated that this was because providers felt they had to rush to complete tasks when they were interrupted.

An interruption-safety relationship was postulated in several of the articles (Chisholm et al., 2000; Chisholm et al., 2001; Spencer et al., 2004; Brixey et al., 2010; Jeanmonod et al., 2010; Westbrook et al., 2010; Chisholm et al., 2011; Allard et al., 2012). Some studies pointed to the psychological literature as evidence that interruptions can lead to errors on the original task following the interruption.

Several studies mentioned the potential for interruptions to lead to an increased cognitive workload, suggesting that ED providers incur high cognitive load due to the nature of work in the ED (Chisholm et al., 2000; Chisholm et al., 2001; Spencer et al., 2004; Chisholm et al., 2011).

One study alluded to but did not measure the impact of interruptions on provider situation awareness: “the practitioner whose attention is constantly shifting from one item to another may not be able to formulate a complete and coherent picture of the state of the system” (Chisholm et al., 2001).

Studies also noted that critical thinking could be impacted by interruptions and discussed the potential for interruptions to lead to increased stress and decreased job satisfaction, but these impacts were not measured (Chisholm et al., 2001; Westbrook et al., 2010).

One study addressed the effect of interruptions on workflow by investigating original task resumption (Brixey et al., 2008). In general, tasks were not always observed to be resumed, though it is not clear why (Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010). One author speculated but did not observe that clinicians use memory aids to facilitate resumption (Brixey et al., 2008). Another noted whether physicians were able to “smoothly transition” back to the original task from the interruption (Jeanmonod et al., 2010).

Most of the articles focused on the negative impact of interruptions. None of the studies investigated the potential for a positive impact of interruptions, but some pointed to the necessity of some interruptions within the ED, for example, the arrival of injured patients or patient status changes (Chisholm et al., 2001; Allard et al., 2012). As one author stated, “interruptions are widely accepted and little criticized in healthcare, being viewed as unavoidable or having limited detrimental effect” (Brixey et al., 2008). Another study described interruptions being either innocuous or the cause of catastrophic outcomes (Allard et al., 2012). Only one discussed the need for providers to determine whether an interruption is critical versus unnecessary (Kosits and Jones, 2011).

Only a few of the outcomes mentioned within the articles were measured. Most of these outcomes were only hypothesized as potential impacts of interruptions.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The current ED literature captures some but far from all of the complexity associated with interruptions. Too often, individual studies investigated one component of the system (e.g., only task or only person) to the exclusion of other components and component-component interactions. Patient and external environmental aspects were insufficiently studied. The unit of analysis was almost always the interrupted person, and his/her task work. Moreover, in all but two of the articles, only two tasks were considered – the original task and the interruption task – and they were depicted sequentially. Consequently, these conceptualizations of the interruption process may not apply well to the work of teams or when tasks overlap or occur concurrently. Teams of clinicians can be partially interrupted (e.g., only one or a few team members), may be working on individual tasks that can be interrupted or the entire team can be interrupted, and some are dependent on team leadership for successful interruption management (Werner and Holden, 2014).

The articles reviewed have taken important first steps in understanding how interruptions affect performance and other outcomes. However, there is a need for a conceptual framework of interruptions in the ED so that causal relationships and moderating variables can be measured and mitigation strategies developed (Cosby and Croskerry, 2009, Nugus et al., 2010; Holden et al., 2013; Westbrook, 2014; Dekker, 2015). Additionally, there was an absence of outcomes measurement related to clinicians, teams of clinicians, and patients, and how they experience interruptions.

Related to the lack of measurement of outcomes overall, the studies neglected to assess how interruptions are managed and how the management of interruptions may lead to healthcare professional and/or patient adaptation to interrupted situations. Further, and perhaps due to the lack of results based on outcomes, adaptation, or management strategies, none of the studies provided interventions or tests of interventions to aid interrupted task performance or mitigate interruptions.

Prior reviews of interruptions research uniformly critique the literature for an absence of a clear, consistent, and theoretically sound conceptualization of interruptions (Grundgeiger and Sanderson, 2009; Magrabi et al., 2011; Westbrook, 2014). Additionally, Westbrook argues that conceptualizations of interruptions in healthcare treat them “as an isolated event” and tend to overlook more complex concepts such as “the influence of the social context on individuals' reactions to interruptions and the strategies they employ to deal with competing demands” (Westbrook, 2014). She proposes that a “productive area for research is consideration of interruptions in the broader sociotechnical system context” (Westbrook, 2014). Others have pointed to the importance of a systems approach to understanding the complexity of the ED specifically (Croskerry and Sinclair, 2001; Wears and Perry, 2002; Wears et al., 2010). However, there is no current definition for interruptions that capture these complexities as broadly as recommended. Accordingly, we draw on a combination of prior literature on interruptions in healthcare (Grundgeiger and Sanderson, 2009; Karsh et al., 2014), human factors theories of patient safety (Carayon et al., 2006; Holden et al., 2013), robust psychological models of interrupted task performance (Altmann and Trafton, 2007; Boehm-Davis and Remington, 2009), and the findings from this review to form a formal conceptualization.

Interruptions in a complex sociotechnical system are a process of multiple unfolding events, including but not limited to suspending one task to work on another. The interruption process: (a) is shaped by system factors and (b) can produce immediate and delayed outcomes— positive, negative, or neutral—for multiple individuals.

Several aspects of the definition are noteworthy:
                           
                              •
                              It conceptualizes an interruption process rather than a single, punctuated event. The central sequence of events in this process is the suspension of a current task (“primary task”) to attend to and work on another (“secondary task”); suspending rather than ending the primary task means that there is at least the intention to resume it. Other parts of the process can include an alert about the secondary task, a response to the alert, and transitions between the primary and secondary tasks.

Interruptions can include a singular task, or multiple unfolding events. From the traditional view, this may include a phone call or responding to an unexpected alarm. However, this definition also includes unexpected changes in patient status that could derail an ongoing task (Werner and Holden, 2014).

The interruption processes occurs within and is shaped by the sociotechnical system, comprised of an interacting set of structural components such as tools (e.g., pagers, electronic medical records), organizational factors (e.g., internal policy, hierarchy), task characteristics (e.g., task urgency, difficulty), and internal (e.g., layout, noise) and external (e.g., regulatory, political) environmental conditions. Each system component or combination of components can suppress or produce interruptions as well as shape the interruption process. For example, tools and technologies can govern how one is alerted to a secondary task while organizational policies and priorities can govern how one responds to it.

There are multiple potential outcomes of the interruption process for multiple individuals, including the one interrupted (“interruptee”), the one who interrupts (“interrupter”) (Rivera, 2014), the patients receiving care, and the workflow and efficiency of the organizational unit where the care takes place. These can be undesirable proximate or immediate outcomes (e.g., a momentary delay, an error as a result of being distracted, forgetting some detail about the primary task while working on the secondary task) or more distal (e.g., staying after one's shift to catch up on the primary task, an adverse event to a patient downstream from an error). Interruptions can also produce neutral or desirable proximal and distal outcomes, for example, when the interruption occurs as a byproduct of communicating important information or turns the interrupted worker's attention to a higher-priority task.


                        Fig. 4
                         presents our proposed model of interruptions in complex settings. The model combines a synthesis of knowledge from reviewed ED interruptions research and expands upon key concepts from sociotechnical system theories (Wears and Perry, 2002; Carayon et al., 2006; Karsh et al., 2006; Carayon et al., 2013; Holden et al., 2013; Carayon et al., 2014) and cognitive psychological models of interrupted task performance (Altmann and Trafton, 2007; Boehm-Davis and Remington, 2009; Coiera, 2012) that were not always addressed by the literature. The goals of the model are to answer the call for better conceptualizing the overall complexity of interruptions in the ED and other such settings (Croskerry and Sinclair, 2001; Wears and Perry, 2002; Wears et al., 2010; Holden et al., 2013) and to motivate future research. It is important to note that the model: 1) is derived from both the reviewed studies and other sources of knowledge, and 2) helps to understand and evaluate existing studies and guide future research.

The sociotechnical orientation of the model is in line with Westbrook's position that multiple factors must be considered as surrounding and shaping interruptions: an interruption occurs in a system, not a vacuum (Westbrook, 2014). Our model specifies a system of person, task, tools and technologies, organization, and internal and external environments; these and their properties can be better specified and measured in future interruptions research. Additionally, because the components of a system interact, further work should consider how a combination of system properties affects interrupted task performance. For example, Wears et al. (2010) describe six factors as examples of ED complexity: unpredictable and unscheduled patient care, workflow marked by simultaneous treatment of multiple patients, diagnostic uncertainty, time pressure due to nature of emergencies and the need to move patients through the ED quickly, lack of feedback to healthcare professionals, and lack of opportunity to perform risky procedures (Wears et al., 2010). These are emergent characteristics of system interactions between person, task, technology, organization, and internal and external environment factors. Another form of interaction that needs to be better considered in interruptions research is the “cross-level effect,” meaning a higher-level system factor (e.g., hospital policy, culture, or staffing levels) affecting one at lower levels (e.g., interruption propensity, resumption lag, or cognitive workload) and vice versa (Karsh and Brown, 2010; Karsh et al., 2014). Indeed, in a setting such as the ED, researchers and practitioners already acknowledge cross-level effects: for example, task properties such as the number of decisions made on a shift depend on organizational factors such as quality of teamwork and resource availability (Croskerry and Sinclair, 2001). The last type of interaction to be considered by future research is between individuals, i.e., teamwork and collaboration. The ideas that interruptions occur during communication, that interruptions may be necessary for teamwork (Coiera et al., 2002; Spencer et al., 2004; Rivera-Rodriguez and Karsh, 2010; Coiera, 2012), that interrupted tasks are sometimes carried out by teams not individuals (Werner and Holden, 2014), and that multiple individuals from different professions can interrupt and be interrupted (Spencer et al., 2004; Fairbanks et al., 2007; Brixey et al., 2008; Brixey et al., 2010), implicates a shift away from considering interruptions from the perspective of only one actor (e.g., the interruptee) or as a linear, unidirectional interaction between two people. Theories and methods in the areas of team cognition (Salas, 2004; Patterson, 2010) and, when teams rely on artifacts, joint cognitive systems can be helpful for this (Hollnagel, 2005).

Recently, Coiera (2012) suggested that researchers transition from unstructured, more exploratory observational studies of interruptions toward application of more structured psychological models. Judging the literature on ED interruptions, this might mean expanding and formalizing what part(s) of the interruption process is being investigated as well as the relationships (e.g., transition probabilities or timing) between steps in the process. We provide one way that the interruption process can be specified, in the middle part of Fig. 2, and join Coiera (2012) in urging more systematic research on defining and understanding this process. At the same time, we note that the full sociotechnical system in Fig. 2 is rarely fully explored in psychological studies, especially those that take place in the laboratory. While accounting for these factors may require continued observational and exploratory study designs, this may be necessary to fully understand a complex phenomenon in complex settings such as the ED (Croskerry and Sinclair, 2001; Wears and Perry, 2002; Wears et al., 2010; Holden et al., 2013; Dekker, 2015).

It is clear from the ED interruptions literature that there are multiple outcomes of interruptions. The right side of the model in Fig. 2 depicts a broad array of potentially interrelated that require measurement and can guide new research questions, some of which we list in Table 4
                           . We urge particular examination of relatively unexplored areas: interruptions management; “positive” (i.e., value-adding interruptions; and provider and organizational outcomes (Rivera-Rodriguez and Karsh, 2010)).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The ED as an “interrupt driven” area of healthcare is a widely accepted concept, and by design healthcare providers in this setting will likely be susceptible to frequent interruption. To develop robust interventions in the ED and other complex sociotechnical work systems, we must understand the sociotechnical system factors shaping interruptions, the way that the interruption process unfolds, and the associated outcomes. By acknowledging the complexity of interruptions in complex sociotechnical systems and building on the existing knowledge reviewed here, we anticipate future research will produce important guidance for interruption-related interventions designed to work in complex settings.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

Dr. Werner was supported by funding from the National Patient Safety Foundation, the Johns Hopkins University School of Nursing Center for Innovative Care in Aging, and the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (grant # 1K08HS022916; PI: Alicia I. Arbaje). Dr. Holden was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Aging (NIA) of the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) (K01AG044439) and grants UL1 TR000445 and KL2 TR000446 from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS/NIH) through the Vanderbilt CTSA. The funders had no role in any of the following activities: design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; and preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

