@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Time pressure and regulations on hospital-in-the-home (HITH) nurses: An on-the-road study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined time pressure in hospital-in-the-home nurses while they were driving.


                        
                        
                           
                           Time pressure has a negative impact on both the nurses' driving and their emotions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Time constraints are neither necessary nor sufficient to elicit time pressure.


                        
                        
                           
                           The challenges and uncertainty associated with healthcare and driving are relevant.


                        
                        
                           
                           Anticipated and in situ regulations may reduce uncertainties and negative emotions.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Time pressure

Driving

Nurses

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study investigated both causal factors and consequences of time pressure in hospital-in-the-home (HITH) nurses. These nurses may experience additional stress from the time pressure they encounter while driving to patients' homes, which may result in greater risk taking while driving. From observation in natural settings, data related to the nurses' driving behaviours and emotions were collected and analysed statistically; semi-directed interviews with the nurses were analysed qualitatively. The results suggest that objective time constraints alone do not necessarily elicit subjective time pressure. The challenges and uncertainty associated with healthcare and the driving period contribute to the emergence of this time pressure, which has a negative impact on both the nurses' driving and their emotions. Finally, the study focuses on anticipated and in situ regulations. These findings provide guidelines for organizational and technical solutions allowing the reduction of time pressure among HITH nurses.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Many nurses work for Hospital-In-The-Home (HITH) organizations. Although research has compared the efficacy of care between HITH and traditional hospitals (Sheppard and Illife, 1998; Macintyre et al., 2002; Crilly et al., 2011; Duke et al., 2012; Sears et al., 2013), few studies have investigated the impact of HITH organizations on nurses' well-being.

HITH nurses' well-being may be reduced by time pressure, which is a widespread problem with some specificity to technologically advanced countries (Szollos, 2009). The aims of the current study were to investigate factors that elicited time pressure in HITH nurses and examine the deleterious consequences of time pressure. The present study focused on the regulations that were used to address the different types of identified constraints. Activity analyses and interviews were performed in a French HITH organization. We focused on work-related trips because driving is a major component of HITH nurses' job. It was expected that the emotional impact of time pressure would be easier to observe during driving than during care.

HITH services appeared a more than fifty years ago (or less depending on the country) and have gradually been affirmed in the health care landscape (Caplan et al., 1999) because they respond to increases in the lifespan and the lack of institutional facilities available to support ageing and/or sick populations (Hyde et al., 2000). Research suggests that HITH is safe, efficacious and feasible for patients with medical illnesses who would otherwise require hospital care (Leff et al., 2005). Thus, HITH is a concrete alternative to hospitalization (Bricon-Souf et al., 2005; Montalto, 1999). However, HITH nurses are not only care providers but also travelling workers. Therefore, both activities can affect their emotional health.

HITH nurses benefit from increased independence compared to nurses who work in the hospital by “moving away from the hierarchical constraints of the hospital structure” (Duke and Street, 2003, pp 855). They also benefit from a more sociable network (Purkis, 2001). Nevertheless, these nurses, similar to those who work in hospitals, encounter an unfavourable ratio between demands and resources, which increases the probability that they will experience professional stress (Garrosa et al., 2011; Lewis et al., 2010; Selye, 1976). Time pressure is one such stressor (Hasson and Arnetz, 2008; Rutledge et al., 2009), and the chronic time pressure and stress relationship may result in burnout (Demerouti et al., 2000; Teng et al., 2010).

HITH nurses (and other home caregivers) encounter the same constraints faced by other workers who drive for work as a secondary task. Although driving time is often considered in the calculation of working hours, it is sometimes considered non-productive time by the drivers themselves (Gressel and Munduteguy, 2008). Consequently, drivers often simultaneously perform additional tasks, such as completing paperwork and arranging visits, thus transforming their cars into mobile offices (Eost and Flyte, 1998; Forrierre and Six, 2010). They also seek to reduce the time spent on the road by using either safe or potentially dangerous strategies, which reflects the importance that drivers give to the activities that will be performed at their destinations. Risk-taking increases under time pressure, which frequently occurs in these populations (Charbotel et al., 2010; Salminen and Lähdeniemi, 2002) and may be related to the emotional and cognitive consequences of such pressure (Cœugnet et al., 2013a, b; Naveteur et al., 2013; O'Brien et al., 2004; Sagberg, 2007). HITH nurses who prioritize patient care and time in the patients' home may be particularly affected by time pressure at the wheel.

HITH nurses may encounter time pressure related to care overload and urgency or to traffic (Andersen et al., 2015). Thus, it is important to clearly define time pressure. Time pressure may result from an unfavourable contrast between the amount of time that is available and the amount of time that is required to complete a task (Rastegary and Landy, 1993; Svenson and Benson, 1993). This perspective primarily views time constraints as chronometric dynamic parameters that can be objectified (e.g., a deadline), regardless of precision (e.g., having to complete a task or a series of tasks “before 5 PM” or “as soon as possible”). However, strong time constraints cannot fully explain time pressure because it is naturally subjective. Time pressure also depends on challenges that are linked to an activity and the value that this activity has for the individual, which is called the “sense of activity” (Cœugnet et al., 2011; Daniellou, 2005). Moreover, Rastegary and Landy (1993) argued that time pressure only arises when people believe that a deadline is mandatory and that being late would result in sanctions. Thus, time pressure should be viewed in the context of activity (considered in a broad meaning) to determine how different factors affect its expression. The HITH study presented below acknowledges this broader ergonomic approach.

Uncertainty is related to stress (Lazarus, 1984) and is a main characteristic of nurses' work environment (see for instance, Conley Wichowski, 1994; Cranley et al., 2009, 2012; Green et al., 2015). Research on call centre employees (Ribert-Van De Weerdt, 2011) and aircraft systems operators (Liu et al., 2015) suggests that uncertainty may contribute to time pressure, with similar effects reported for drivers (Cœugnet et al., 2011, 2013a, b). Uncertainty, which can be related to goal achievement or to available resources, can arise because an event is unpredictable or because an expected event may occur at an unknown time. Both uncertainties are applicable to nurses and may be deleterious because they prevent anticipatory regulations development (Jobidon et al., 2005).

In the framework of French speaking ergonomics, regulations are mostly considered in reference to Wiener's cybernetic theory (1948), Ashby's system theory (1970), and Piaget's notion of biological regulation (1967) as “retro-active control which maintains balance relative to an organized structure or to an organization in construction” (Piaget, 1967, p.239, translation Leplat, 1994; see also Leplat, 1977, 2001, 2006). According to Leplat (2006), the human operator can not only regulate the process under control but also his own activity to optimize his well-being, his own performance and the system's performance. Two regulation modes can be used. Reactive/retroactive regulations are based on feedback about the realization of activity. Workers can also use proactive/anticipatory regulations to prevent potential difficulties and keep a sufficient amount of resources to complete actions. In the case of work activities, Leplat (1994) proposes that those regulations can be individual and/or collective.

By studying a group of HITH nurses during their rounds, the present research intended (1) to provide convergent evidence that time pressure is naturally subjective and is related to unfavourable time constraints, challenges and uncertainties. This study also (2) assessed the perceived emotions and behavioural consequences concomitant with time pressure while driving. Finally, this research sought (3) to identify some anticipated or in situ regulations that could be used to address time constraints and alleviate time pressure and its consequences.

@&#METHOD@&#

The present study was conducted within a French HITH organization (Santélys Association) that provides healthcare in a large French city and its surrounding area (approximately one million people living within 600 km2). To better understand the organization, a prerequisite observation phase was performed using classical ergonomic methods, including analyses of work prescriptions, real work and activity, and interviews with different operators (i.e. the senior nurse coordinator and nurses).

Santélys consists of multidisciplinary caregiver teams that have the capacity to care for 140–160 patients. Four geographic areas are covered by 4 nursing teams (for a total of 32 nurses in full or part time). Care is mainly palliative (±45%) or punctual (±40%) and includes some rehabilitation (±15%). Shift
                              1
                           
                           
                              1
                              This note is devoted to the clarification of the terms we use. “Shift work” is the full work duration in a day. A “round” referred to all the visits in patients' homes for one nurse in a same day; it begins when the nurse drives in the first patient and it ends when the nurse leaves the last patient. “Trip” qualifies the moment when the nurse drives between two defined locations (e.g., between the main structure and the first patient's home or between the second patient's home and the third patient's home).
                            work is implemented. Each shift lasts for approximately seven hours, including a morning round of five hours and two hours of work at the organization in the afternoon. Nurses seldom visit patients in the afternoon. Organization time was dedicated to the transmission of the patient's condition, the eventual planning for a doctor's visit, the admission of new patients, changes of medication dosage or to order supplies. Time is also devoted to preparing the round for the following day (usually about ten minutes, as estimated by the nurses). The nursing staff simultaneously organizes their rounds and the nurse's aides' rounds to ensure care coordination when care depends on a nurse and nurse's aide pair. The round planning is performed on a board on which, by column, the nurses hold labels for each patient. Each column corresponds to a nurse. They place the labels below each other in order of the round. According to the “official” activity prescription, planning is first prioritized by the nature of the care (i.e., technical and/or palliative nursing, washing) and is often related to when it should be performed (e.g., just after waking, before or after meals). In fact, to meet the goal of arriving at the appointed time in the patients' home, we observed that nurses organized the rounds as a function of (1) geographic location (they try to group visits as much as possible in the same sector area, accounting for traffic conditions and time of day), (2) care duration (long or short) and constraints, and (3) the patients' wishes.

Nurses in this HITH organization benefit from a personal professional car (C4 by Citroën®). These cars, equipped with GPS, do not have any distinct signs, except for the caduceus. Nurses also have “hands free” mobile phones. They drive about 60 km per working day (300 km a week), mainly on city streets.

Four nurses, aged between 28 and 36 years, were observed. We chose these four nurses because (1) they all work full-time on the same team/same geographical area, (2) they had equivalent experience in HITH, and (3) all of them agreed voluntarily to participate to the study. Psychological assessments indicated that the sample was homogenous on traits that may influence driving behaviour (Cœugnet et al., 2013a, b). Bortner's questionnaire (1969) revealed an AB type. The STAI-Y (Spielberger, 1983) described low trait-anxiety (35–38/80). Scores on the Driver Anger Scale (Deffenbacher et al., 1994; translated by Delhomme and Villieux, 2005) were low or moderate (27–36/70). The four nurses were observed for an equal number of hours.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

This research was based on different types of quantitative and qualitative data that were collected at different times in the care process. A round planning was observed, to which the experimenter never interfered. Every action on the wall schedule, i.e., allocations of a given patient to a round, modifications of the order of the visits, was carefully recorded. The main set of data came from observations and concomitant verbalizations that were made by nurses during rounds (Appendix 1). Phone calls were included. The on-trip data collection is detailed below. Guided interviews (Appendix 2) were conducted separately with each of the four nurses after all the observations were completed. The observer invited the nurses to comment on their reactions to specific observed round contexts. Nurses were also asked to detail the main factors that influenced their time constraints and time pressure and to describe their emotions. Each interview lasted approximately 30 min. We explored the relation between time constraints and time pressure, as well as their emotional and behavioural consequences. As for nurses' regulations, for pragmatic and ethical reasons we focused on external regulations, i.e., regulations realized during work situations. Our choice was to gather observable behaviours, focussing on collective regulations, i.e., realized by interactions with colleagues.


                           Systematic observations – On-trip observations were performed during the rounds. The observer was female. She sat in the passenger seat in the front of the vehicle. She observed (1) the dashboard speedometer, (2) road events, and (3) the driver's behaviour. Because the nurses refused the use of cameras or audio-tapes, open trip observations (total duration: 5 h 30 min) were performed to design and test an observation grid and to train (1) the observer to complete the grid, and (2) the nurses to verbalize their time pressure and emotional feeling. Thereafter, during the systematic observation phase, an observation grid was completed for the full duration of every trip. In sum, driving observations totalled 18 h 22 min (504 km), 68 trips (spread over 12 different rounds), and 52 patients were visited (24 h 27 min devoted to care; mean full care duration: 2 h 34 min per observed round). Trips devoted to picking up some material/equipment or to deliver blood samples were included (N = 16) because they are a part of the nurses' mission during their rounds. Phone calls were also taken into account in the grid in terms of their purpose and possible consequences on the round. Moreover, after visiting a patient, nurses were questioned about whether interactions by phone with colleague(s) occurred during the care period. In the case of a positive answer, more details were requested about the motive of the phone call and its possible impact upon the round.


                           Verbalization collections – Nurses were encouraged to verbalize their emotions and to report if they felt or not under time pressure while they were driving. The observer (who was an experienced clinical interviewer) noted the main keywords and refined the transcription during subsequent care. Because travel times were relatively short and unrelated talk was not encouraged, the observer's memory loads were small. Possibility was left to include also emotional expressions observed during phone calls.


                           Time constraints – Each trip was categorized a posteriori as either high or low time constraint (TC+, TC−). Open interviews with the senior nurse's coordinator and observations of nursing staff planning the rounds indicated that, given a mean visit duration of 30 min and a mean trip duration of 15 min, visiting 6 patients in a 5-h round constituted a threshold beyond which substantial time constraints are unavoidable. Therefore, a posteriori categorization in TC+ and TC− relied on this criterion (more than 6 patients in each round versus 6 patients or less). When the number of patients to be visited was modified during a round (see § 3.4.2), the classification takes into account the change from the time at which it occurred. It has been carefully checked that the total remaining time available after each visit never invalidates this categorization for any trip, based on the estimates reported above.


                           Time pressure – Each observed trip was categorized as either TP+ or TP− according to the nurses' reports of time pressure.


                           Driving behaviours and road events – The observation grid (consisting boxes to check) was designed to collect data about driving situation characteristics (road type, traffic density, urban fires, yield-the-way, and events blocking or slowing progression), occurrences of tailgating, and any other traffic rule violations such as speeding (the observer noted the maximum speed – in km/h – reached at each occurrence).


                           Emotions – The nurses' verbalizations about their current emotions were transcribed and dichotomized as positive or negative emotions.


                           Regulations – They were coded according to the moment of implementation (anticipated or in situ regulations). Data collected during the planning meetings highlighted how the rounds were prepared by the nurses and which regulations were implemented in advance, i.e., before the rounds started. As for data collected during the rounds, phone calls were analysed, and nurses' comments highlighted the regulations implemented in situ, or during the trips. Each regulation was categorized a posteriori as having or not having an impact upon the course of the round (round adjustments versus information request or control).

Non-parametric statistics were used because the data distribution violated the normality principle. A Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA was used to compare the four types of trips, which were defined by time constraints and time pressure combinations, and the Mann–Whitney U-test was used for two-by-two comparisons. Chi-square tests compared the rates between classes. Spearman rank correlation assessed the relationship between two variables. In the results section, the observed trips were considered independently from the nurses who were driving, but it has been carefully checked that the reported results represent all the nurses.

@&#RESULTS@&#

During the systematic observation phase, 32 trips were made under TC−, and 36 were made under TC+. The number of patients varied between 3 and 6 for rounds performed under TC−, and between 7 and 8 under TC+. Nurses reported feeling time pressure (TP+) during 38 trips and time pressure was absent during 30 trips (TP).

The relations between time constraints and time pressure were examined using a 2 × 2 contingency table. As shown in Fig. 1
                        , nurses had low time constraints in 25% of the trips, during which they did not feel time pressure [TC−TP−]. In 33.82% of the trips, nurses had an objective chronometric reason to feel time pressure and they did [TC+TP+]. Nurses indicated that time constraints often corresponded to understaffing due to vacations, sickness or a large overall workload. The association between time pressure and heavy rounds was often expressed in their interviews: “Either I have many patients because of heavy workload, or during a classical round we learn that there is another patient who must be added. In such situations, we are in a hurry in general”; “The difficult situation is when there is a heavy round. There is no time to dawdle”; “We are in hurry when we have a heavy round and we want to satisfy all of the patients because we know that after a while, they will call to find out where we are”.

If time pressure was singularly caused by time constraints, the data would have been primarily concentrated in the [TC+TP+] and [TC−TP−] cells of the contingency table. This was not the case: 41.18% of the trips were in mixed cells. A Chi-square test performed on the four trips types did not reveal a significant difference in the distribution of participants between the four cells (χ2(1, N = 68) = 1.99, ns). Because time constraints sometimes arose without time pressure [TC+TP−] (19.12%), the former was not always sufficient to induce the latter. Moreover, in 22.06% of the trips, time pressure arose when time constraints were absent [TC−TP+].

As shown in Table 1
                        , the four trip types did not significantly differ in duration. Interestingly, the duration of the care that followed a trip that was classified as [TC−TP+] was significantly longer than the three other trip types (all ps < 0.05), which did not significantly differ between each other. A fine-grained analysis of the rounds showed that this increased duration did not compromise ending the round on time.

In this results section, we focus on [TC−TP+] trips. On the one hand, the role of uncertainty in the emergence of time pressure when time constraints were absent is illustrated by the following interviews: “I distrust. Just a disagreement with a patient can make us overwhelmed even on a light round.”; “The last day before my vacation, I had only a few patients on my round but I had crap on crap which made me say to myself: “What's next?” On the road, it's possible that there are traffic jams, accidents …”
                     

As shown above, time pressures without objective time constraints often arose during trips that preceded a longer duration of patient care. This time pressure may have resulted from greater uncertainties or challenges related to the next patient, or nurses anticipating either more complex care or the patient's need for social support. This was not observed in relation to the [TC−TP−] trips. When uncertainty was low, nurses knew in advance that they would complete the round early, which left them room to manoeuvre in case something happened: “If we lose time on the road, we say that it does not matter. We will still have time to administer the appropriate care to the patients.”

On the other hand, being late or having insufficient time for the patient may also have adverse consequences. Thus, the challenges that were associated with care had to be considered together with uncertainty as determining factors of time pressure during trips that were classified as [TC−TP+]: “This morning I had a cool round, but the second patient needs me to unplug [plug of morphine infusion preventing the patient from getting out of bed alone] in order to start his day. He said nothing, but myself … I do not want to cut off his day. Sometimes I impose my own constraints.”

As shown in Fig. 2
                           A–B, there was a significant effect for trip type ([TC+TP+], [TC+TP−], [TC−TP+], [TC−TP−]) on the number of tailgating occurrences per trip (H(3, N = 68) = 14.89, p < .001). The mean speed was not significantly influenced by the trip types (H(3, N = 68) = 1.88, ns). Trip types did not influence the ratio of speeding (H(3, N = 68) = 6.13, ns) but did influence the amount of excess speed (H(3, N = 68) = 15.19, p < .001). The [TC+TP+] trips appeared to be the more risky driving condition due to more frequent tailgating and higher excess speed.

Tailgating appeared to be influenced more by time constraints than by time pressure because [TC+TP+] was significantly greater than [TC−TP+] (U = 96.5, p < .03) and [TC−TP−] (U = 102, p < .01), while the amount of excess speed was influenced by time pressure because [TC+TP+] was significantly greater than [TC+TP−] (U = 70.5, p < .01) and [TC−TP−] (U = 58.5, p < .001). Other traffic rule violations (i.e. failure to give way, unauthorized parking, or not adhering to road lights or stops) were seldom observed and could not be analysed separately. When pooled, the number of rule violations that occurred did not significantly differ as a function of trip types (H(3,N = 68) = 6.33, ns).

Overall, 71 occurrences of emotional verbalization were observed (20 positive and 51 negative emotions). The ANOVA revealed a significant effect for trip type on the frequency of reported negative feeling, (H(3, N = 68) = 12.39, p < .01). At best, this effect is explained by time pressure because negative feelings were more often expressed under TP+ than TP− (U = 312, p < .001; for information, TC+ versus TC−: U = 523, ns; Fig. 3
                           A).

As nurses encountered more events that impeded driving (e.g., when a delivery van blocked their way or when traffic lights turned red), more negative emotions were reported (ρ = 0.37, p < .05). The following verbalization illustrates the facts that negative emotions focused on driving: “He gets on my nerves, he doesn't pull forward”. The rate at which negative feelings were reported correlated with the frequency at which tailgating was observed (ρ = 0.34, p < .05). Negative emotions referring to healthcare were rarely reported during the trips. When they were reported, they were related to palliative care when a patient's health was deteriorating, such as: “Bouh, this patient is doing poorly. I would not be surprised if …” (unfinished sentence). Fig. 3B shows that the expression of negative emotions is irrespective of time constraints and is affected by time pressure.

In contrast, there were no significant influences for trip type on the number of positive feelings (H(3, N = 68) = 1.77, ns; Fig. 3A). The positive feelings reported by nurses were mostly related to the driving situation: “When there are not many people on the road, like today, it's fun to drive”. However, some positive feelings were related to care activities, for which comments often included a reference to time and to an underlying satisfaction related to confronting work challenges, such as, “I'm proud, we arrived at the same time as the nurse' aide and we will work better together”.

One round planning was observed to highlight the anticipated regulations. It lasted 20 min, which is double the length of time initially estimated by the nurses. Compared to a reference planning, 29 label changes, e.g., changes in the order of the visited patients, have been observed. Exemplifying anticipated regulations, these changes rely on information about:
                              
                                 -
                                 unusual difficulties expected to arise on the road,

requested care duration, if possibly different from the reference duration,

patients' wishes for a specific visit time window (e.g., the patient's generalist doctor comes at 10 am the next day and the patient prefers the care to be made beforehand).

These observed regulations were collective and problem-centred. Planned the day before the rounds, they allowed the nurses to anticipate what they could do (and who could do something) when an unusual time cost occurred, for example, when a nurse had to spend more time than expected with a patient. To increase the efficiency of nursing care, they created “room to manoeuvre,” which reduced time constraints. For example, nurses anticipated their rounds according to the location of the patient's home: “We have to tell the nurse that there is road work on street X; she will lose time. We will not load her with too many patients” or the care and its constraints: “Mrs R needs a certain type of drug before her care time. So, we need to visit Mrs R twice. Mr V lives near Mrs R. So we can visit him between the two visits to Mrs R.”; “During the organization of the round, we can cut the nursing care and the technical care if there are more nurses' aides than nurses; then, we will spend less time in the patients' home”.

Several anticipated regulations centred on emotional context were also observed. For example, when round overloads were announced, nurses usually warned patients a day in advance that they may not arrive on time. This prevented reproaches from patients, which nurses viewed incompatible with good care: “We call patients. One who is not happy says this the day before but not while we provide the healthcare. We are more relaxed that way. What is stressful for us is when patients make negative comments”; “We tell the patients, too. At least this prevents misunderstandings by the patient and family”.

A total of 66 phone calls were referenced; 59 phone calls were directly observed (37 were made by the observed nurses and 22 were received) and 7 occurred outside the car. We noted that 48 phone calls (including the non-observed 7 calls) were related to the occurrence of 33 in situ collective regulations implemented during 20 of the 68 trips (29% of trips). Those regulations were either information requests (N = 13; 39.4%) or round adjustments (N = 20; 60.6%). These observations corroborate nurses' comments, especially on the possibility of requesting help from other nurses who were working in the same geographic area (collective regulation focused on the problem): “We assist each other, from one area to another if we are overloaded”; “We know that if there is a problem, we can rearrange the round, or give the responsibility for some patients to another nurse. We tell each other “if there is a problem, we will call”.” The set of directly observed data showed that a regulation was associated with a greater ratio of phone calls made than phone calls received (1.7 vs 1.1 per trip in average; χ2(1, N = 39) = 5.58; p < .05). This difference may be partly explained by the fact that the observed nurse requesting a round adjustment sometimes also called the HITH organization, the patient or the nurses' aides. Moreover, every search by the observed nurse for reducing the number of patients in a round was successful (10 reductions that required 17 phone calls).

As shown in Fig. 4
                           , there was a significant effect for trip type on the number of occurrences of collective regulations per trip (on the row data, χ2(3, N = 68) = 20.83; p < .001). The deviation from the theoretical ratio was 63.64% for [TC+TP+], 14.29% for [TC−TP+], −14.29% for [TC+TP−], and −87.5% for [TC−TP−], showing a strong association between time constraint and/or time pressure and regulations. The data did not differentiated time pressure and time constraints with regards to the strength of this association (TP+ vs. TP−: 26/38 vs. 7/30, χ2(1, N = 68) = 13.64; p < .001; TC+ vs. TC−: 24/36 vs. 9/32, χ2(1, N = 68) = 10.07; p < .01). Looking at the differences between round adjustments and information requests revealed that the latter was not influenced by the trip type. In contrast, round adjustments were subjected to time pressure and time constraint influences (respectively TP+ vs. TP−: 17 vs. 3, χ2(1, N = 68) = 9.74; p < .01; TC+ vs. TC−: 15 vs. 5, χ2(1, N = 68) = 5.53; p < .05).

Among the 20 trips with at least one external collective regulation directly observed, 16 trips (80%) were related to at least one verbalization of emotion. The ratio was 31/48 (64%) for the trips without these regulations. The difference between the two ratios was not significant. More detailed analysis as a function of the trip type would be inconclusive due to the small sample sizes, except possibly the fact that 8 of the 16 trips depicted above were [TC+TP+] trips. Notably, emotional verbalizations seldom occurred during the phone calls (4/71 emotional verbalizations). However, it was observed that after care that was emotionally difficult or when a patient's health condition worsened, the called nurses implicitly managed the emotions of the observed nurse as exemplified in this phone interaction, “Mrs. X is really not good today.”/“Don't worry. Continue your round. I'll visit Mrs. X this afternoon.”

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The observed HITH nurses performed more than half of their work-related trips under time pressure. This ratio may be context-dependent but suggests that time pressure is a real problem for HITH nurses. As we hypothesized (Cœugnet et al., 2011, 2013a, b), time pressure appears to be subjective because time constraints are neither sufficient nor necessary for time pressure to arise. Most of the effects that were reported above support our predictions about time pressure's causes (i.e., sense of activity and uncertainty) and consequences (i.e., negative emotions and risk-taking). Moreover, the present study describes the external collective regulations implemented either in an anticipated manner (during the round planning) or in situ (through phone call interactions between nurses).

Care-related challenges were influential as a cause of time pressure and nurses appeared very sensitive to potential failures in patients' support. Rastegary and Landy (1993) argued that the risk of being sanctioned for violating time limits is a necessary condition for time pressure. This view could mainly evoke external sanctions. In the HITH organization that we investigated, institutional sanctions (ranging from simple verbal comments by a superior to suspension or dismissal) were possible. The nurses who were observed explained that supervisorial dissatisfaction about their work could result from the healthcare that they provided to patients (medical error, and/or official reports of discontent from patients or family members). However, during the interview performed after the systematic observation phases, the nurses rarely spontaneously spoke about institutional sanctions or their fear of them. In contrast, they repeatedly commented on the potentially deleterious consequences that delays could have on their patient's physical and psychological well-being. For the nurses we observed (who are probably representative of many others on that point), the sense of activity (Martin and Younger, 2001; Wu and Volker, 2011) and challenges that they confronted were far more important and influential than the threat of institutional sanctions. This was evidenced by the distressing impact that complaints from patients or their families had on the nurses.

As shown in the results section, although they enjoy driving (cf. their verbalizations of positive emotions on that point, independently from time pressure and constraints), nurses often react negatively to events that impeded driving, especially under time pressure. They expressed few concerns about the risk for car accidents, which may be related to their low driving anxiety and their focus on their primary tasks. The results show that the time pressure associated with high time constraints increased the risks that nurses took on the road, especially tailgating and amount of excess speed. The HITH organization offers protective conditions because it pays for tickets that the nurses receive for traffic rule violations and damage caused to the car, within the limit of two accidents each year whose nurse is to blame. However, the perspective of accidents could be seen per se as an adverse event. Thus, risky driving may emerge because the fear associated with a car accident weighs less than the benefit of to completing the main activity.

Uncertainty about the duration of care and/or the trip was also an important factor that affected time pressure. Indeed, uncertainty triggered time pressure during trips that had few time constraints. State anxiety which is described as the equivalent of cognitive uncertainty (Gudykunst, 1993) could be an underlying causal factor. As such, it is notable that the observed nurses were rated as neither high on trait-anxiety nor high on specific driving anxiety, which suggests that uncertainty may have a larger impact on anxious nurses. When nurses were able to anticipate time constraints and used coping strategies, anxiety/uncertainty was minimized, specifically when other nurses were relied on because the workload was too high. This required social trust within teams, i.e. a lack of uncertainty as regards colleagues' willingness to help each other.

The anticipated regulations observed during round planning aims at optimizing the nurses' rounds and at reducing uncertainties. They proved useful. Interestingly, these anticipated regulations may partially explain the [TC+TP−] condition, in which time pressure was low because the nurses who knew the time constraints earlier implemented these regulations. Regardless of the work pattern, a major beneficial factor was the room to manoeuvre, i.e., the latitude that the individual had that enabled him/her to respond to changes in the environment. Room to manoeuvre makes work activity more comfortable. According to Karasek's model (1979), increasing decision latitude prevents or reduces work-related stress even when the demands are high. The lead role given to the nurses in the preparation of their planning is in line with this model.

At individual level, during the rounds, nurses may use the high decision latitude they (as any other driver) have on the road as an in situ strategy to regulate problems. Collective regulations are also observed: these in situ external regulations only occur during 30% of trips, mostly those performed under time constraints and/or time pressure (the influence of the type of trips was observed for the round adjustments and not for the information requests). Thus, both anticipated and in situ regulations complete each other to optimize the performance of the structure as for the patients. These mutual adjustments of the rounds can also be seen as a form of “problem coping”, i.e., efforts that are directed towards managing or solving a problem that could result in negative feelings (Lazarus, 1984). Thus, this type of coping seeks to use some resources to address a problem. It includes situation-specific and task-oriented actions, but in the present case, it also indirectly prevents emotions from having a negative impact on the round of the nurse who made the call (focused-on-emotion collective regulation).

It was rare for nurses to verbalize emotions related to patient care. This could be in line with many previous publications highlighting nurses as multi-skilled emotion managers (Bolton, 2001) and with Goffman's concepts concerning the presentation of a socially acceptable face (Goffman, 1959). This did not reflect a generally reduced emotional expression or affective flattening because the road-related emotions were often verbalized, especially negativity about time pressure in reaction to driving situations that impeded their progression. Even if we did not directly investigate emotional coping (described as the process of managing or reducing negative feelings via cognitive and/or behavioural strategies; Lazarus, 1984), we cannot reject any form of coping by emotional sharing (Rimé, 2009) for either in our study. Indeed, some of our observations suggest that nurses could be able to detect negative feelings even when overtly expressed emotions are absent. It should be particularly useful since, as observed in telephone call centres (Cœugnet et al., 2011; Ribert-Van De Weerdt, 2011), emotional coping costs time and is difficult to implement under time pressure. Another hypothesis to investigate is whether nurses benefit from time pressure when they are dealing with emotions that are elicited by patient care. Time pressure has been shown to reduce empathy (Darley and Batson, 1973). This effect is socially deleterious in many situations, but it may be advantageous in some distressing work experiences. Moreover, when time pressure does not exhaust coping resources, it may provide positive emotions, such as self-efficacy (Rastegary and Landy, 1993; Bandura, 1997; Cœugnet et al., 2013a, b). Thus, it is possible, though counterintuitive, that time pressure might be useful in some HITH contexts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Time pressure is a subjective state. HITH nurses experienced time pressure due to (1) time constraints as well as (2) the challenges and (3) the uncertainties that they encountered during their professional activities. This time pressure resulted in negative emotions and led HITH nurses to take more risks on the road.

Our quantitative and qualitative data suggests strategies for improving HITH nurses' well-being when they experience the negative effects of time pressure. An activity analysis should (1) determine whether nurses have sufficient room to manoeuvre, (2) determine whether there is enough organizational effort to reduce uncertainties, (3) qualify the available social support and, if required, examine the efficacy of conflict management within the organization. If there are weaknesses, efforts should be made to make organizational or technical improvements. These measures did not appear necessary in Santélys, where time pressure was not associated with stress and burnout. In contrast, Van de Weerdt and Baratta (2011) described this relationship in a homecare organization in which professionals had no room to manoeuvre and were not allowed to communicate with their colleagues during rounds. This contrast suggests that increasing managerial pressure, as is often done in French health services, has negative effects on occupational health. Finally, it is important to allow nurses to reduce time constraints and time pressure through anticipated collective regulation. In situ individual regulations can also be strengthened to reduce risk taking during driving. For example, a cooperative mobile application that is intended for nurses, could provide nurses with additional room to manoeuvre by indicating (1) the geographic location of other nurses, (2) the number of remaining patients to visit by the team, and (3) whether the nurses are on time, late or early. This would give nurses an opportunity to change their rounds due to new information (e.g., a patient left the hospital, additional blood tests are requested, or road work or traffic jams) and it would provide the nurse with “emotional” reassurance that a colleague could possibly visit one of her/his patients if she/he is late. According Stuckey et al. (2007), these solutions can be classified as part of the organizational environment and highlight occupational light vehicle use.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The ﬁrst author has been funded by a PhD priority topic fellowship from the French Ministère de l’Enseignement Superieur et de la Recherche. Thanks were due to the nurses of Santèlys Association for their active participation in this study and to the general staff for their collaboration.


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Observation type
                                    Category
                                    Abbreviation
                                    Data
                                    Coding
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                    Time
                                    h
                                    Clock hour
                                    e.g., “8.12 p.m.”
                                 
                                 
                                    d
                                    Behaviour duration
                                    e.g., “12 min”
                                 
                                 
                                    Behaviours
                                    
                                    GPS
                                    GPS use
                                    O (yes) N (no)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    Vit.
                                    Overspeed
                                    Counter speed
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    Ctrl
                                    Control
                                    O (yes) N (no)
                                 
                                 
                                    Stops
                                    FR
                                    Red light
                                    Stop O (yes) N(no)
                                 
                                 
                                    FO
                                    Orange light
                                    Stop O (yes) N(no)
                                 
                                 
                                    S
                                    Stop
                                    Stop O (yes) N(no)
                                 
                                 
                                    CP
                                    Give way
                                    Stop O (yes) N(no)
                                 
                                 
                                    B
                                    Train gate
                                    Stop O (yes) N(no)
                                 
                                 
                                    PR
                                    Priority to the right
                                    Stop O (yes) N(no)
                                 
                                 
                                    P
                                    Pedestrians
                                    Stop O (yes) N(no)
                                 
                                 
                                    AI
                                    Unexpected stop
                                    To precise
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    ST
                                    Authorized parking.
                                    O (yes) N (no)
                                 
                                 
                                    Driving mode
                                    AR
                                    Fast acceleration
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    DB
                                    Abrupt overtaking
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    CS
                                    Jerky driving
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    CL
                                    Linear driving
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    DIV
                                    Inter-vehicular distance
                                    O (yes) N (no)
                                 
                                 
                                    VS
                                    Tight bend
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    CL
                                    Turn signal
                                    O (yes) N (no)
                                 
                                 
                                    Courtesy
                                    AC
                                    From another driver
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    I
                                    From the nurse
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    EC
                                    Control error
                                    To precise
                                 
                                 
                                    Phone Call
                                    AI
                                    Call from the nurse
                                    To precise
                                 
                                 
                                    AE
                                    External call
                                    To precise
                                 
                                 
                                    Context
                                    
                                    Something else
                                    
                                    To precise
                                 
                                 
                                    Road
                                    V
                                    City
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    A
                                    Highway
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    N
                                    Trunk road
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    VR
                                    Speedway
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    Traffic
                                    D
                                    Clear
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    F
                                    Flowing
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    R
                                    Slow
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    E
                                    Traffic jam
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    Parking
                                    Fac
                                    Easy
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    Dif
                                    Difficult
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    P
                                    Parking without maneuver
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    C
                                    Parallel parking
                                    x (easy or difficult)
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     The possible reminders are written in italic.

The interviewer reminds the nurses about the fact that:
                        
                           1.
                           the use of “you” means all observed nurses. There were no obvious differences on the behaviour of nurses during the observations phase.

whether or not you have time constraints or you feel time pressure; it was observed the quality of care was maintained (reinsurance).

To begin, do you differentiate high time constraints and the fact to feel under time pressure? If so, what would be your arguments to differentiate them? (to precise the difference).
                           
                              1.
                              First, we have identified situations with high time constraints during which you feel really pressed in time. [TC+; TP+]
                                    
                                       1.1
                                       Were you sometimes in such a situation?

Could you give me some elements that explain this condition? And examples?
                                             
                                                ○
                                                
                                                   Patient
                                                


                                                   Round
                                                


                                                   Collaboration
                                                


                                                   Road
                                                


                                                   Personal reasons …

What do you feel in this condition?
                                             
                                                ○
                                                
                                                   Psychological feeling
                                                


                                                   Physiological feeling
                                                

Sometimes, there were situations without high time constraints and during which you do not feel under time pressure [TC−; TP−]
                                    
                                       Same set of questions (1.1–1.3)

Now; is it possible high time constraints without feeling under time pressure [TC+; TP−]?
                                    
                                       Same set of questions (1.1–1.3)

Finally, is it possible that nurses encountered no time constraints but feel under time pressure [TC−; TP+]?
                                    
                                       Same set of questions (1.1–1.3)

Number of patients: From how many patients you estimate you have a round rather loaded, you have high time constraints?

Round modification (admission was not observed during the observations phase)

When you have patient admissions:
                           
                              -
                              Is there a different organization? If yes, which one?

When you said that during your round, you'll have to make an admission, what do you say? What do you feel at that moment? Do you feel that in other situations?

Reinsurance: During the observations, I did not observe extremely dangerous behaviour but just some small deviant behaviour.
                           
                              1.
                              Can you tell me the deviant behaviours I have observed in trips I made with you? Why? What did you feel at that moment?
                              

Do you think sometimes you take some risks on the road unintentionally?

What would be the reason for which you could take risks on the road?

@&#REFERENCES@&#

