@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The impact of different types of textile liners used in protective footwear on the subjective sensations of firefighters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A tool for evaluating the comfort of use of firefighter footwear is presented.


                        
                        
                           
                           New construction of liners was tested in terms of the subjective sensations of firefighters.


                        
                        
                           
                           Higher comfort was observed for the liner with a superabsorbent and a ventilation system.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Protective footwear

Textile liner

Comfort of use

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The paper presents ergonomic evaluation of footwear used with three types of textile liners differing in terms of design and material composition. Two novel textile composite liners with enhanced hygienic properties were compared with a standard liner used in firefighter boots. The study involved 45 healthy firefighters from fire and rescue units who wore protective footwear with one of the three types of liners. The study was conducted in a laboratory under a normal atmosphere. The ergonomic properties of the protective footwear and liners were evaluated according to the standard EN ISO 20344:2012 as well as using an additional questionnaire concerning the thermal and moisture sensations experienced while wearing the footwear. The study was conducted on a much larger group of subjects (45) than that required by the ISO standard (3) to increase the reliability of subjective evaluations. Some statistically significant differences were found between the different types of textile liners used in firefighter boots. It was confirmed that the ergonomic properties of protective footwear worn in the workplace may be improved by the use of appropriate textile components.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Personal protective equipment (PPE), including protective footwear, should meet the ergonomic requirements stipulated in Directive 89/686/EEC, which imposes on manufacturers the obligation to ensure that the PPE they produce meets certain health-related, hygienic, and ergonomic standards. This directive contains fundamental health and safety requirements concerning all PPE categories. For a PPE product to be placed on the EU market, it must meet the relevant parameters specified in the directive. Directive 89/686/EEC also describes procedures for evaluation of conformity, which vary depending on the PPE category, and which should be carried out by the manufacturer or its authorized representative before a given PPE product may be placed on the market. The directive makes a distinction between PPE of simple design (category I) and PPE of complex design (category III). Other PPE items, not falling under either of the above-mentioned categories, are classed as category II. If a given PPE product has passed evaluation for conformity with the requirements specified in the directive, the manufacturer may issue an EC conformity declaration, put the CE mark on the product, and place the product on the EU market. The objective of the directive is to make sure that all PPE available in the European Union represents a uniform level of safety and does not carry a risk for user health or hygiene.

The lifestyle changes that have occurred over the past years and the increasing professional activities of PPE users have put pressure on manufacturers to improve the ergonomics and comfort of use of protective footwear. Due to the popularity of comfortable sports shoes, users started to expect other types of footwear, including protective footwear, to ensure similar comfort. The intensive development of materials technology and improvements in footwear design initiated by sports shoe manufacturers has resulted in the implementation of many new solutions in protective footwear (Velani et al., 2012; Akbar-Khanzadeh et al., 1995; Mayer and Korhonen, 1999; Akbar-Khanzadeh, 1998; Frederick, 1984).

The problem with protective footwear is that the measures taken to meet the protective requirements imposed on it deteriorate its biomechanical and hygienic properties. For example, steel toecaps and steel anti-puncture insoles increase the weight of a pair of boots (to about 4 kg) and lead to considerable stiffness and a complete lack of fit to the user's foot. However, ergonomic protective footwear should not exhibit properties that would significantly decrease its functionality or affect the function of the feet or of the human body as a whole. Due to the unconventional design of protective footwear, the most frequently encountered problems among its users are: foot abrasions, painful skin lesions, limited mobility, a sensation of burning in the feet while walking for a longer time, sensations of high temperature and humidity inside footwear, and excessive sweating of the feet leading to skin diseases (mycoses) (Hole, 1973).

Currently, the ergonomic properties of protective footwear are evaluated in accordance with the standard EN ISO 20344:2012, harmonized with Directive 89/686/EEC. The methodology is focused on assessing the biomechanical comfort of use of protective footwear having a complex design. Unfortunately, the procedure described in the standard stipulates that evaluation should be conducted on three subjects, which does not ensure reliable results, especially in terms of subjective evaluation. It should also be stressed that ergonomics is not limited only to biomechanics, but also includes certain hygienic properties of materials that help ensure thermal balance, that is, appropriate heat and moisture transport between the foot and the environment (Koradecka, 2012). Protective footwear usually incorporates some barrier materials which hamper heat and moisture transport (Coca et al., 2010; Garner et al., 2013). Therefore, the heat produced inside protective footwear is not fully transmitted to the environment, sweat is not completely removed, and relative humidity may increase up to 100% (Mitsui et al., 1999; Chonan et al., 2000; Heus and Schols, 2005; Bergquist and Holmér, 1997; Kuklane et al., 1999; Kuklane, 2009; Smith et al., 2013). Sweat accumulation and increased humidity are the main causes of subjective discomfort, which may also lead to physiological disturbances in the human body. The response of the body to adverse environmental conditions, just as in the case of barrier clothing, may result in hyperthermia, thermal imbalance, and physical and mental fatigue (Marszałek et al., 2009; Bugajska et al., 2007; Zwolińska and Bogdan, 2012; Irzmańska et al., 2014a).

However, mechanisms of heat and moisture exchange in protective footwear differ from those in the clothes systems or individual textile samples studied to date (Heus and Schols, 2005). Still, this fact has not been supported with adequate scientific evidence. According to the literature devoted to casual and sport shoes, moisture transport occurs by: water vapor permeability through footwear materials, capillary transport of liquid sweat, water vapor and liquid sweat absorption, and air circulation due to the pumping effect of feet while walking (Covill et al., 2003, 2002a,b; Filipitsch et al., 1995; Ogden, 1998; Solveig, 2006; Dieckhaus, 2003; Yang et al., 2013; Taylor et al., 2006). One paper discussed the mechanisms of sweat removal from the foot surface and footwear, emphasizing the role of insoles (Irzmańska et al., 2012). According to its authors, insoles may remove up to 60% of the sweat produced by the feet. Liquid sweat is accumulated in the shoe soles, which leads to their gradual saturation, especially if the shoe upper is impermeable. In such a situation, a major role may be played by support textiles (liner, insole, socks), which may facilitate moisture drainage along the fibers and yarns to a level above the shoe upper, where it may evaporate as a result of ventilation during walking. Thus, an optimum microclimate inside footwear can be ensured by, e.g., using appropriate textile materials for inside footwear elements, such as insoles, liners, and inserts (ISO/TR 18690:2012; Scheffer, 2012). All-rubber firefighter footwear is typically equipped with wool felt liners, which exhibit good insulation properties, meeting the firefighting requirements, but they also have a tendency to accumulate heat and humidity. Wool felt does not improve physiological, thermoregulatory, or comfort properties during physical activity due to the fact that the macroscopic structure of the fibers (the presence of a scaly cuticle on the surface and the crimping of individual fibers) promotes thermal insulation and sorption of water in liquid and vapor form (leading to strong sorption-induced swelling and emission of considerable heat of sorption) (Irzmańska et al., 2014b; Stuart et al., 1989; Tanaka et al., 2001).

As it has been shown, textiles worn inside footwear (sox, insoles, and liners) and close to one's body significantly influence the rate of heat and sweat transport, which is critical for footwear microclimate and comfort of use (Borreguero et al., 2013; Bertaux et al., 2010; Fauland et al., 2012; Gulbiniene et al., 2011; Irzmańska et al., 2012; Purvis and Tunstall, 2004; Johnson and Russell, 2009).

It seems that appropriately designed liners with optimum hygienic parameters in protective footwear will be helpful for the users of all-rubber firefighter boots. Therefore, this paper presents an ergonomic evaluation of such footwear worn with three types of textile liners. The studied liners differed in terms of their construction and material composition. We designed two types of composite liners made of textile composites with improved hygienic properties, which should enable increased sweat evaporation from the skin, absorption of liquid sweat, and heat reduction. The proposed liners were compared to a standard liner used in firefighter footwear. The ergonomic properties of the protective footwear and liners were evaluated pursuant to the standard EN ISO 20344:2012 and by means of an additional questionnaire concerning thermal and moisture sensations in protective footwear. The study was conducted on a much larger group of subjects (45) than that required by the ISO standard (3) to increase the reliability of subjective evaluations.

The following research questions were raised in the paper: Can the ergonomics of all-rubber footwear be improved by the application of different textile components in liners? Can users identify subtle differences between liners made of wool and those made of textile composites, and will this translate into greater comfort of use? It was hypothesized that it is possible to improve the ergonomic properties of protective footwear by using appropriate textile components inside it.

The present study investigated all-rubber protective footwear equipped with protective elements, that is, steel toecaps and anti-puncture steel plates installed in the soles (Fig. 1
                        ). The average weight of a pair of boots was 3.5 kg, liners included. The construction of the studied liners is given in Table 1
                        , while the textile materials from which they were made are presented in Table 2
                        .

The study involved 45 healthy firefighters from fire and rescue units wearing protective footwear with liners, who were divided into 3 study groups (A, B, and C). Group A included 15 subjects aged 27–40 (33.4 ± 3.48), with a body mass index (BMI) in the range of 21.46–30.02 (25.42 ± 2.66). Group B consisted of 15 subjects aged 25–41 (32 ± 5.45) with a BMI of 20.90–33.20 (25.73 ± 2.87). Group C also comprised of 15 firefighters, aged 25–38 (31.5 ± 3.48), with a BMI of 24.95 ± 2.94.

Each subject was given a two-piece sports outfit consisting of shorts and a T-shirt made of cotton (100%), as well as socks made of cotton (60%) and polyamide (40%). The footwear, socks, and liners were conditioned in the laboratory at an air temperature of 23 ± 2 °C and a relative humidity of 50 ± 5%.

The subjects were assigned to the groups based on the liners they were using. Group A used liners with a superabsorbent and with an additional ventilation system in the front part of the upper, group B used liners without a superabsorbent or an additional ventilation system in the upper, while Group C used standard wool felt liners. The study protocol was approved by the Committee of Scientific Research Ethics at the CIOP-PIB (Poland).

Experimental procedure consisted of an exercise test according to the procedure for ergonomic assessment of footwear described in EN ISO 20344:2012. Every liner type was tested by 15 subjects. The presented test involved a much greater number of subjects than that required by the ISO standard (3 subjects). The exercise tests consisted of activities typically performed during physical work, that is:
                           
                              •
                              walking at a speed of 4–5 km/h for 5 min,

ascending stairs (17 ± 3 steps) and descending stairs (17 ± 3 steps) for a maximum of 1 min,

kneeling/crouching for 1 min.

Following the exercise test, the subjects answered questions contained in the following questionnaires:
                           
                              •
                              The first questionnaire was adopted from EN ISO 20344:2012 and concerned ergonomic assessment of the biomechanical comfort of protective footwear worn with three types of liners (Table 3
                                 ). The questions addressed the condition of the inside surface of the footwear, fastener adjustment, climbing stairs, and kneeling/crouching.

The other, additional questionnaire was formulated by the authors of the present study and concerned the subjective evaluation of protective footwear used with three liner types (Table 4
                                 ). The questions concerned sensations of chafing by the seams and other elements of the lining, limitation of foot movement by the liner, and subjective perceptions of warmth and moisture inside the footwear (Table 4).

Data were analyzed using the chi-squared test and Cramer's V coefficient to determine differences between the analyzed textile liners in terms of the ergonomic properties of protective footwear, as well as using analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine differences between the analyzed liners in terms of subjective sensations of warmth and moisture. Pairwise comparison of means was conducted using post hoc tests with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. Analysis was done by means of the SPSS Statistics 20.0 software.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The present study concerned ergonomic evaluation of all-rubber protective footwear with standard and novel textiles liners. Some statistically significant differences were found between the three types of liners in respect of subjective evaluation of ergonomic properties both in terms of biomechanical comfort and temperature- and humidity-related comfort.

Statistically significant differences between the three studied types of liners used with protective footwear were found in terms of elements chafing the skin, such as seams (χ(2) = 6.14; p < 0.05; V = 0.37). The subjects wearing composite liners with an additional ventilation system (group A) described them as “non-chafing,” in contrast to the subjects wearing composite liners without a ventilation system or wool felt liners (groups B and C), as many as 46.67% of whom complained of chafing (Fig. 2
                        ). No statistically significant differences between the groups were identified for foot mobility inside the footwear (χ(2) = 2.81; p > 0.05) (Fig. 3
                        ).

It was found that during the exercise test negative sensations of moisture reported by the subjects wearing footwear with wool felt liners (Group C) were by 61% higher than in the case of footwear with liners containing a superabsorbent and ventilation system (group A) and by 9% higher than in the case of footwear with liners containing neither a superabsorbent nor a ventilation system (group B). It should be stressed that sensations of moisture while walking were experienced by the users of liners without a superabsorbent and ventilation system (group B) more strongly than by the users of liners with a superabsorbent and ventilation system (group A) by as much as 31%. Similarly to moisture sensations, thermal sensations in footwear with wool felt liners (group C) were experienced more strongly (by as much as 83%) than in the case of footwear with liners containing a superabsorbent and ventilation system (group A). Importantly, thermal sensations associated with novel liners containing a superabsorbent and ventilation system (group A) were better than those associated with the novel liners without them (group B) by as much as 48% (Fig. 4
                        ). This was confirmed by ANOVA, which showed the differences observed between the subjects belonging to groups A, B, and C to be statistically significant only for comparisons between groups C and A. The microclimate (temperature and moisture) during exercise in footwear equipped with liners with a ventilation system and superabsorbent was rated significantly higher than that in the footwear with wool felt liners or liners without a ventilation system or superabsorbent. In turn, the microclimate during exercise in footwear equipped with wool felt liners was evaluated to be the same as that in the case of liners without a superabsorbent (Table 5
                        ).

As expected, the results of the questionnaire showed wool felt liners (tested by group C) to be less comfortable than the novel liners made of soft composite materials (tested by groups A and B). The questionnaire (formulated by the authors of the present paper) was designed to evaluate thermal and moisture sensations in footwear, in an important way complementing the standard assessment of the ergonomic properties of protective footwear. This is of particular significance in the case of footwear used in firefighting and chemical rescue actions, which is made of rubber or plastic materials that prevent the permeation of water and/or other chemical substances from the outside. Such footwear makes it impossible to remove the heat and sweat which are profusely produced during physical exercise. As the subjects performed the exercise test, the temperature and humidity inside the footwear gradually increased, which led to a sensation of discomfort in those subjects who wore liners made of non-hygienic textile materials. The felt liner made it practically impossible for sweat to evaporate away, so all water vapor condensed inside the all-rubber footwear and within the structure of the felt liner itself. The above conclusions are confirmed by the results of a previous study conducted by the authors of the present paper, concerning the comfort of use of felt liners in protective footwear (Irzmańska et al., 2014a). Some authors (Troynikov and Wardiningsih, 2011; Woodcock, 1966; Hes and Loghin, 2008) have reported that transport of moisture through materials made of hydrophilic fibers is difficult as water becomes mechanically bound (through adhesion) and capillary water accumulates inside microcapillary voids, cracks, and openings (Ghali et al., 1994). This is also true of wool, as it is characterized by a considerably heterogeneous macroscopic structure (Bogusławska-Bączek and Hes, 2013). According to the literature, the maximum sorption of moisture (at 100% relative humidity of the air) is 22–30% of the dry weight of wool, and only 0–8% of the dry weight of manmade polyester fibers (Bartkowiak and Frydrych, 2011). Due to the scaly surface of wool fibers and the structure of felt (a heat insulator), heat gradually accumulates, raising the temperature inside the footwear, which is keenly felt by the subjects, in contrast to those wearing liners equipped with a ventilation system in the front part of the upper.

The behavior of textile materials in contact with liquid sweat is critical for their ability to ensure comfort of use during intensive physical activity. In such materials, liquid sweat is drained sideways or transversely, from one side of material to the other, as it is carried away from the body (Dutkiewicz, 2003). The solution proposed in this paper, that is, liners containing a superabsorbent characterized by high sorption capacity and dynamics, increases the ability of the footwear to absorb large volumes of sweat produced by the feet. According to some papers (Taylor et al., 2006; Gran, 1957), moisture is stored in the form of liquid sweat by liners, which take in about 50% of the overall amount of moisture absorbed by the footwear. Thus, as moisture was stored, or “sequestered” from the immediate surroundings of the feet in liners with a superabsorbent, sensations associated with the microclimate inside the all-rubber footwear were more positive. In turn, non-hygienic wool liners had very poor sorption properties, and sweat accumulated on the skin and inside the liners. The liners proposed in this paper maximized the rate of sweat evaporation, at the same time minimizing the discomfort caused by wet materials sticking to the skin. The novel liners removed sweat from the skin and transported it to the external side of the material, which had some surface available for evaporation thanks to the ventilation system and composite materials with a structure enhancing sweat transport and evaporation. If two surfaces of a material differ in their ability to attract sweat, then the placement of the layer with lower absorption properties in contact with the skin will cause the sweat collected from the skin to be transported outside to the layer which is exposed to air movement, where it can evaporate. Thus, materials with a density gradient (where the fiber diameter and capillary size are greater in the internal layer than in the external one) enable effective sweat migration away from the skin. The incorporation of composites in liners used with all-rubber protective footwear has greatly enhanced the comfort of use of the protective footwear thanks to efficient moisture management, which would be impossible to achieve with standard liners made exclusively of natural (wool) fibers. The most interesting finding in our study was that the ergonomic properties (comfort of use) of all-rubber firefighter footwear can be improved by fitting it with appropriate internal textile components.

Statistically significant differences were found between the three types of textile liners used in protective footwear in terms of evaluation of the presence of surface irregularities or sharp or hard areas χ(2) = 10.49; p < 0.05; V = 0.48 (Fig. 2). On the other hand, assessment of footwear with liners concerning the presence or absence of defects that could pose a hazard to the users did not show significant differences (χ(2) = 1.98; p > 0.05). Similarly, statistical analysis did not reveal significant differences between the studied groups in respect of difficulties while walking (χ(2) = 2.71; p > 0.05), climbing stairs (χ(2) = 0.51; p > 0.05), or kneeling/crouching (χ(2) = 1.09; p > 0.05). As the tested all-rubber footwear did not contain any fasteners, the question about fastening adjustment was omitted (the third question in the EN ISO 20344:2012 questionnaire) (Figs. 5–7
                        
                        
                        ).

As expected, the wool felt liner (tested by group C) was perceived as more uncomfortable than the novel liners made of soft composite materials (tested by groups A and B). The wool liners were made of thick, stiff wool felt with a surface density of 400 g/m2 and a thickness of over 3 mm. Due to their scaly (rough) structure, wool fibers have a tendency to protrude into the skin rather than buckle under external pressure, thus activating pain receptors and causing irritation (Naylor et al., 1992). The composites used in the two novel liners consisted of materials made of polyester fibers (PES) and Lyocell cellulose fibers (woven fabrics with a satin weave characterized by a smooth surface and enhanced sensory perception). As can be seen, parameters such as fiber type and fabric thickness and stiffness are of importance for the comfort of use of textile components in footwear. Interestingly, despite the fact that the subjects were wearing very uncomfortable heavy footwear, subtle differences in sensations linked to textile liners were perceived and identified. Some authors (Gavin, 2003; Dai et al., 2008) have proven that high intensity exercise tests should be used for examining differences between textiles. In turn, other workers have compared two types of polyester material during intensive exercise without noting any significant differences between them (Brazaitis et al., 2010). This could have been caused by small differences in the macroscopic structure of polyester and cotton fibers. In the case of a comparison of products made of wool fibers (liner C) and polyester fibers (liners A and B), such differences may be more perceptible, which shows that liners B and A (built of the same composite materials) do not differ significantly.

The subjects found footwear equipped with traditional liners to present some difficulties in performing professional activities due to the specific morphological structure of wool felt. On the other hand, the two tested composite liners made it easier for the subjects to walk, kneel/crouch, and climb stairs, and did not limit their foot mobility. These liners ensured stability and a sense of security while walking.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The two novel liners made of textile composites with enhanced hygienic properties afford the users of all-rubber firefighter footwear increased comfort of use. Therefore, the ergonomics of protective all-rubber footwear impermeable to heat and moisture can be improved by using composite liners made of textile materials with desirable hydrophilic and hydrophobic characteristics and by appropriately designing their arrangement within the spatial structure of the liners. This new approach to evaluating comfort of use of footwear equipped with support textiles may be a valuable tool for ergonomic assessment of footwear worn at the workplace.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This publication was supported under scientific project no. N N404 068240 financed by the National Science Centre (Poland) in the years 2011–2013.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

