@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Mobile input device type, texting style and screen size influence upper extremity and trapezius muscle activity, and cervical posture while texting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Input device type and texting style affect ergonomic exposures when texting.


                        
                        
                           
                           Touch screen texting requires less muscle activity than a physical keypad.


                        
                        
                           
                           2-Handed texting elicits less wrist extensor muscle activity than 1 thumb/hand.


                        
                        
                           
                           Muscle activity and cervical flexion increase as touch screen size increases.


                        
                        
                           
                           Fewer choose to use thumbs only when texting with larger touch screen sizes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Text messaging

Ergonomic exposure

SMS (short message service)

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study aimed to determine the effects of input device type, texting style, and screen size on upper extremity and trapezius muscle activity and cervical posture during a short texting task in college students. Users of a physical keypad produced greater thumb, finger flexor, and wrist extensor muscle activity than when texting with a touch screen device of similar dimensions. Texting on either device produced greater wrist extensor muscle activity when texting with 1 hand/thumb compared with both hands/thumbs. As touch screen size increased, more participants held the device on their lap, and chose to use both thumbs less. There was also a trend for greater finger flexor, wrist extensor, and trapezius muscle activity as touch screen size increased, and for greater cervical flexion, although mean differences for cervical flexion were small. Future research can help inform whether the ergonomic stressors observed during texting are associated with musculoskeletal disorder risk.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Globally, the number of mobile device subscriptions is approaching 6.8 billion (ITU, 2013). It is expected that worldwide text messaging frequency will increase to 9.4 trillion annually by 2016, up from 5.9 trillion in 2011 (Clark-Dickson, 2012). In the United States, it has been found that 91% of mobile device users perform text messaging, e-mailing, or instant messaging (Rainie, 2010). Individuals in a one Canadian university community spent more than 3.5 h per day using mobile devices to text, email, or browse the Internet (Berolo et al., 2011).

Case reports and epidemiologic studies indicate there is a potential risk of musculoskeletal symptoms and musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in the neck, shoulder, and hands with increased exposure to mobile device use for text messaging (Berolo et al., 2011; Gold et al., 2009; Korpinen et al., 2013; Menz, 2005; Ming et al., 2006; Storr et al., 2007; Williams and Kennedy, 2011). Non-neutral and static postures and forceful exertions have been identified as risk factors for neck/shoulder and hand/wrist MSDs (Bernard, 1997; National Academy of Sciences, 2001). Texting on mobile devices requires muscle activity to hold the device and type while texting. The moment generated through key activation (typically by the thumb) must be counterbalanced, likely through activation of the finger flexors and wrist extensors.

Aspects of mobile device design, including input device type (touch screen or physical keypad), device weight, and screen size may influence ergonomic exposures while texting. Ergonomic exposures may be different when performing the same texting task on touch screen tablets of different sizes. Young et al. (2012) observed increased cervical flexion with touch screen placement on one's lap vs. placement on a table. Due to their increased weight, mobile devices with larger touch screen sizes are more likely to be used on the lap as compared with smaller devices. Therefore, greater cervical flexion may occur with larger screen size. However, no previous studies have examined touch screen size and its influence on upper extremity muscle activity, upper trapezius muscle activity, and cervical posture.

Texting styles (preferences for which digits and hands are used) may affect muscle activity, and joint angles. One observational study of texters (n = 859) found the most frequent styles were both hands holding the device with both thumbs typing (46.1%) and one thumb typing while the same hand holds the device (44.1%) (Gold et al., 2012). Literature is sparse with regard to comparisons of muscle activities in the fingers, forearm/wrist, and neck and forearm/wrist and neck posture while texting in these two different styles. However, Gustafsson et al. (2011) found that greater extensor digitorum muscle activity was used during texting while holding the phone with one hand rather than two, which was attributed to higher stabilizing forces required when texting and gripping the phone with one hand. The wrist extensors work synergistically with the extensor digitorum (Kendall et al., 1993). Therefore, wrist extensor muscle activity would likely be associated with texting style.

Mobile devices with the QWERTY keyboard configuration are generally of two input types: physical keypad and touch screen. Keystroke forces as measured through a force plate were greater in physical keypads than in touch screen keyboards (Kim et al., 2014). Similarly, participants in texting studies have been found to increase their applied muscle activity with increased computer keyboard key activation force requirements (Lee et al., 2009; Radwin and Ruffalo, 1999; Rempel et al., 1997. Therefore, users will likely exert greater thumb muscle forces when using a physical keypad than a touch screen mobile device.

Individual keys on touch screen devices cannot be identified through haptic feedback. Typically, users must view these virtual keys to identify them. Generally, smaller keys are present on devices with smaller screen sizes. Thus, individuals may prefer to hold touch screen phones with smaller screens closer to their line of sight, using less cervical flexion to view the screen.

To understand the potential effects of text messaging exposures on MSDs, it is important to describe muscle activity and joint angles while texting on commonly utilized hand held devices with commonly used texting styles. The study of muscles forces and postures associated with texting on hand held devices with different input types or different sizes, and texting with different styles could identify potentially negative musculoskeletal impacts on users and could inform preventive guidelines. Any adverse effect of input device type would be of particular import for mobile device designers, while an effect of typing style would be critical for users.

In this study, we used readily available, commonly used, off-the-shelf hand held devices.

The primary aim of the study was to ascertain whether input device type and/or texting style affected upper extremity muscle activity and cervical posture during a short texting task. Because of the greater force required to activate physical keys, we hypothesize that greater thenar eminence activity will occur when using a physical keypad than a touch screen mobile device. Similarly, because the moment generated in texting must be counterbalanced by the finger flexors and wrist extensors, we hypothesize that wrist extensor and finger muscle activity will be also affected by input device type. Because of the increased need to stabilize and grip the phone with one-handed texting versus two-handed texting, we hypothesize that wrist extensor muscle activity will be influenced by texting style. We also sought to characterize participants' preferred texting styles with touch screen devices of different size screens. Additionally, we explored the effects of texting on upper extremity and upper trapezius muscle activity and cervical posture with respect to touch screen size while holding the device with two hands and typing with both thumbs.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

College students were recruited via email and advertisements posted at a large urban university campus. Potential participants were screened over the phone for eligibility. Inclusion criteria included: at least 18 years of age, right hand dominant, and experience with use of mobile hand-held devices for text messaging. Exclusion criteria included allergies to adhesive tape, arm or hand pain or numbness rated 4 or higher on a 0–10 numerical scale, and experiencing arm or hand pain or numbness more than occasionally (i.e., frequently or continuously). Twenty eligible participants provided informed consent. This study was approved by the Temple University and University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey Institutional Review Boards.

Participants sat in a wooden chair without armrests (Fig. 1
                        ) and texted the phrase “hi how are you” without capitalization or punctuation, at their preferred pace, and without stopping to correct errors. This task was executed continuously and repeatedly over a period of 10 s. There was a break of 1 min between randomized experimental conditions. Two trials of each condition were executed. Participants were asked to rest for 30 s between trials of the same condition. The second trial only was used in data analysis. Prior to executing each condition, an investigator provided verbal instructions and demonstrated the condition.

Mobile devices utilized in the study had a QWERTY format for character input. These included a physical keypad phone, 96 g, 8.4 × 4.3 × 2.3 cm, keyboard: 3.5 × 5.0 cm (LG 900G, LG Mobile Phones, San Diego, CA); a 3.5″ touch screen phone, 101 g, 11.2 × 5.9 × .71.0 cm, keyboard: 2.7 × 4.3 cm (iPod touch model MC544LL, Apple, Cupertino, CA); a 7″ touch screen notepad, 385 g, 18.6 × 12.0 × 1.2 cm (Samsung Galaxy Tab model GT-P1010, Samsung Electronics, Ridgefield Park, NJ); and a 9.5″ touch screen notepad, 603 g, 18.6 × 24.1 × 86.0 cm, (iPad 2 model MC770LL, Apple, Cupertino, CA). Each mobile device was made ready for texting before being handed to the participant. That is, “Notes” or another similar app on the mobile device was activated before the participant was given the device. Each of these applications had a font size of 8.5 points.

The randomized conditions consisted of the following:
                           
                              •
                              physical keypad device, right hand holding device, right thumb typing (1/1)

physical keypad device, both hands holding device, both thumbs typing (2/2)

3.5″ touch screen device, right hand holding device, right thumb typing (1/1)

3.5″ touch screen device, both hands holding device, both thumbs typing (2/2)

3.5″ touch screen device: preferred style

7″ touch screen device: preferred style

9.5″ touch screen device: preferred style

For the first four listed conditions, participants were required to hold the device in a portrait orientation. For the preferred style conditions, mobile devices were placed screen down on a table located 1 m away from the participant. Participants retrieved the device, resumed sitting in the chair, and spent as much time as desired to determine how they wanted to hold the device and which fingers they wanted to use to text. In general, participants self-determined how they wanted to hold the device in less than 1 min. After they began texting, a researcher (DK or MG) recorded which fingers were used and whether the device or its bottom edge was on the lap.

To measure cervical posture in the sagittal plane, adhesive spherical markers (3/8″ in diameter) were affixed to the participants over the 7th cervical vertebrae spinous process and the mid-forehead. A video camera (HDR-SR11, Sony Corporation; Tokyo, Japan) was affixed to a tripod located 1.5 m from the participant. Camera height was adjusted for each participant so that the center of the lens was at the same height as the participant's external auditory meatus while sitting in the chair. Prior to the texting trials, participants were asked to sit upright in a wooden chair and fix their gaze upon an eye-level wall graphic located 4.6 m away for a period of 10 s during which a lateral view digital video (30 Hz) was recorded. This was regarded as the cervical neutral condition.

In data analysis, for the cervical neutral condition and each texting condition video, markers were digitized in and a line between the markers was drawn (Fig. 1). The angle between this line and the horizontal was calculated (MaxTRAQ V2.2, Innovision Systems Inc., Columbiaville, MI). This angle was calculated for all frames of the video clip and the mean angle was utilized as the data point. The amount of forward motion (cervical flexion) for a given texting condition was determined by subtracting the mean texting condition cervical angle from the mean cervical neutral angle.

Bi-polar differential surface EMG electrodes with an inter-electrode distance of 20 mm (SX320, Biometrics Ltd., Newport, UK) were affixed with double-stick tape to 4 muscles groups on the participant's right side: (1) upper trapezius, (2) extensor carpi radialis (longus and brevis) (ECR), (3) flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS), and (4) abductor pollicis brevis (APB) prior to the texting trials. The electrode for upper trapezius was placed at the midpoint between C7 and the acromion; the electrode for the extensor carpi radialis was placed 2 fingerbreadths distal to the lateral epicondyle; the electrode for the flexor digitorum superficialis was placed midway along the volar aspect of the forearm, slightly medial to midline; the electrode for the abductor pollicis brevis was placed midway between the volar aspect of the first metacarpalphalangeal joint and the first carpometacarpal joint (Delagi et al., 2011). A ground electrode was affixed to the ulnar styloid process of the left wrist. The electrodes were connected to the same DataLOG device and associated software described above, thus enabling synchronization with the electrogoniometer data for wrist motion. The EMG sampling rate was 1000 Hz. For all EMG measurements, the root mean square (RMS) signal was used with a moving average over 0.1 s. The 50th percentile RMS signal was used in data analysis.

Prior to the texting trials, for each of the four muscle groups, the surface EMG signal was collected during three, 5-s maximum voluntary contractions (MVCs), separated by a 1 min break between contractions to allow for muscle recovery. A minimum break of at least 1 min was taken between testing of each muscle group. The first and last 0.25 s of each exertion was removed, in order to eliminate any transients. The highest value of the 3 exertions was designated as the 100% MVC. MVCs were obtained as follows:
                              
                                 Upper trapezius: Participants were seated in a chair with their arms at their sides and asked to shrug upward while grasping metal handles affixed to the floor with a steel chain.

ECR: Participants were seated (with their elbow bent 90° and forearm pronated and resting on a table) and grasped a metal handle affixed to the floor with a steel chain.

FDS: Participants gripped a hydraulic hand dynamometer (Jamar model 5030J1, Lafayette Instruments, Lafayette, IN).

APB: Participants performed a key-style pinch using a hydraulic pinch dynamometer (Baseline model 12-0200, Fabrication Enterprises, White Plains, NY).

Surface EMG activity from each of the electrodes was recorded during each texting trial.

Each muscle activity and joint angle variable was tested for normality with the Shapiro–Wilk test and by viewing PP and QQ plots. Since the muscle activity variables were not normally distributed, these were log transformed in the data analysis. Mean muscle activities and joint angles were computed on a per condition basis. A repeated measures ANOVA (RMANOVA) was performed to evaluate the effect of input device type, texting style and interaction between input device type and texting style on the mean muscle activities and cervical posture between the 4 conditions identified for our primary aim (physical keypad device and touch screen device, each with 1/1 or 2/2 texting styles).

The 2/2 texting style was selected as a preferred style by some participants for all three screen sizes. A repeated measures ANOVA was performed to evaluate the effect of screen size on mean muscle activity and cervical posture while participants typed in the 2/2 style. Since there were three levels of screen size, Mauchly's test of sphericity was conducted. If sphericity could not be assumed, the Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment for the p-value was used. Trends in outcome variables by screen size were determined using a test for linear trend in SPSS. Data are presented as mean and standard deviation. Statistical significance was regarded at p < 0.05. Excel (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA), SAS V9.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) and SPSS V20 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY) were used in data analysis.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The mean age of the participants recruited to the study was 21.2 ± 2.7 years (range: 18–28 years). Sixteen females and 4 males participated. The mean height was 169.2 cm (range: 154.9–193 cm), and the mean weight was 72.5 kg (range: 52.1–107 kg).

There was an effect of input device type for thumb muscle (APB) activity (p = 0.001, RMANOVA), but no effect of texting style. Participants using the physical keypad generated greater mean APB activity than when using a touch screen regardless of texting style. For finger flexor (FDS) muscle activity, there was also an effect of input device type (RMANOVA, p < 0.001), and no effect of texting style (Table 1
                           ). However, an interaction effect was observed (p = 0.025). Similarly, greater FDS muscle activity was generated while using the physical keypad than the touch screen. Wrist extensor muscle (ECR) activity was significantly greater with physical keypad than the touch screen regardless of texting styles (RMANOVA, p < 0.001). Additionally, there was an effect of texting style (RMANOVA, p < 0.001), with greater ECR muscle activity used in the 1/1 style. However, there was no interaction between input device type and style (p = 0.07). There was no effect of input device type or texting style on upper trapezius muscle activity.

For cervical flexion there was an effect of texting style (RMANOVA, p = <0.001), with greater flexion in the 2/2 style. Input device type did not affect cervical flexion.

We observed changes in preferred texting styles when participants texted on screens of different size (Table 2
                           ). When texting with their preferred style on the smallest (3.5″) touch screen, 90% of participants used both thumbs and none held the device on their lap. As screen size increased, more used the right index finger in combination with other digits. Additionally, more placed the entire device or its bottom edge on their lap. Sixty percent of participants placed the larger (9.5″) touch screen on their lap while texting.

For EMG muscle activity measurements, there were mean differences by screen sizes when texting with the 2/2 style (RMANOVA, p < 0.05) (Table 3
                           ). Finger flexor, wrist extensor, and upper trapezius muscle activity each increased as screen size increased (test for trend, p < 0.05). Additionally, cervical flexion increased with increasing screen size (test for trend, p < 0.05).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

We found that device type and texting style has an effect on activity in certain muscles and cervical posture (flexion angle) in college students using commonly utilized hand held devices for short duration texting. Touch screen device size may also have an effect on these variables.

The greater mean thumb (APB), wrist extensor (ECR), and finger flexor (FDS) muscle activities that were observed with the 3.5″ physical keypad input device as compared to a 3.5″ touch screen input device (of similar linear dimensions and weight) were likely due to greater force requirements to depress a physical key. It is possible that the FDS and ECR generate force to counterbalance the moment that is generated by activating the physical keys, while also contracting to stabilize the wrist and finger joints, which occurs during gripping activities (Mogk and Keir, 2003). Our finding is consistent with Kim et al. (2014) who reported lower muscle activity in finger muscles when typing on a virtual touchscreen compared to a conventional keyboard. Werth and Babski-Reeves (2014) also reported lower muscle forces when typing on a virtual (touch screen) keyboard.

In comparing different texting styles (1/1 vs. 2/2), the greater muscle activity in the ECR in the 1/1 style is likely attributable to the fact that one hand is supporting the full weight of the device in the 1/1 condition. Gustafsson et al. (2011) also found higher muscle activation in the extensors while texting with one thumb compared to 2 thumbs in a study with a larger sample size (n = 56), which was attributed to increased need for stability while holding the phone and keying simultaneously. We did not find significantly greater thumb muscle activity in the one-handed compared to the two-handed condition. We expected that use of only one thumb would increase the exposure of the thumb compared to sharing the task between two thumbs. However, we did not track texting pace or frequency of thumb motion in this study. If the pace of texting with one thumb was slower than with two thumbs, that would offset the potentially increased demand of texting with one thumb over a short duration of time. Although we informally observed no change in texting speed between the 1/1 and 2/2 texting style conditions, we cannot be sure of the possible effect of texting speed on our results.

Unexpectedly, participants assumed greater cervical flexion when texting in the 2/2 style. Although statistically significant, the differences in cervical flexion between texting styles were relatively small (mean difference for cervical flexion = 2.0° with the touch screen device and 3.4° with the physical keypad device) and thus may not have a meaningful impact on MSD risk. In the 1/1 style on a given device, the smaller amount of cervical flexion we observed was likely because participants tended to hold the phone closer to their faces in order to see the screen (based on informal authors' observations).

Sixty percent of participants chose to place the 9.5″ touch screen on their laps during texting, while no participants placed the 3.5″ touch screen on their laps. This is likely due to the fact the larger device is heavier, and that the virtual keys (which are larger in devices with larger screen sizes) can be seen at a greater distance. A greater percentage of participants used the right index finger in combination with other digits as the screen size (and therefore the virtual key size) increased. This may be because a larger digital keyboard might have prompted people to type as they would on a conventional computer keyboard.

We observed an increase in cervical flexion while texting in the 2/2 style as screen size increased. This is probably because a greater proportion of participants placed the device on the lap as the screen became larger. The placement of the larger device on the lap requires a more downward gaze, which can be achieved by increasing cervical flexion. However, it may not necessarily be the size of the device, but rather the placement of the larger device that is related to increased cervical flexion. In Young et al. (2012), placing a tablet on a table higher than the lap resulted in reduced flexion in the head and neck as compared with placing the device on the lap. Similar relationships with laptop computer placement and neck flexion have been observed previously (Asundi et al., 2010; Moffet et al., 2002).

The increased cervical flexion helps explain the trend for an increase in trapezius muscle activity as screen size became larger. As the cervical spine flexes more, the upper trapezius must work harder to contribute to a counterbalancing force to offset the increasing flexion moment produced by the weight of the head. This potential mechanism of postural stress may help explain why Gustafsson (2012) found that texters who sat with the head in forward bent position more commonly experienced symptoms.

Increased ECR and FDS muscle activity with screen size is likely due to the greater weight of the larger devices. We did see a non-significant trend in thumb muscle activity as screen size increased, with activity substantially greater with the 9.5″ device than the 3.5″ device. The former device likely required a longer thumb excursion than the 3.5″ device.

The greater cervical flexion that we observed as touch screen device size increased, combined with the trends for increased finger flexor, wrist extensor and trapezius muscle activity suggest that texting on a 9.5″ touch screen device (tablet) may impart greater demand and postural stress on musculoskeletal tissue than using a smaller 3.5″ device, at least when using the 2/2 texting style.

This study adds to the growing body of evidence regarding the biomechanical exposure that occurs while texting with various mobile devices. We used off-the-shelf devices that are popular among college students. The 3.5″ physical keypad device and the 3.5″ touchscreen device used in this study had minor differences in design (such as location and dimensions of the keyboard, and the weight of the device). These differences may have contributed to the variability in muscle activity and joint angles when comparisons were made between the physical keypad and touch screen devices. It was practical and relevant to compare two commonly used devices of similar dimensions where the most obvious difference was the input device type.

We only measured muscle activity of select forearm and hand muscles, activity of the upper trapezius, and sagittal plane posture of the cervical spine. Findings with respect to input device type and texting style would also likely be influenced by trunk, shoulder, elbow, and wrist posture. For example, a study that examined shoulder posture while texing found that shoulder elevation was greater than shoulder flexion and abduction, which likely depended on device placement (Young et al., 2013), which in turn might be affected by device type and style.

Although we used surface EMG electrode placement for the APB, other thenar eminence muscles that may only be accessed through invasive means are involved in performing texting motions. Due to their proximity to each other, and perhaps with greater probability than with the other muscles that were measured, it is difficult to rule out cross-talk of the thenar surface EMG signal.

This was a lab-based study in which participants only texted for a short time. It is unknown how muscle activities and joint angles during texting for longer periods, and in real-world conditions would differ from our results. Also, we assumed that the “preferred texting” styles on touch screen devices of different sizes were representative of the way that participants would text in real life settings. It is possible that an individual's preferred style while texting on differently sized touch screens may evolve over an extended time period, and that the style chosen in the lab was not representative of their long-term preference. We acknowledge this as a limitation and future research could consider giving participants ample time before any lab visits to determine their preferred style. Additionally, participants were not asked about prior experience with the devices used in this study. It is unknown how their prior familiarity or lack of familiarity with each device would have affected the results. Our sample size was related to time and budgetary restraints. Although adequate for most of our aims, it is possible that the small sample size underpowered our ability to find differences in some of our measurements. Texting performance metrics such as speed and accuracy may affect muscle activity, but were not measured in this study. Although we did not informally observe differences in texting speed between conditions, it is possible that differences in texting speeds influenced our muscle activity measurements. Lastly, eighty percent of participants were female, and the study was conducted among college students, which may limit generalizability.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Input device type (physical keypad compared to touch screen), texting styles (right hand/right thumb compared to both hands/both thumbs) and touch screen size influence upper extremity and upper trapezius muscle activity, and cervical flexion during texting. Depending on the condition, there is a complex combination of potential benefits and costs with respect to demand on musculoskeletal tissues. Texting with a physical keypad device compared to a similarly sized touch screen device requires more muscle activity in distal upper extremity muscles. One-handed texting led to greater wrist extensor muscle activity than 2 thumbs/hands texting. Exploratory results also suggested that screen size had an effect on muscle activity; greater muscle activity in the forearm/wrist flexors and extensors and the upper trapezius was associated with larger screen sizes, most likely from the weight of the device. The small increases in cervical flexion associated with larger screen sizes may be a factor in the increased upper trapezius muscle activity observed. Study findings imply that smaller, lighter virtual keyboard mobile devices when used with both hands may reduce biomechanical exposures in the distal upper extremity muscles, the upper trapezius, and the cervical spine.

This study builds on past mobile device research and can continue to help inform mobile device designers and ergonomists on the relationship between device design features or texting styles and their potential link with physical exposures and MSDs.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors wish to acknowledge Bryan Rooney and Richard Sommerkorn, students in the Doctor of Physical Therapy Program at Rutgers (Stratford, NJ) at the time of this study, who assisted with eligibility screening and scheduling, and Greg Stevenson, who assisted with fabrication of the trapezius MVC testing station. We would also like to thank Divya Srinivasan at the Centre for Musculoskeletal Research (CBF) for her thoughtful comments during the preparation of the manuscript. This work was supported by Temple University funds to Judith Gold.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

