@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Development and evaluation of one-hand drivable manual wheelchair device for hemiplegic patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Existing manual wheelchairs require considerable use and control of both hands for operation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hemiplegic patients encounter difficulty in propelling the wheelchair with one hand.


                        
                        
                           
                           Most hemiplegic patients performed incorrectly in driving a manual wheelchair without using their feet.


                        
                        
                           
                           Adaptation of ‘One-hand drivable manual wheelchair’ can be an effective solution.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Manual wheelchair

One-hand drivable wheelchair

Hemiplegia

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study was conducted for one-hand users including hemiplegic clients currently using standard manual wheelchairs, so as to analyze their specific problems and recommend solutions regarding usage. Thirty hemiplegic clients who were admitted to rehabilitation and convalescent hospitals participated as subjects. The research tools were standard manual wheelchairs commonly used by people with impaired gait and a “one-hand drivable manual wheelchair,” which was developed for this study. The Wheelchair Skills Test (WST) was adopted for the objective assessment tool, while drivability, convenience, difference, and acceptability were developed for the subjective evaluation tools. The assessment procedures comprise two phases of pre-assessment and post-assessment. In the pre-assessment phase, the WST and subjective evaluation (drivability, convenience) were conducted using the existing standard manual wheelchair and with/without use of a foot to control the wheelchair. In the post-assessment phase, the WST and subjective evaluation (drivability, convenience, difference, acceptability) were also carried out using the developed one-hand drivable manual wheelchair. The results showed that the highest pass rate recorded for the WST items was 3.3% when the participants drove standard manual wheelchairs without the use of either foot and 96.7% when using the manual wheelchairs equipped with developed device. As compared to the existing wheelchair, statistical results showed significant effects on the WST, drivability, convenience, difference and acceptability when the participants drove wheelchairs equipped with the developed device. These findings imply that the one-hand drivable wheelchair equipped with the developed device can be an active and effective solution for hemiplegic clients using existing manual wheelchairs to increase their mobility and occupational performance.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Stroke, also referred to as cerebrovascular accident (CVA), results from anoxia and brain necrosis. According to WHO (2013), stroke mortality in 2011 reached 6.2 million people and stroke is now the second leading cause of death. Also noticeable is the stronger emphasis placed on rehabilitation for stroke sequelae, due to the severity of the resulting impairment. Approximately two out of three stroke survivors suffer from permanent functional disability, and most stroke patients experience hemiplegia for more than six months after stroke occurrence (Kim et al., 2009; Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012; Williams et al., 1999). The Ministry of Health and Welfare (2011) reports that stroke, at 70.6%, is the leading cause of brain disability in Korea, and stroke occurrence shows persistent increase since the 2005 survey. Stroke patients with impairments and disabilities need much assistance with their basic daily activities and movements.

Hemiplegia that follows a cerebrovascular accident means weakness of functions on one side of the body. The ability to maintain appropriate muscle tension and posture is weakened, control in carrying out selective movements appears abnormal, and various functional disorders are detected depending on the impaired part of the brain, size and cause of occurrence (Kim and Chang, 2013; Knesek, 2009). In addition to the physical disabilities of walking, climbing up the stairs, rising from a seated position, turning, decreased balance, etc., hemiplegia leads to a variety of problems such as cognitive disorder, visual perception disorder, language disorder, social disorder and limited participation in daily activities (Ahn et al., 2011; Peurala et al., 2007).

Mobility is defined as the ability to move within the household and community, and is essential to enabling performance of daily activities and social participation (Radomski and Latham, 2008; Salminen et al., 2009). The Occupational Therapy Practice Framework: Domain and Process classifies mobility into functional mobility and community mobility (AOTA, 2008). Radomski and Latham (2008) contended that both aspects of mobility should be considered during the assessment and intervention of occupational therapists, and proposed adaptation methods to enhance mobility skills during intervention and guidelines to build knowledge of compensatory strategies. According to Salminen et al. (2009), when moving becomes difficult or impossible due to limitation of mobility, wheelchair intervention enables such activities and participation.

A wheelchair, as an assistive device for paralyzed patients whose gait is no longer safe or effective or for the aged with weakened physical strength (Radomski and Latham, 2008; Seo et al., 2012), is utilized not only to enhance mobility, but also to prevent, complement and correct the disabilities of the user (Ham et al., 1998). A wheelchair employed for such purposes will facilitate the user to engage in work of personal value as well as community activities (Bell and Hinojosa, 1995; Kim and Chang, 2013). As such, for a hemiplegic patient with impaired function of the lower body and difficulty in walking safely as a result of physical or brain disability, a wheelchair becomes an invaluable assistive device.

Depending on how it is operated, a wheelchair is divided into a manual type or a powered type. A manual wheelchair is suitable for an individual whose upper extremities are functioning well (good muscular strength), who has control of the trunk muscles (good coordination) and able to use both hands, one hand, one hand and one foot, or both legs to move the wheelchair. This manual type has a simple structure, of which the wheels are driven by the user him/herself, and with easy maintenance and low costs (Attali and Pelisse, 2001; Choi et al., 2006; Radomski and Latham, 2008). Manual wheelchairs are divided into stationary and folding types depending on portability. A stationary manual wheelchair refers to an unfolding frame, which generally has higher durability than a folding frame (Batavia, 1998), and as the two rear wheels are connected to an axle, the wheelchair is operable with only one hand. There is, however, the difficulty with storage and portability because the wheelchair does not fold. On the contrary, a folding manual wheelchair has a folding frame that folds in the center much like an accordion, and transport and storage in small space are simple (Batavia, 1998). The problem with this type of wheelchair surfaces when it is driven with only one hand and will not roll forward or backward but only turn in place, because the two rear wheels are not connected.

A powered wheelchair is run by an electric motor, and the rolling wheels make it convenient for the disabled with impaired upper limbs, the aged with weakened physical strength, or users lacking the ability to operate a manual wheelchair (Radomski and Latham, 2008). Given current sophisticated technology, assuming intact cognition and perception, even a person with the most severe physical limitations is capable of independently driving a powered wheelchair (Pedretti et al., 2006). Mountain et al. (2010a) reported that the stroke patients with visuospatial neglect trained to use powered wheelchairs improved their WST-P (Wheelchair Skills Test, Power Mobility version 3.2) scores to the same extent as the participants without neglect, although their pre-training and post-training scores were lower. The group's total mean WST-P scores improved from 25.5% of skills passed at baseline to 71.5% post-training (P = .002). The conclusion reached was that many people with stroke, with or without visuospatial neglect, can learn to use powered wheelchairs safely and effectively with proper training. However, the downsides are that it (a powered wheelchair) is heavy and high-priced, and there is great difficulty overcoming stairs or transporting the wheelchair by car for long distances (Ryu, 2003; Seo et al., 2012). Moreover, additional assessments are called for to check mobility, means-result action, cognitive, and judgment skills, because a powered wheelchair requires a control panel and operates differently from a manual wheelchair. Users of a powered wheelchair should have skills that enable them to look left and right to avoid hazards, and to precisely stop the wheelchair when slowly approaching a door (Batavia, 1998).

According to the demand and status report of assistive devices for persons with disabilities released by the Ministry of Health and Welfare (2011), out of the total demand for physical and brain disabilities assistive devices, canes top the list at 22.3%, followed by manual wheelchairs at 9%, and then placing third, powered wheelchairs at 6.9%. In terms of current possession, canes account for the most at 23.3%, followed by manual wheelchairs at 8.1%, and powered wheelchairs were fifth at 3.6%, out of the total possession ratio. As noted, manual wheelchairs show not only higher demand but also higher possession ratio in comparison with powered wheelchairs. Moreover, according to the usage and satisfaction survey of mobility assistive devices for stroke patients by Park et al. (2010a), manual wheelchairs were the leading choice for Korean stroke patients using mobility assistive devices: 74 (57.8%) out of 100 patients. Similar results were reported in Canada: out of 100 stroke patients, 40 people (40%) were using manual wheelchairs, 1 person (1%) was using a powered wheelchair, and 59 (59%) were not using a wheelchair (Mountain et al., 2010b).

Current wheelchair usage in Korea shows that most of the wheelchairs operated by stroke patients are folding (X type frame) manual wheelchairs (Koo et al., 2005; Ministry of Health and Welfare, 2011; Park et al., 2010a). This kind of standard manual wheelchair is widely used because of the ease of storage and portability with low costs. However, for various reasons, one hand of the user may not move freely, or the limbs on one side of the body may be paralyzed much like in the case of hemiplegia. Such patients will not be able to move both hands freely, and have only one hand to maneuver the folding manual wheelchair (Kang et al., 2011; Tsai et al., 2007, 2008a, 2008b). The reason is, this type of wheelchair is designed to fold and does not have driving axle to propel the wheels on opposite sides; therefore, turning only one wheel will not move the wheelchair forward or backward.

If a caregiver is around to help move the wheelchair, the problem is solved. Unfortunately, in trying to move short distances, the user will have to drive the wheelchair independently most of the time. As a compensatory method, users who have some experience with manual wheelchairs can use a foot to skillfully and adequately maneuver the manual wheelchair. Still, inexperienced users cannot utilize their foot and moving independently remains difficult. Problems persist even when hemiplegic patients can make use of a foot to drive the wheelchair. According to Kirby et al. (1999) and Tsai et al. (2008a, 2008b), “In general, most hemiplegic stroke patients use the unaffected arm and leg to propel their wheelchairs. To facilitate this propulsive pattern, the leg rest of the wheelchair on the unaffected side is usually removed so that they can produce propulsive force and guide the chair's direction by stamping the unaffected foot on the ground. This asymmetrical propulsion, however, may cause the wheelchair to stray toward the affected side on a level surface, and even cause danger on a slope.”

Manual wheelchair research has been conducted from an ergonomic perspective, such as van der Woude's studies (2006, 1989, 1986) on the correlation between wheelchair design and the ability of the wheelchair user, and other numerous studies on wheelchair propulsion: Paquet and Feathers (2004) focused on the anthropometric measurements of various wheelchair user groups; White and Kirby (2003) examined the possible injury risks of healthcare professionals who need to bend or twist their bodies when folding or unfolding a manual wheelchair; Debril et al. (2011) studied paraplegic patients with musculoskeletal diseases of the upper extremities, onto which the entire body weight was transferred when getting into a manual or another type of wheelchair; and Pierret et al. (2014) quantitatively measured the cardiac, energetic and subjective strains of paraplegic patients as they traverse cross slope using manual wheelchairs.

Although quite a number of studies have been conducted from various perspectives in relation to manual wheelchairs, few studies are found reviewing the propulsion issues of manual wheelchairs. In order to resolve the problems with using manual wheelchairs for one-hand users including hemiplegic patients, Tsai et al. (2007, 2008a, 2008b) developed ankle-propelled and knee-propelled wheelchair prototypes and van der Woude and Groot (1986) developed a crank-propelled and lever-propelled wheelchair and demonstrated their effectiveness. Hanna (1991), Harris et al. (1991) and Nina et al. (2009) developed a prototype of the lever-propelled manual wheelchair. A commercial one-arm drivable wheelchair “Poirier Arnas One Arm Drive Wheelchair” by Independent Living Centre (2014) in Australia was developed to enable one-hand driving by installing an additional lever on one side. There are also commercially available lever operated wheelchairs such as “One Arm Drive by Lever” by Invacare Corporation (2014) in UK, “Lever Drive One Arm Drive System” by Mobilitybasics (2013) in Canada, and “Lever-Operated Wheelchair” by Meyra Corporation (2014) in the U.S.

Aside from these ankle, knee, crank and lever types to propel the wheelchair, there are other prototypes or products that operate on a different method. There are accordion-style axles for folding one-arm-drive mechanism developed and available on the market, which is a one arm drive system to allow users to propel and steer in all directions from one side of the wheelchair using a twin pushrim system mounted on the wheel. One of these one-arm-drive wheelchairs is “Quickie Dual Pushrim Drive System” (US Patent #5306035) developed by Counts (1994). This wheelchair was designed specifically for triplegics or individuals with use of only one arm. Another is “a set of quick release hubs for wheelchairs for physically handicapped persons with hemiplegic disability” (US Patent #5791672) developed by Masclet (1998). There are some commercially available accordion-style one-arm drive wheelchairs such as “Denyers Vector One Arm Drive”, “Glide One Arm Drive Lightweight Wheelchair”, “Mobility Plus Elite One Arm Drive Wheelchair”, “Mobility Plus Equaliser One Arm Drive Wheelchair”, and “Quickie One-Arm Drive Kit” manufactured by Independent Living Centre in Australia (2014). Additionally are “One Arm Drive Wheelchair” manufactured by Invacare Corporation (2014) in UK and “Two-hand-rim Propelled Wheelchair” by Sunrise Medical Corporation (2008) in the U.S. Especially, Drive Medical (2013) in the U.S. presented an accessory that can be adapted to two of their wheelchair models, the “Viper” and the “Sentra EC”. It is a dual pushrim accessory which includes an axle to connect both wheelchair wheels. The accessory is adaptable to both the right and left sides of the wheelchair. Most of these wheelchairs have two handrims mounted on the patient's side with unaffected upper limb function. A handrim comprises a set of outer handrim and inner handrim, and two sets are prepared for the wheelchair (one set on each side of the wheelchair). The outer handrim is used to turn or change directions, and the inner handrim is used to drive both wheels. To propel themselves, wheelchair users have one hand hold and push or pull the outer and inner handrims at the same time, enabling the wheelchair to move straight forward and backward with only one hand. Thus, a patient who cannot use one of the hands, or wishes to free one hand, can move conveniently by using only one hand.

These wheelchairs were developed for the same purpose of assisting those who have difficulty using one of the hands. The user is able to select a suitable type or structure depending on his/her state of disability or preference, and so these wheelchairs may be the solution for those who hesitate to use a powered wheelchair for various reasons. However, some of these wheelchairs are stationary and unfolding, which causes portability and storage issues. Folding wheelchairs, on the other hand, are priced almost as high as powered wheelchairs and incur cost-effect issues. The user with a manual wheelchair may end up having to purchase an additional wheelchair. Therefore, the most ideal solution is to develop a one-arm/hand propellable/drivable manual wheelchair kit/unit with devices that can be universally and simply mounted on the existing standard manual wheelchair. This would resolve the cost issue of one-hand users having to purchase additional wheelchairs, the inconvenient storage and transport issue, and the propulsion issue due to absence of a driving axle.

As such, this study aims to analyze problems associated with usage of general folding manual wheelchairs by one-hand users, including hemiplegic patients, and develop a one-hand drivable manual wheelchair device based on the findings. The effectiveness of the developed device is then evaluated to prove applicability for hemiplegic patients. Hence, this study will promote mobility of hemiplegic patients, provide implications for more related research and set up a mechanism to provide the devices and relevant services.

@&#METHOD@&#

Thirty hemiplegic patients who had been admitted to rehabilitation and convalescent hospitals located in a metropolitan city were selected for the purpose of an in-depth analysis of problems experienced by hemiplegic patients using standard manual wheelchairs. Participant selection was limited to individuals using standard manual wheelchairs and with three or more months of wheelchair experience, and with normal visual/perception and cognitive functions for accurate assessments. Among hemiplegic patients, only those who had retained normal function of an upper limb, left or right, were selected, as the existing manual wheelchairs will be driven with only one hand. Also, only those who understood the purpose of this study and agreed to voluntarily participate were selected. A written informed consent about the duration, experimental procedures, potential risks and benefits of this study was obtained from each participant.


                        Table 1
                         shows a survey of the participants' general characteristics: a total of five items, namely gender, age group, dominant hand, paretic side and disease period. Shown in Table 2
                         are the wheelchair usage characteristics of participants: a total of four items, namely year(s) of use, frequency of use, daily average hour(s) of use, and independence of use.


                        
                           
                              1)
                              Standard manual wheelchair (general folding manual wheelchair)

A standard manual wheelchair is easily purchased at a low cost, and also can be folded for easy storage and portability. This is a rear-wheel drive manual wheelchair with big rear wheels equipped with hand rims and small front casters.
                           
                              2)
                              Development of a one-hand drivable manual wheelchair device

In developing a one-hand drivable manual wheelchair device for this study, shortcomings of the existing general folding manual wheelchair were first complemented, so that the basic design concept of the developed device could reflect the improvement. The goal being to enhance user convenience from an ergonomic perspective, the design criteria were established as follows:
                           
                              ▪
                              Sustain portability and storage advantages of the existing standard manual wheelchair.

Devices developed from this study should be easily attached onto the existing standard manual wheelchair, thereby resolving the issue of having to purchase an additional wheelchair.

Keep sale price at a minimum low with little gap in production cost compared to that of the existing standard manual wheelchair, and thereby facilitate supply to users.

Ergonomically designed, the wheelchair should be convenient to use and require only minimum movements without the need of extra tools when folding or unfolding.

Make structure simple with few parts to minimize increase in weight, which enables easy transfer.

Shown in Fig. 1
                         is the one-hand drivable manual wheelchair, which is the existing standard manual wheelchair equipped with device developed from this study, the driving axle unit and the driving handrim. This newly developed wheelchair is foldable, sharing the same merit as the existing standard manual wheelchair, and is also equipped with a driving axle (which delivers rotation to both wheels) that is used to move forward, backward and change directions with the use of only one hand, regardless of whether the patient suffers left or right hemiplegia. As such, problems with propulsion, which are experienced by hemiplegic patients using standard manual wheelchairs without driving axles, along with portability and storage issues are resolved at once. The greatest merit is that the driving axle unit and the driving handrim can easily be mounted on a standard manual wheelchair, and current manual wheelchair users will no longer have to make additional purchases of wheelchairs with one-hand driving function. This should resolve the cost issue and enable wide distribution of the devices developed from this study.

A driving axle unit which delivers rotation to both wheels can be folded spontaneously when the user folds the manual wheelchair with the existing method. As seen in Fig. 1, the driving axle is installed through the wheel hub, which is in the middle of the two wheels, and connected to the center axle of the driving handrims at both ends. A ball bearing, particularly developed for the purpose of this study, is installed in the interior and exterior of the wheel hub, in order to provide flexible turning of the driving axle and replace the existing bolts and nuts. To enable folding of the driving axle, there are two sets of interior hinge joints at the center and at each end of the interior hinge joint is a set of exterior hinge joints. Therefore, the steps to installing such device involve removing the bolts, nuts and bearings that fasten the exiting manual wheelchair frame, then installing the developed driving axle and bearing on both sides of the wheel hub, and bolting the handrims on the wheel hub.

A set of two handrims is mounted on both sides of the developed wheelchair. There is a handrim for turning (larger handrim or outer handrim viewing from the side of wheelchair) and a handrim for driving (smaller handrim or inner handrim viewing from the side of wheelchair). The turning handrim is used to rotate/turn or change directions, while the driving handrim runs both wheels. To propel the wheelchair, the turning handrim and the driving handrim can be held together by one hand, and pushed or pulled to move forward or backward. As such, hemiplegic patients who cannot utilize one of the two hands or individuals who wish to free one hand can conveniently move using only one hand. (For example, moving becomes possible with one hand holding onto an object or while talking on a mobile phone, and while one hand is holding the door open, the other free hand can turn the handrim to pass through.) A right hemiplegic patient with use of the left hand would fasten together the two handrims on the right side of the wheelchair with the developed clamp, while a right hand user would fasten together the two handrims the same way but on the opposite (left) side. Also, when both hands are used, the developed wheelchair is operable by only turning the handrims, in the same way as the standard manual wheelchair.

As the standard manual wheelchair served as the base model for the one-hand drivable manual wheelchair equipped with the developed devices as shown in Fig. 1, the developed wheelchair measurements are almost the same as those of the existing model (1040 (L)*600 (W)*875 (H)mm) but with a bigger width of 650 mm (W) because of the 50 mm add-on of plastic driving handrims. Weight including the driving axle unit is 18.8 kg, which is an increase of 1.8 kg from the existing 17 kg. The increase in overall measurements and weight of the wheelchair is too slight to be recognized by the user, and should not cause problems with usage.
                           
                              3)
                              Assessment tool: Wheelchair Skills Test (WST)

The Wheelchair Skills Program (WSP, 2008) was developed by Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. The WSP includes the Wheelchair Skills Test (WST), the questionnaire version of the WST (WST-Q) and the Wheelchair Skills Training Program (WSTP). Among these, the WST is an evaluation to test the skills of wheelchair operation, and apply the findings to identify which maneuver skills to focus on during rehabilitation. Revisions and complements were continuously made to the WST, and leading up to the most recent version of WST 4.2 with test items that differ according to test subject (user/caregiver) or type of wheelchair used (manual/powered).

Another tool identified to test manual wheelchair skills is the Wheelchair Users Functional Assessment or WUFA (Stanley, 2003). The WUFA is applied to patients using wheelchairs due to general paralysis, paraplegia, and impaired spinal cord, and is based on the WST and the WC-PFP (Wheelchair Physical Functional Performance) that determines performance on the functional skills of a manual wheelchair user. The WUFA comprises a total of 13 test items, and assesses the mobility and daily activities of a manual wheelchair user. Assessments are made on a 5-point scale of “extreme independence (5 points)”, “limited independence (4 points)”, “dependent to a certain degree (3 points)”, “minimal movement (2 points)”, and “total dependence (1 point)”.

The WST-M/WCU (Manual/Wheelchair User) version 4.1 (WSP, 2008) was referred to for the purpose of this study, which evaluates the operation skills of a manual wheelchair user. The WST-M/WCU has a total of 32 test items comprising 9 indoor skills, 12 community skills, and 11 advanced skills. Results are measured on the Scale for Scoring Skill Performance and the Scale for Scoring Skill Safety. Performance results are recorded as pass/fail, and safety results are recorded as safe/unsafe.

Among the total nine indoor skills suggested by Jo (2010), Kirby et al. (2008, 2004), six skills (roll forward, roll backward, and four other skills each separating left/right) were selected in accordance with the purpose and testing conditions of this study to assess the wheelchair skills of hemiplegic patients. The Wheelchair Skills Test (WST) and the Wheelchair Skills Training Program (WSTP) Manual of the WSP (2008), along with the Wheelchair Skills Program 4.1 Obstacle Course Guidelines were taken as reference to establish the WST testing environment, and the testing method and environment both complied with the provided guidelines. The components of the testing environment are as follows: rolls forward 10 m, rolls backward 5 m, turns left 90∘ while moving forward, turns right 90∘ while moving forward, turns left 90∘ while moving backward, turns right 90∘ while moving backward, turns left 180∘ in place, and turns right 180∘ in place. Two skills similar to those used in parallel car parking were added: maneuvers sideways (left) and maneuvers sideways (right). Test results were measured only with the Scale for Scoring Skill Performance.

Whereas the existing WST does not restrict how a wheelchair is driven (whether by using one hand and one foot or by using both hands), this study, for the purpose of identifying problems with one-hand operation of existing folding wheelchairs, conducted assessment procedures dually: without the use of a foot, and with the use of a foot. The existing WST total score is calculated as: number of items passed divided by the value obtained by subtracting items failed and error items from the total count of items, which is 32, and multiplying the result value by 100 (total performance score = number of passed skills/(number of possible skills-number of no part-number of testing error × 100%). However, in this study, the total score is the value obtained by multiplying 10 to the number of items passed (total score = items passed × 10).
                           
                              4)
                              Assessment tool: participants' subjective opinion

This study referred to Demers et al. (2002) and Jung and Jung (2003), and their questionnaire items were modified for the aim and purpose of the current study. The participants were asked to give subjective opinions on the following questionnaire items: drivability (how is the drivability of the existing wheelchair or the developed wheelchair?), convenience (how convenient is it to use the existing wheelchair or the developed wheelchair?), difference (how different is it to use the developed wheelchair compared to the existing wheelchair?), and acceptability (would you use the developed wheelchair or a similar wheelchair if manufactured in the future?). The participants were asked about drivability and convenience of the existing standard manual wheelchair. They were also asked to evaluate the developed one-hand drivable manual wheelchair on its drivability and convenience, along with two additional questionnaire items, namely, difference in comparison to the existing wheelchair and acceptability of future use of the developed devices. A total of four test items were applied for the developed wheelchair. Each item was rated on a 5-point Likert scale, from the lowest 1 point to the highest 5 points.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

All participants first answered the questionnaires on general characteristics and wheelchair usage characteristics. Then, the WST was conducted with the existing standard wheelchair as pre-assessment, and followed by questionnaire of subjective opinions on the WST experience. After the pre-assessment, a period of one week was passed to avoid carry-over effect and learning effect. Post-assessment was carried out in the same manner with the developed one-hand drivable manual wheelchair.

The field researcher, referring to Kim and Chang (2013), then asked the participants to sit evenly on both sides of the wheelchair seat and to have the hip rear sit deep into the seat (reaching the back of the seat) prior to the WST. The participants operated the standard manual wheelchair first without the use of foot (foot constrained) and then with the use of foot (foot unconstrained) for the WST. To adapt to the built testing environment, the participants were asked to switch to the testing manual wheelchair and test run for about five minutes, rolling forward and backward, turning left and right 90°, turning 180° in place, and maneuvering sideways to left and right, prior to taking the WST. Then to adapt to the newly developed wheelchair, all participants switched to the wheelchair mounted with the developed devices and did a test run in a non-testing environment for about 20 min, rolling forward and backward, turning left and right 90°, turning 180° in place, maneuvering sideways to left and right, prior to taking the WST. The reason for the less amounts of practice allowed for the existing wheelchair was that the selected participants has been exposed longer periods of time as compared to the newly developed wheelchair. The participants were asked to give subjective opinions immediately after driving the wheelchair.

To analyze the experiment results according to the participants' general characteristics and wheelchair usage characteristics, descriptive statistics analysis was used. Also, a paired t-test was conducted to compare the before/after of the developed wheelchair. An independent t-test and one-way ANOVA were used to investigate differences in the WST results by general characteristic and wheelchair usage characteristic, and a two-way ANOVA was administered to examine the differences in the dependent variables (WST and subjective scores) scores by general characteristic and wheelchair usage characteristic. Lastly, Pearson correlation analysis was conducted to determine the correlation among the dependent variables (WST and subjective scores).

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Table 3
                         shows the pass frequency analysis on the WST items. As indicated, the WST evaluated with the existing standard wheelchair and foot constrained resulted in only one participant (3.3%) passing each of the two items, “rolls backward 5 m” and “left turns 90° while moving backward”, and none of the participants passing the other items. On the contrary, with a foot unconstrained, more than 15 (50.0%) out of the 30 participants passed a total of six items: “rolls forward 10 m”, “rolls backward 5 m”, “turns left 90∘ while moving forward”, “turns right 90° while moving forward”, “turns left 90∘ while moving backward”, and “turns right 90∘ while moving backward”. Among them, “rolls forward 10 m” had the highest passing rate (86.7%). Even with the use of a foot, however, a total of four items showed pass rate of less than 12 (40.0%) out of the 30 participants: “turns left 180° in place”, “turns right 180° in place”, “maneuvers sideways (left)”, and “maneuvers sideways (right)”. Among these “maneuvers sideways (right)” had the lowest passing rate (16.7%).

When driving the wheelchair mounted with the developed devices, more than 15 (50.0%) out of the 30 participants passed a total of seven items, including the six items passed when driving the existing wheelchair with the foot unconstrained and an additional item “turns left 180° in place”. Among them, “turns left 90° while moving forward” had the highest passing rate (96.7%). Also, there were three items that showed passing of under 15 (50.0%) out of the 30 participants: “turns right 180° in place”, “maneuvers sideways (left)”, and “maneuvers sideways (left)”.

A paired t-test was conducted to investigate differences in the average scores of the WST and subjective scores before/after the developed wheelchair. As indicated in Table 4
                        , results show statistically very significant difference (p < .05) in scores achieved before and after the use of the developed wheelchair in regards to the WST, drivability and convenience.

According to the ANOVA results on WST scores before/after the use of developed wheelchair by participants' general characteristic and wheelchair usage characteristic, statistically significant difference was only shown for age group (F = 3.471, p = .022) and independence of wheelchair use (F = 7.135, p = .001). That is, the lower the age group, the higher the WST score, and the higher the independence of use, the higher the WST score. Significant differences were not identified for the other characteristics.

According to the ANOVA results of drivability and convenience scores before/after the use of developed wheelchair by participants' general characteristic and wheelchair usage characteristic, significant difference was shown in the convenience scores for years of wheelchair use (F = 4.233. p = .009). That is, the shorter the years of wheelchair use, higher scores were given for using the developed wheelchair. Significant differences were not identified in the drivability and convenience scores for the other general characteristics and wheelchair usage characteristics.

Two-way ANOVA was conducted to examine differences in WST, drivability and convenience scores in regards to general characteristic and before/after use of the developed wheelchair. Analysis results indicated no significance (p > .05) of general characteristic and before/after device development on the differences of WST, drivability and convenience scores, thereby concluding that correlation has not been established. Table 5
                         does show significant difference in drivability (F = 2.822, p = .035) and convenience (F = 2.613, p = .046) scores in regards to daily average use (wheelchair usage characteristic) and before/after device development, but ANOVA results showed no correlation in regards to the other wheelchair usage characteristics.

Pearson correlation analysis was conducted to determine the correlation of WST and subjective scores in regards to differences in scores before/after the use of developed wheelchair. As shown in Table 6
                        , highly significant correlation (r ≥ .632, p < .05) was found among the differences in WST and subjective scores before/after the developed wheelchair. Not only were the results between the objective and subjective scores consistent, but also the results among the subjective scores showed very significant correlation (p < .05), which indicates consistency in the scoring of participants' subjective feeling or judgment. As such, the findings of this study are proven reliable.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

With the purpose of facilitating mobility of hemiplegic patients, more relevant research, and a national support structure, this study analyzed the problems of hemiplegic patients using the standard manual wheelchair and developed a device to resolve those problems, then assessed the effectiveness of the developed wheelchair.

The WST was conducted to identify problems with wheelchair operation skills when driving a standard manual wheelchair, which is mainly used by hemiplegic patients. Based on the WST results, the existing standard manual wheelchair driven without the use of one foot showed average pass rates of 0.7% or less for all the WST items tested. This means that it is almost impossible for a one-hand user to move independently using the existing manual wheelchair without using the sound foot. Kang et al. (2011) also noted, “It is not possible to mobilize oneself by driving a manual wheelchair with only one hand and without the use of a foot.”

According to a previous WST study conducted by Kirby et al. (2005) on driving with only one hand and foot due to hemiplegia, participants driving with the paretic side and turning 180° in place showed a 50% pass rate, whereas driving with the non-paretic side showed a 60% pass rate. In this study, “turn left 180°” with the paretic left side had a 40% pass rate, whereas “turn right 180°” with the paretic right side had a 60% pass rate. Compared to Kirby et al. (2005), driving with the paretic right side showed a slightly higher pass rate in this study, but the total paretic side average was similar at 50%. Furthermore, in this study, the pass rates for “roll forward 10°m”, “turn left 90° while moving forward”, and “turn right 90°while moving forward” were 86.7%, 80%, and 83.3%, respectively, compared to 100% pass rates recorded by Charbonneau et al. (2013). The noted gap in pass rates may be the result of differences in research methods or test subjects. Previous studies of Coolen et al. (2004), Jo (2010), Kirby et al. (2004), and MacPhee et al. (2004) may not have targeted hemiplegia or did not conform to the test conditions and purpose of this study; however, the results showed 100% pass rates for most of the WST indoor skills.

Similarly, when the existing manual wheelchair was driven with the foot unconstrained in this study, the average pass rate for WST was 55.7% (shown in Table 3), an enormous increase as compared to the result obtained without using the foot (0.7%). Also, the noted pass rate of 55.7% is approximately 5% lower than 61.0% for the newly developed wheelchair. The mean difference of total passed between the foot unconstrained and the developed device was −5.3 (±23.4) with paired t-test result of t(p) = −1.246 (.223). Indicative of minimal performance difference, such results may reflect negatively on boosting the newly developed device. Nevertheless, the results should not be overlooked in the comparative assessments because of the known safety issues (secondary injury) associated with a hemiplegic patient driving with the use of a foot as noted by Kim and Chang (2013), Kirby et al. (1999) and Tsai et al. (2008a, 2008b).

In this study, a total of seven WST items had pass rates of 50% or more when the one-hand drivable manual wheelchair equipped with the developed device was operated without the use of either foot. When the existing wheelchair was operated without the use of either foot, participants passed 3.3% or less on all WST items. Based on these findings, it becomes evident that a hemiplegic patient gains enhanced wheelchair skills upon using the developed wheelchair with only one hand and even without the use of either foot.

There was a total of four WST items with low pass rates even with the use of a foot, which include “turn left in place 180°”, “turn right in place 180°”, “maneuver sideways to the left”, and “maneuver sideways to the right”. However, pass rates for the same test items increased significantly when using the developed device, and moreover, pass rates increased for all test items, with the exception of “roll backward 5°m” and “turn 90° while moving backward”. This result is comparable to the findings of Charbonneau et al. (2013)’s study that people with hemiplegia using arms and legs to propel their wheelchairs perform better backward than forward and prefer the backward direction. In consideration of such results and the fact that the participants of this study had spent less time (less exposure to) using the developed wheelchair than the existing wheelchair, it may be inferred that continuous use of the developed wheelchair will enable effective driving even without the use of either foot.

The participants gave positive subjective scores for drivability and convenience after using the developed wheelchair, and also high scores for difference or future acceptability in comparison with the existing wheelchair. In addition, objective evaluation index (WST) and subjective evaluation indices (drivability, convenience, difference, acceptability) showed extremely high correlation, which indicates that the participants gave consistent subjective scores according to the WST results. Findings as such may serve as both objective and subjective verification of the effectiveness of the developed devices of this study.

Meanwhile, this study analyzed the WST and subjective scores before/after using the developed wheelchair by participants' general characteristic and wheelchair usage characteristic, in order to identify factors that may affect the wheelchair operation skills or the drivability and convenience felt by the hemiplegic patient using the wheelchair. Results showed that the lower the age group and the higher the independence of wheelchair use, the higher the WST scores; which suggests that young people with better use of their upper limbs have higher wheelchair operation skills. These results are similar to the findings of Kirby et al. (2004, 2005), which showed that the younger the age, the higher the WST scores, and wheelchair experience and the WST scores showed a positive correlation. This implies that age and independence of use should be considered as very critical factors in manual wheelchair intervention.

In addition, ANOVA was conducted to compare drivability and convenience scores, which were used as subjective scores, and the results showed significant difference between the convenience scores in regards to “years of wheelchair use.” That is, the fewer the years, the higher the score given in use of the developed wheelchair. It seems that long-time wheelchair users are already so adapted to the existing wheelchair that they gave relatively lower evaluations for the developed wheelchair.

Based on the analysis of differences in WST, drivability and convenience scores in regards to participants' general characteristic and before/after the developed wheelchair, no correlation was found. Meanwhile, very significant correlation was shown when comparing the correlations between WST and subjective scores in regards to difference in scores before/after the developed wheelchair. This consistency between the objective and subjective evaluations supports the reliability of the results of this study.

Meanwhile, crosstab analysis on hemiplegic side in reference to dominant hand showed the following results: four right-handed subjects with right hemiplegia (20.0%) and 16 right-handed with left hemiplegia (80.0%), meanwhile one left-handed subject with left hemiplegia (11.1%) and eight left-handed with right hemiplegia (88.8%). As such, the figures indicate that the opposite side of the dominant hand is four times as likely to develop hemiplegia than the same side of the dominant hand. Also, from the WST score analysis based on dominant hand and hemiplegic side, asymptotic significance probability was p < .001 in crosstabs Chi-square test. That is, higher performance was achieved when the hemiplegic side was not the same as the dominant hand side.

As noted by Tsai et al. (2008a, 2008b), “When the wheelchair was moving, the unaffected foot needed to correct the direction of the wheelchair by contacting the ground. While the unaffected foot was correcting the direction of the wheelchair, propulsion by the unaffected arm was interrupted.” This study also confirmed the problems associated with a hemiplegic patient driving with the use of a foot. Prior to conducting the WST, having referred to Kim and Chang (2013), the participants were asked to sit evenly on both sides of the hip and with the hip rear touching the back of the seat. However, as shown in Fig. 2
                        , a right hemiplegic patient driving the wheelchair with the left foot (circled part) was observed to immediately take on an asymmetric posture and move the hip rear to the center of the seat. Similar observations were made by Park et al. (2010b), in that a hemiplegic patient's posture asymmetry is noticeable in the wheelchair sitting posture, and by Tsai et al. (2008a), in that a hemiplegic patient's sitting posture is deviated more to the paretic side.


                        Kim and Chang (2013) reports that should one continue to sit in a wheelchair in asymmetric posture, one is highly likely to develop deformation such as scoliosis or kyphosis, or bedsores. Kirby et al. (1999) and Tsai et al. (2008a) further raises alarm about the risk of slipping due to asymmetric force if one continues to drive in this manner. It may also lead to secondary accidents such as falling. As such, wheelchair interventionists need to gain knowledge of safer adaptation methods and complementary strategies in prevention of secondary deformations or accidents, and be given the responsibility of education and training.

Posture becomes asymmetric so that the foot is able to utilize ground reaction force and control the direction of the wheelchair. In Fig. 2, the solid lines in the photos to the right side indicate ground contact. A closer look will find two COG (center of gravity) points when the foot is constrained, which is the same results obtained with the developed wheelchair of this study. However, in Fig. 2, ground contact increases to three points with the use of the left foot. Tsai et al. (2008a) confirms the same results, that is: “A hemiplegic patient, by using the unimpaired foot, can appropriately guide the wheelchair direction and drive the wheelchair even with one hand and one foot.”

Nevertheless, Tsai et al. (2008a) raised issues with this way of driving, in that, “The discontinuous movement caused by the repeated deviation and directional correction may consume more energy and time, thereby causing hemiplegic stroke patients to reach their goals less efficiently than users with healthy upper limbs propelling a manual wheelchair.” Aside from Tsai et al. (2008a), few studies have covered such risks as of present, and so problem analysis should be made from a physics, biomechanics and kinetics perspective, which includes ground reaction force that occurs when driving with the use of one foot, joint angle, motion analysis of movement, center of gravity, etc. It is further suggested that various studies should be conducted in the future, such as risk factor analysis and effects on the musculoskeletal system based on secondary accident occurrences from using the existing manual wheelchair.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The current study analyzed the problems associated with hemiplegic patients' use of the standard manual wheelchair, and as a solution, developed a one-hand drivable manual wheelchair device and investigated its effectiveness. The study results showed very low pass rates for all the WST items when hemiplegic patients operated the existing standard manual wheelchair without foot use and without an assistant, thereby verifying by experiment that the wheelchair cannot be moved independently without the use of one foot. This also seems to explain the reason why most hemiplegic patients use a foot to drive the wheelchair.

It is thus recommended that without an assistant, the existing manual wheelchair should only be used to move short distances indoors, if possible, and it should be the role of wheelchair interventionists, such as occupational therapists or assistive technology practitioners, to educate and train the skills of driving with the non-paretic foot. For users that operate the wheelchair with one hand and one foot, a customized wheelchair is necessary. Kenward (1971) claimed that interlocking sections should be provided, which allow the wheelchair seat, armrest, back of seat, etc. to be adjusted according to the body measurements of the wheelchair user. In other words, the seat height should be adjustable making it easy to operate with the foot, and the seat angle should be adjustable to either horizontal or forward-tilting. The foothold can already be folded up or down as needed, but it should also open outward or be removable if it hinders the foot in driving.

Furthermore, this study presented a possible and very effective solution to the problems associated with hemiplegic patients' use of the standard manual wheelchair, by providing a one-hand drivable manual wheelchair device. In comparison to the existing standard manual wheelchair, the one-hand drivable manual wheelchair with the developed device proved to be highly effective for hemiplegic patients in terms of wheelchair operation skills, drivability and convenience, and also were given positive scores for difference and future acceptability. As such, introduction and wide use of the developed device seemed urgent and necessary. However, rather than have a private company promote R&D (research and development) and supply, the government should aim to promote the health and safety of the social minorities and establish a service mechanism with financial support at the national level. This would help to facilitate one-hand users such as hemiplegic patients to participate in moving activities and carry out operations with more convenience and independence.

Further studies are needed to complement the limitations of this study, which was conducted on a limited number of test subjects and in limited areas, and targeted only rehabilitation and convalescent hospitals. As such, the results of this study would hardly be a generalization of all hemiplegic patients. Thus, a more in-depth study is called for, which investigates diverse areas and more subjects from rehabilitation institutions. Moreover, there exists further limitation in that only the indoor skills of the WST were modified and evaluated to suit the purpose and testing environment of this study. Thus, future studies need to verify the effects of the developed device when applied to community skills or advanced skills, and also investigate the effects of the developed device by measuring time and speed, that is, via quantitative evaluation.

There may have existed a limitation of experimental procedures such as an intrinsic-learning phenomenon because of the order of testing the WST between the existing wheelchair and the developed wheelchair. There were also some potential design limitations of the developed device such as issues of compatibility in retrofitting the developed device to the other manual wheelchairs and of durability since the usability tests for the developed driving axle and hand rims were not conducted. In addition, propelling inner and outer hand-rims requires some manual dexterity and can be confusing for people with hemiplegia who have cognitive or perceptual problems. These limitations should be tested and further studied.

This study observed problems that may arise with a hemiplegic patient driving the standard manual wheelchair with one hand and one foot. That is, continuous use of one foot for wheelchair driving may lead to additional problems, such as secondary musculoskeletal deformation due to an asymmetric sitting posture. Thus, in resolution, further studies on motion analysis, including ground reaction force, joint angle, movement, and center of gravity, or from a kinetic perspective are needed.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This study was supported by research funds from Chosun University, 2012.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

