@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Normative static grip strength of population of Turkey, effects of various factors and a comparison with international norms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Normative static grip strength of normal population of Turkey was estimated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Effects of individual and job factors on grip strength were investigated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Grip strength was significantly affected by gender, age-group and hand.


                        
                        
                           
                           There exist cross-national grip strength variations among some nations but not all.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Static (isometric) hand grip strength

Normative data of Turkey

Anthropometry

Ergonomic design

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Normative data are of importance in ergonomics and clinical settings. Applying normative data internationally is questionable. To this end, this study aimed to establish gender- and age-specific reference values for static (isometric) hand grip strength of normal population of Turkey with special regard to occupational demand, and compare them with the international norms. The secondary aims were to investigate the effects of gender, age-group, weight-group, job-group, hand and several anthropometric variables on static grip strength. A sample of 211 (128 male and 83 female) volunteers aged between 18 and 69 with various occupations participated in the study. Grip strength data were collected using a Jamar dynamometer with standard testing position, protocol and instructions. The mean and std deviation of maximum voluntary static grip strength values (in N) for dominant and non-dominant hands respectively were 455.2 ± 73.6 and 441.5 ± 72.6 for males, and 258 ± 46.1 and 246.2 ± 49.1 for females. The mean female strength was about 57% of the mean male strength value for both dominant and non-dominant hands. There was a curvilinear relationship of grip strength to age, significant differences between genders, hands, and some age-groups, and a correlation to height, body-mass, BMI and hand dimensions depending on the gender. The comparisons with the norms of other world populations indicate that there are cross-national grip strength variations among some nations but not all.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Population norms are developed to determine the capacity of the population and reference values. The developed norms are then used to design for health, safety, comfort and productivity of workforce and consumers and also for clinical purposes. Of these, grip strength norms are often required for safe manual work, tool and product design requiring grip strength; and also for pre-employment screening, work hardening and job-return following a post injury treatment. If the strength limits of the workforce or users are repetitively exceeded, fatigue and eventually injuries may occur (e.g.; Armstrong et al., 1987; Putz-Anderson, 1988; Kilbom, 1994; Eksioglu, 2004, 2006, 2011; Potvin, 2012).

A number of studies reported in the literature identify gender, age, height, weight, body mass index (BMI), and occupation as predictors for grip strength (e.g.; Bechtol, 1954; Schmidt and Toews, 1970; Agnew and Maas, 1982; Fraser and Benten, 1983; Mathiowetz et al., 1985; Hinson and Gench, 1989; Balogun et al., 1991; Crosby and Wehbe, 1994; Harth and Vetter, 1994; Josty et al., 1997; Fraser et al., 1999; Xiao et al., 2005; Bohannon et al., 2006; Anakwe et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2009; Werle et al., 2009). Several of these studies are described in more detail below.


                     Mathiowetz et al. (1985) studied grip and pinch strengths of 310 male and 328 female (20–94 years) from Milwaukee of USA. They obtained the highest grip strength at age group of 25–39.

The study by Balogun et al. (1991) with 960 volunteers (480 males and 480 females; 7–84 years) from Nigeria reported that static grip strength is positively related to both body weight and height at all ages, BMI, and age up to the third decade of life, and thereafter grip strength is inversely related to age.


                     Crosby and Wehbe (1994) studied 214 participants and found that height, weight, gender, hand dominance and hobby demands were predictive of grip strength.


                     Josty et al. (1997) studied 104 participants' grip and pinch strengths in non-manual, light manual and heavy manual workers using a Jamar dynamometer and a pinch measuring device. Heavy manual workers had the strongest grips with the least difference between sides. Office workers had the weakest grips and the greatest difference between sides. Light manual workers were between these two groups.

A study by Xiao et al. (2005) studied isometric muscle strengths of a sample of 193 mainland Chinese (146 males and 47 females) from the city of Ningbo. The study reported that male grip strength was about 50% higher than female grip strength (50.6% for left grip, 52.3% for right grip). A 2.5 cm grip span was used for both genders. In addition, industrial workers and students had higher mean strengths than administrators for males, and industrial workers had higher mean strengths than students. They also found significant correlations between grip strength and a number of anthropometric variables including weight, height (male only) BMI (exc. male right grip strength).


                     Kamarul et al. (2006) studied the grip strength of adult Malaysian population (412 participants, 200 women and 212 men, 18–65 years) and concluded that hand grip strength is significantly correlated with hand dominance, gender, occupation, height and weight, but not BMI. The study also reported that the mean hand grip strengths of Malaysian participants were significantly weaker than those reported for American or European populations and thus data derived from western populations cannot be applied to a comparable Malaysian population.


                     Bohannon et al. (2006) performed a meta-analysis by consolidating 12 previous multinational data (USA, Canada, UK, Australia, Sweden; 3317 participants) and presented age-, gender- and side specific reference values for hand grip strength. They reported that grip strength differs for males and females, grip strength differs between left and right sides and grip strength changes with age.


                     Anakwe et al. (2007) studied static grip strength of 250 participants (172 males and 78 females, 18–83 years) from South East Scotland and found that grip strength was greatest for the 35 to 44 year-old group for both genders and grip strength was consistently greater for men than women. Manual workers had greater mean grip strengths than non-manual workers, and forearm circumference was positively correlated with male grip strength. The study used second setting of Jamar hydraulic handgrip dynamometer. Male participants were composed of manual and nonmanual employees, and female participants of nonmanual employees only. For both genders, dominant hand grip strength was greater than the non-dominant hand.

A study by Werle et al. (2009) with 1023 Swiss participants (both genders of 18–96 years) revealed a curvilinear relationship of grip and pinch strength to age, a correlation to height, weight and significant differences between occupational groups.

The findings from the previous studies can be summarized as follows: (i) males have a greater grip strength than females, (ii) grip strength has a curvilinear relationship to age which results in an increase in grip strength with increasing age to reach a peak at 30–45 years, and then a decrease with increasing age, (iii) manual workers have greater mean grip strengths than non-manual workers (for the majority of the studies), (iv) dominant hand has greater grip strength capability than nondominant hand with right hand dominant participants; however, for left hand dominat participants the difference is less and even not significant, and (v) there is a positive correlation between grip strength, weight, height and BMI in healthy participants for a significant number of cases.

In addition, there are a number of studies that found cross-national and ethnic differences in grip strength (e.g.; Guthrie et al. cited in Chapanis, 1975; Desrosiers et al., 1995; Butler, 1997; Kothiyal and Tettey, 2000; Kamarul et al., 2006; Andersen-Ranberg et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2009; Werle et al., 2009; Araujo et al., 2010). According to Andersen-Ranberg et al. (2009), gene–environment (geographical region) interactions may explain country-specific differences. However, from the examination of a sample of available static grip strength studies (Table 1
                     ), it is not clear whether the cross-national differences are attributable solely to geographical region, racial difference, or other factors.

It is suggested by a number of studies that when designing work or product for strength, it is most appropriate to use normative data that have been developed using a population that closely matches the workforce or users being assessed. For comparisons, factors such as the appropriateness of the norm group (e.g., gender, age-group, job-group, anthropometry, geographical region) must also be considered (e.g., Innes, 1999; Bohannon et al., 2006; Andersen-Ranberg et al., 2009). Indeed, the most common grouping is based on country of residence (Innes, 1999).

Due to the non-existing universal strength norms yet, and the fore-mentioned potential cross-national or geographical variations, grip strength norms should be developed for various nationalities living in the same or different geographical regions. Another concern is to investigate whether the effects of various factors on grip strength for various populations are similar or not.

This study is the first attempt to establish strength norms of the normal population of Turkey. Therefore, the main objectives of this study were to:
                        
                           (i)
                           estimate the maximum voluntary static grip strength (GS) distribution of normal population of Turkey specific to gender, age-group, job-group and hand;

investigate the effects of gender, age-group, job-group, hand and body mass-group on GS for the population of Turkey.

The secondary objectives of the study were to:
                        
                           (iii)
                           investigate the strength of linear association between grip strength and a number of anthropometric characteristics (age, height, body mass, body mass index, hand length, hand breadth, and wrist circumference); and

compare the grip strength data of the population of Turkey with the GS norms of the population of a number of other countries.

@&#METHODS@&#

All the participants were recruited from the major metropolitan city of Istanbul and its surrounding areas. It was assumed that Istanbul approximately represents the general population of Turkey since the population of the city is composed of people whose birth places and family roots are from all the seven geographical regions of Turkey. The sampling was made so that all seven regions and most ethnic groups of Turkey are represented in the sample. The stratified random sampling method was used dividing the population of Turkey into strata: age-group, job-group and the geographical-region. If a participant's both birth place and family root were from the same region then the participant was considered from that region of Turkey.

The sample represented a wide variety of occupational and socio-economic backgrounds (e.g.; secretary, waiter, postman, housewife, baker, driver, factory worker, tailor, carpenter, mechanic, student, engineer, inspector, accountant and so on), which were classified into two main groups, namely, manual employees (ME --males only), non-manual employees (NME). NME is also divided into two sub groups: non-students (ns-NME) and students (s-NME). This sub-grouping of NME was made so that direct comparisons with the other population studies that included such grouping would be possible. The sample was also grouped into 10-year age bands as follows: (18–29), (30–39), (40–49), (50–59) and (≥60) (the last age-group included ns-NME only). Based on self-reported medical history, all participants were free from musculoskeletal and neurological problems that could affect their GS. Only seven male and six female participants were left-hand dominant. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board for Research with Human Participants at Boğaziçi University.

The required minimum sample size was estimated using the formula provided in “General requirements for establishing anthropometric databases” (ISO 15535, 2006) for a 95% confidence interval for the 5th and 95th percentiles (since in most cases, anthropometric data for technological design are of interest at the 5th and 95th percentiles):
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    n
                                    ≥
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             (
                                             
                                                3.006
                                                ×
                                                
                                                   
                                                      CV
                                                   
                                                   α
                                                
                                             
                                             )
                                          
                                       
                                       2
                                    
                                    
                                    and
                                    
                                    CV
                                    =
                                    
                                       s
                                       
                                          
                                             x
                                             ¯
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    ×
                                    100
                                 
                              
                           
                        (where, n: sample size, CV: coefficient of variation, α: the percentage of relative accuracy desired, 
                           
                              
                                 x
                                 ¯
                              
                           
                         and s: the mean and standard deviation of the population for GS). Assuming a relative accuracy of 5%, and using the empirical means and standard deviations (males: 444.4 N and 63.8 N with CV = 14.3; females: 260 N and 38.8 N with CV = 14.9) from the results of the inital pilot study of 60 participants (30 for each gender), the minimum required sample sizes were calculated as 74 for males and 80 for females. On the other hand, actual sample of the study included 211 volunteers (128 males and 83 females). Adequacy of the predetermined sample sizes was verified by the final sample sizes for both genders. Table 2
                         depicts the participant information.

The strength tests were administered with a Jamar handgrip dynamometer (Model 5030J1, Sammons Preston Rolyan, Bolingbrook, IL, USA), which is considered a standard isometric grip strength testing device. The dynamometer accommodates various hand sizes due to its adjustable-handle of five grip positions: from 35 mm to 86 mm (1.375–3.375 inches), in 12.7 mm (0.5 inch) increments. A single dynamometer was used for all GS measurements. A mechanical scale was used to weigh the participants. Both dynamometer and scale were calibrated for accuracy before the tests. A GPM anthropometer (no. 101) was used to measure stature and a sliding caliper was used to measure the length and width of the hands of the participants. A tape measure was used to measure the wrist circumference of the participants.

After receiving an explanation on the study goals and procedures, all candidate participants filled a personal data and brief medical history forms to ensure that they were healthy enough for the study. Then, their weights (in light indoor clothing and shoes off by standing on a weighing scale); statures (vertical distance from the floor (shoes off) to the highest point of the head (vertex) while a participant stands fully erect with heels together and head is oriented in the Frankfurt plane using an anthropometer); the hand lengths (perpendicular distance from a line drawn between the styloid processes to the tip of the middle finger using a sliding caliper); the hand widths (projected distance between radial and ulnar metacarpals at the level of the metacarpal heads from the second to the fifth metacarpal using a sliding caliper); and the wrist circumferences (circumference of wrist at the level of the styloid processes of the radius and ulna, with the hand outstretched using a tape measure) were measured. In measuring these dimensions, ISO 7250-1, 2008 was followed.

The participants were first familiarized with the equipment, protocol and procedures for collecting GS data. The objectives of the familiarization period were to (i) let the participants become familiar with the use of the equipment; (ii) train the participants on the measurement protocol; (iii) adapt the participants mentally and physically to the conditions of the task to be performed as much as possible; and (iv) improve the cooperation between the experimenter and the participants. The participants were instructed to refrain from consuming a full meal or beverages with caffeine for about 2 h before the testing to reduce the possible adverse effects to the GS. Laboratory climate was kept to normal room temperature (∼22 °C) and about normal humidity (40–60%) for all participants. Due to their potential effects on the participants' motivation and performance, competition, noise, spectators, etc. were avoided.

Before the actual tests, the participants performed several trial tests with self-determined submaximal grip forces at five different grip span settings of the dynamometer to determine their ‘preferred grip span’, for which they felt comfortable and they could produce their maximal GS. After the initial determination of the preferred span, the participant, once more, was allowed to try the spans one above and one below the preferred span to ensure that that was the one the participant actually preferred. This method of providing one more opportunity to the participant to decide on ‘preferred span’ is an improvement over the previously used method of subjective determination of preferred span by a number of researchers (e.g.; Kamon and Goldfuss, 1978; Smith and Benge, 1985; Chuang et al., 1997; Haidar et al., 2004). Indeed, Chung et al. (1997) and Eksioglu (2004) used both objective and subjective methods of determination of preferred span with no significant difference.

It should be noted that though a more precise optimal span for an individual can be obtained relative to an individual's hand anthropometry using a continuously adjustable dynamometer (Eksioglu, 2004), the common practice to obtain population grip strength norms has been the use of 2nd setting for all or 2nd setting (for females) and 3rd settings (for males) of a discretely adjustable dynamometer such as Jamar's. Considering that some females have larger hands and some males have smaller hands, instead of assigning all females to 2nd setting and all males to 3rd setting, the assignment of ‘preferred span’ seemed better choice to obtain the actual strength capacity of the population.

As a result, about 70% (91 of 128) of men and 10% (8 of 83) of women preferred 3rd setting of Jamar dynamometer (span width: 60.3 mm). The rest of the participants (about 30% of men and 90% of women) preferred the narrower span, the 2nd setting of the dynamometer (span width: 47.6 mm). No other settings of the dynamometer were selected by the participants. Indeed, for a discretely adjustable Jamar hand grip dynamometer, a number of previous studies indicated that maximal grips are usually attained at the 2nd or 3rd settings of the dynamometer (e.g., Goldman et al., 1991; Crosby et al., 1994; Firrell and Crain, 1996).

The GS values were recorded following the standard testing position recommended by the American Society of Hand Therapists (Fess and Moran, 1981; Bohannon, 1991; Fess, 1992). This testing position is described as sitting in a straight-backed chair with the feet flat on the floor, the shoulder adducted and neutrally rotated, elbow flexed at 90°, and forearm and wrist in neutral position. In all the cases, the arm was not supported by the examiner or by an armrest. For the grip strength measurements, the dynamometer was presented vertically and in line with the forearm to maintain the standard forearm and wrist positions (Mathiowetz, 1990). The dynamometer weight was supported by the experimenter (Fig. 1
                        ).

Using the preferred grip span, each participant's GS was measured following the protocol by Caldwell et al. (1974). Standardized instructions to all participants were kept factual without emotional appeals. No instantaneous feedbacks were given to the participants about their GS performance. When the participant was ready, the participant was instructed to “increase to maximum exertion (without jerk) in about one second and maintain this effort during a four second count” (Caldwell et al., 1974). Maximal and average values during first three seconds of steady exertion (excluding transient periods of about one second each, before and after steady exertion) were recorded. Since the dynamometer was an analog one, the average value was determined by the experimenter through observation by allowing only slight fluctuations during steady exertion, otherwise the trial was repeated. This measurement was repeated twice with a minimum of 2-min rest period between the trials, provided that the difference between the two measurements was within 10% of each other. Otherwise, the measurement was repeated as many as needed. The highest of the average values of the two or more trials was recorded as the maximum voluntary static grip strength (GS) [i.e.; GS = max (avg. of trial 1, avg. of trial 2, …)], since it represents an achieved value. Innes (1999) and Haidar et al. (2004) reported that both average and maximum methods have high repeatability and negligible difference between them. Furthermore, the use of maximum GS values would allow us to make meaningful comparisons with a considerable number of grip strength studies.

Statistical analysis was performed using Minitab 16.0. Descriptive statistics of the collected GS data were calculated by gender, age-group, job-group, and hand stratified data. Pearson product moment correlation coefficients were calculated to understand the linear relationships among GS, age, height, body-mass, BMI, and hand-wrist dimensions. After checking the assumptions (normality, equal variance, and independency), parametric analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to investigate the effects of independent factors (job-group, age-group and weight-group) on the response variable (GS). Male participants were stratified into three job groups: manual employees (ME); non-student non-manual employees (ns-NME), and student non-manual employees (s-NME); and female participants into two: ns-NME and s-NME. NME of both genders were divided into five age groups (in yrs): (18–29), (30–39), (40–49), (50–59) and (60 and up); ME of males were divided into four age groups excluding the oldest group (60 and up). Both genders were also divided into three weight groups based on body-mass-index (BMI): underweight, normal and overweight. BMI provides a measure of weight adjusted for height and it is an objective measure of body adiposity (Khosia and Lowe, 1967):
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 BMI = body
                                 
                                 mass
                                 
                                 
                                    (kg) / height
                                    2
                                 
                                 
                                    (m
                                    2
                                 
                                 )
                              
                           
                        
                     

Weight stratification then is: underweight (BMI<18.5), normal (18.5 ≤ BMI < 25) and overweight (BMI ≥ 25) (WHO, 2004). (A note: Although some advocate considering ethnic-specific cutpoints for obesity, many well-known experts do not recommend this (e.g., Stevens, 2003). In any case, the selected cutpoints are in agreement with the reported ones for the people of Turkey (Subramanian et al., 2011)).

In the ANOVA models, the interaction effects were found insignificant, thus the interactions were omitted. Therefore, while calculating sum of squares, only significant main effects were taken into consideration. For post-hoc analysis, Tukey's tests were performed. Paired t-tests were performed to compare the GS of both hands. Two-sample t-tests were performed to compare mean male GS with mean female GS, and the mean GS of population of Turkey with mean GS of other populations. For the case of comparing the two population means (H0: μ1 = μ2 vs. H1: μ1 ≠ μ2), an F-test was first performed to test the equality of the two population variances being compared in order to determine the appropriate t-test statistics to be used. For all comparisons, p < 0.05 were accepted as statistically significant.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Descriptive statistics were performed to accomplish the first main objective of the study. Based on the descriptive statistical analysis of the collected grip strength data, the GS of both hands were estimated across gender, age-group, and job-group. The results were summarized by a percentile table (Table 3
                        ) and partly by the boxplots of age-group vs. GS (Fig. 2
                        ). The box plots depict the mean (circles), median, 1st and 3rd quartiles and range values and spread of the data. The frequency distributions of GS of female and male dominant hands are also shown (Fig. 3
                        ).

The summary results, as expected, indicate that, on average, males are much stronger than females (female GS ∼57% of male GS), and dominant hand is barely stronger than non-dominant hand (the difference ∼3% for males and ∼5% for females). The male GS variation is larger than the female GS variation as standard deviations indicate (Table 3). ME group (for males only), on average, appears to be the strongest group. The weakest GS groups seem to be the oldest two groups. The frequency distributions of the GS data for both genders appear to be nearly Gaussian.

The second main objective of the study was the investigation of the effects of various factors on GS. For the purpose, analysis of variance (ANOVA) and t-tests were performed to determine the effects of the considered factors (gender, job-group, age-group, BMI-group and hand) on GS.

The results indicated significant gender, age-group and hand effect on GS. All the ANOVA and Tukey's tests were performed for dominant hand GS only. Instead of a single ANOVA, separate ANOVAs were performed for the data of both genders due to the unequal variance of genders (male GS variance > female GS variance), and unmatched age and job groups. In addition, ‘handedness’ was not included into the ANOVAs as a separate factor, because the response variable was the dominant-hand GS only. The details of the analyses and comparisons are provided in the following sub-sections.

Results indicated that gender accounts for the largest difference in GS similar to the previous studies. For the matched job group (i.e., NME) and age range (18–69), female GS was about 57% of male GS for both hands (male ME data was excluded since female sample did not include ME). As the standard deviations show, the male strength variation is larger than female strength variation. The t-tests for the significance of the gender effect on GS indicated that males are significantly stronger than females for both hands (dominant hand: t = 19.28, p < 0.001; non-dominat hand: t = 19.05, p < 0.001).


                           
                              
                                 a)
                                 
                                    Males:
                                    
                                       
                                          (i)
                                          
                                             Job-group effect for age-matched (18–59) ME and ns-NME: The ANOVA indicated that there is no significant difference between ME and ns-NME (F = 3.39, p = 0.069). Here (60–69 age group was excluded since ME group did not include this age group. Student group (s-NME) was also excluded since the group involved first age group only.


                                             Job-group effect for ME, ns-NME and s-NME in the first age group (18–29): The ANOVA indicated no significant job-group effect on GS (F = 0.45, p = 0.642).


                                    Females: For females there was no ME group to compare. A t-test for the age-matched groups (18–29) indicated no significant difference between ns-NME and s-NME (F = 0.67 and p = 0.419).

The boxplots of the overall dominant hand GS of the males and females stratified by age-group were previously shown in Fig. 3.
                              
                                 a)
                                 
                                    Males:
                                    
                                       
                                          (i)
                                          
                                             Age effect for ns-NME with five age groups (18–69): The ANOVA showed significant age effect on GS (F = 3.27, p = 0.017). Tukey tests indicated that (60–69) age group is the only group significantly weaker than (18–29) and (30–39) age groups (t = 3.166, p < 0.0198; t = 3.030, p < 0.0286, respectively). The age group of (30–39) is the strongest followed by (18–29). There were no statistically significant differences among (40–49), (50–59) and (60–69) age groups. There were also no significant differences among the youngest four age groups (18–59).


                                             Age effect for ME (18–59): The ANOVA indicated no significant difference between four age groups for male manual employees (F = 1.08, p = 0.383).


                                    Females (ns-NME): The ANOVA indicated significant age effect on GS (F = 12.62, p < 0.001). Tukey tests indicated that (30–39) and (40–49) age groups are significantly stronger than the oldest two groups (50–59 and 60–69) and (18–29) age group is stronger than (60–69) age group (for all, t > 3.83 and p < 0.003).


                           
                              
                                 a)
                                 
                                    Males: Male participants consisted of normal and overweight groups only. There were only a few underweight participants and thus were excluded from the statistical analysis. The ANOVA results indicated no significant BMI effect on GS for normal and overweight groups.


                                    Females: Female participants consisted of three weight groups: underweight, normal and overweight. The ANOVA results indicated no significant difference among the three groups.

The mean GS value of dominant hand was about 13.7 N and 11.8 N higher than that of non-dominant hand of males and females, respectively. These values correspond to about 3% and 5% difference between the dominant and non-dominant hand GS for males and females, respectively. Paired-t-tests indicated that dominant hand GS is significantly higher than non-dominant hand GS for both genders (Females: t = 4.24 and p < 0.001; males: t = 4.59 and p = 0.001).

To accomplish the first of the secondary objectives, a correlation analysis (Pearson product–moment correlations) was performed to determine the strength of linear relationships for GS, age, height, weight and BMI, and also for GS, hand length, hand breadth and wrist circumference for both genders (Tables 4 and 5
                        
                        ).
                           
                              a)
                              
                                 For females (18–69): (GS, body-mass), (age, body-mass), (age, BMI) and (body-mass, BMI) pairs are positively, and (age, height) and (height, BMI) pairs are negatively correlated (Table 4). For the case of GS and hand dimensions, GS is positively correlated with hand length only (Table 5). All three hand dimensions are positively correlated.


                                 For males (18–69): (GS, height), (GS, body-mass), (GS, BMI), (age, BMI) and (BMI, body-mass) pairs are positively, and (GS, age) and (age, height) pairs are negatively correlated (Table 4). For the case of GS and hand dimensions, the all hand dimensions are positively correlated with GS and with each other (Table 5).

The last objective of the study was to compare the obtained GS data of population of Turkey with some of the available international GS data. For a fairly accurate comparison, gender, age-group, job-group and experimental conditions need to be matched. However, this is sometimes not possible due to the deficiencies and inconsistencies in the reported data in the literature. This was the case for some of the comparisons performed in this study.

It was attempted to match the age-range and job type of the comparison population with the present study as much as possible. The sample mean, std dev and sample size data of the considered populations for each gender were used for t-tests for the comparisons of the mean GS values (Table 6
                        ).

Performed t-tests indicated that the male dominant hand GS of population of Turkey is similar to the GS of the US samples of Kamon and Goldfuss (1978), Mathiowetz et al. (1985) and Bao and Silverstein (2005); UK samples of Haidar et al. (2004) and Anakwe et al. (2007) and Nigerian student sample of Balogun et al. (1992). On the other hand, the same GS is significantly higher than the GS of the US student sample of Nicolay and Walker (2005), Chinese (Mainland) samples of Xiao et al. (2005) and Malaysian sample of Kamarul et al. (2006).

For the comparable samples, the female dominant hand GS of the population of Turkey is not significantly different than the GS of the US sample of Kamon and Goldfuss (1978) and female NME sample of Anakwe et al. (2007) significantly lower than the US samples of Mathiowetz et al. (1985), marginally lower than but stronger than the US student sample of Nikolay and Walker (2005), Chinese (Mainland) sample of Xiao et al. (2005) and Malaysian sample of Kamarul et al. (2006).

The overall comparison results indicate that the GS capacity of the population of Turkey is similar to some populations and different from some others depending on the study and population.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The results of this study are, in general, consistent with the studies of a number of other populations. Gender, age-group, height, hand and hand anthropometry have been identified as important factors in determining the GS capacity.
                        
                           a)
                           
                              Gender effect: Results indicated that, overall, the GS of male NME is significantly higher than the GS of female NME. This well-established fact by a number of previous studies (e.g., Kamon and Goldfuss, 1978; Mathiowetz et al., 1985; Bohannon et al., 2006) has been confirmed once more by the present study for the population of Turkey. Muscle strength is a function of size of related muscles. Since males generally have bigger arm muscles and more involved in strength requiring activities than females, their mean GS is expected to be higher than that of females. In fact, forearm circumference is found significantly related to grip strength (e.g., Kallman et al., 1990; Fraser et al., 1999; Anakwe et al., 2007). For the present study, the larger variation in male GS relative to female GS partly may be explained by larger range of muscle size difference among males and partly by more homogenous female sample used (NME only).


                              Hand effect: The mean GS value for dominant hand was found significantly higher than that of non-dominant hand. Because dominant hand is used forcefully more often than non-dominant one, the muscles of dominant side get bigger and thus stronger. Studies by Fraser et al. (1999) and Anakwe et al. (2007) indicated that dominant hand forearm circumference is bigger than non-dominant hand for both genders). However, the difference found by the present study is only 3% and 5% for male and females, respectively. These results do not align with generally accepted “10% rule” (the dominant GS is approximately 10% greater than the non-dominant GS (e.g.; Bechtol, 1954).


                              Age-group effect: The GS and age-group were found non-linearly related for both genders, though more pronounced for females. The female GS of NME increases and peaks somewhere between 30 and 39 years of age and decreases gradually up to about 49 years of age; and starts to decline significantly thereafter. On the other hand, males maintain their GS at least another decade longer. This trend is similar to a number of other studies (e.g., Andersen-Ranberg et al., 2009; Bohannon, 2006).

This difference in length of maintenance of GS between males and females may partly be explained by genetics and partly by maintenance of arm muscle mass through physical activities for longer years, and thus resisting to the age-related muscle loss longer years.

A number of studies indicate that GS is influenced by age, peaking in the third and fourth decades and declining afterwards—a curvilinear relationship between age and GS (e.g., Mathiowtz et al., 1985; Nevill and Holder, 2000; Peolsson et al., 2001; Maurissen et al., 2003; Peebles and Norris, 2003; Massey-Westrop et al., 2004; Andersen-Ranberg et al., 2009; Bohannon, 2006; Anakwe et al., 2007; Werle et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2009). The results of the present study, generally speaking, are in close agreement with most of these studies. For example, a close examination of the study by Mathiowetz et al. (1985) indicated that male GS peaks within the 20–39 yr age group and remains similar within this range and gradually declines thereafter. On the other hand, female GS gradually increases from age group 20–24 to 30–34 and gradually declines thereafter. Mathiowetz et al. also indicated a curvilinear relationship between age and GS. A study by Anakwe et al. (2007) indicated that GS increases with age and is greatest for the 35–44 year old cohort for both genders and both manual and non-manual employee. For the present study, the age-range wherein peak GS was achieved (30–39) is within the peak GS age range of these two studies for both genders.

The present study could not fully investigate the age-group effect on GS for both genders due to the upper limit of age of the sample. Thus, similar studies need to be performed by the samples with age above 69 for NME and above 59 for male ME.
                        
                           d)
                           
                              Job-group effect: It was expected that ME would be stronger than NME since they use their hands and arms more often and forcefully than NME. Thus, the muscles of ME get bigger, stronger, fit and resist to age-related muscle loss. Generally speaking, in terms of absolute strength values there was a difference; however, the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.069). This is in agreement with the study on a Chinese sample by Lau and Ip (2006); however, it is not in a quite agreement to a number of other studies (e.g., Josty et al., 1997; Anakwe et al., 2007).

The present study did not include female ME so the job-effect on GS for female remains undetermined.
                        
                           e)
                           
                              Weight-group effect: The current study could not fully investigate the relationship of GS and body-mass, as only a few male participants were underweight and all female participants were NME. Similar studies need to be performed with samples that include all three weight groups for each job-group for both genders to determine this effect more clearly.


                              Comparisons to other nationalities: Rougly speaking, the study results indicate similarities between GS of population of Turkey and U.K., US and Nigeria; and differences with the GS data of the compared Asian populations (Mainland China and Malaysia). These differences partly can be attributed to the experimental conditions (e.g., grip span variation, test procedure), and in some cases poorly matched age-range, nutrition, fittness level, anthropometric factors, generation, genetics and, perhaps, the effect of geographical region. Hence, an accurate comparison should be based at least on gender, age-group, and job-group stratified strength data provided that the grip span and study protocol are matched.

The comparison results suggest that there are cross-national similarities and differences of GS. Obviously, the globally usable one set of reference values for grip strength does not exist.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Through this study, the static hand-grip strength norms for the healthy adult population of Turkey, aged 18 to 69, are established. As a result, it is hoped that one more gap in the world strength database is filled. These norms may serve as the reference values in designing for grip strength (tasks, equipment and consumer products) for normal adult population of Turkey. The data can also be used in biomechanical modeling and in the development of ergonomics evaluation tools. Clinicians can also refer to these data for treatment and job-return purposes.

The study shows similarities and differences between population of Turkey and some other populations.

Another contribution of this study is the determination of the effects of a number of factors on grip strength. Most of these factors have already been studied for number of other populations. However, once more, the effects of these factors on grip strength are confirmed for the population under study.

Based on the results of the study, the following specific inferences can be made: (i) The mean female GS is about 57% of mean male grip strength; (ii) there is a curvilinear relationship between age and GS for both genders and this is more pronounced for the female GS (For female NME, GS gradually increases and peaks within the age-group of 30–39 and gradually declines thereafter. For male NME, GS stays about the same up to (30–39) age group and gradually decreases thereafter. For male ME, the GS remains relatively similar between ages of 18–49 years); (iii) for both males and females, dominant hand GS is greater than non-dominant hand. However, the differences are less than the ones in the most reported studies in the literature; and (iv) comparisons with other population studies show that there are cross-national grip strength variations among some nations but not all. Though it is not explicit whether the variations are attributable solely to the differences in geographical area, genetics or some other factors.

In conclusion, in designing for grip strength, the significant factors as well as cross-national similarities and differences of grip strength should be taken into account by the practicioners. Clinicians must also locate the closest population grip strength values to compare with the grip strength values of their patients to make accurate diagnosis and treatment protocols.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

