@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Physical exercise and burnout facets predict injuries in a population-based sample of French career firefighters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Occupational burnout was an important role in well-being of firefighters.


                        
                        
                           
                           Problem-focused coping was a protective factor for firefighter injuries.


                        
                        
                           
                           Physical exercise was identified as risk factors of injuries.


                        
                        
                           
                           Cognitive weariness and social support seeking was positively related to injuries.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Physical activity

Emergency workers

Occupational burnout

Coping strategies

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Although firefighting is known to engender a high rate of injury, few studies have examined the contribution of physical exercise, burnout and coping strategies to firefighting-related injuries. Data were collected from a population-based sample of 220 male firefighters. In a descriptive study, the nature and site of the injuries and the relationships among firefighter injuries, physical exercise, burnout and coping strategies were examined. Sprains were the most prevalent type of injury (98%), followed by tendinitis (40%) and muscle tears (30%). More than two thirds of these injuries were located at the ankle. Weekly hours of physical exercise, cognitive weariness at work, social support seeking, problem-focused coping and emotional exhaustion were significantly related to these injuries. The findings suggest that physical exercise and cognitive weariness can be considered as risk factors for French firefighter injuries, whereas problem-focused coping can be seen as a protective factor. More research is needed to explain the relationship between social support seeking and injury.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Firefighting is a physically, mentally (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992) and emotionally demanding job (Orris et al., 1995) that places significant stress on the musculoskeletal system (Reichelt and Conrad, 1994), increases cardiovascular risk (Melius, 1994), and often leads to fatigue and sleep disorders (Bos et al., 2004). Firefighting is also a hazardous occupation with a greater incidence of injury compared with most other jobs (Karter and Badger, 2001). Over the last 30 years, the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) reports indicate that firefighter injuries in the United States (US) mainly occur during fireground operations (>45%), followed by non-emergency incidents (∼20%) or other on-duty activities (∼20%), whereas training activities (∼10%) and responding to or returning from an incident (∼5%) show the lowest injury percentages (Karter and Molis, 2011). Although many studies have determined the incidence rate and the cause of injury among US firefighters (Jahnke et al., 2013a; Poplin et al., 2011), information about the types of injuries sustained by French firefighters has remained surprisingly low.

In France, in addition to fireground operations, a substantial part of firefighter duties involves emergency medical services, which have been reported to show a higher injury rate than those of the fire services (Maguire et al., 2005). In addition, many mandatory sessions of physical exercise are scheduled during duty time in order to maintain high physical fitness, a key job requirement, as well as to reduce the risk of cardiovascular incidents and prevent job-related injuries (Smith, 2011). For example, it has been shown that frequent physical exercise has noteworthy beneficial effects on cardiovascular disease risk in US firefighters (Durand et al., 2011). In addition, firefighters with lower aerobic capacity are more likely to sustain an injury compared with their fitter counterparts (Poplin et al., 2014). Paradoxically, recent evidence indicates that physical exercise is the most frequent cause of injuries in US firefighters (Jahnke et al., 2013a; Poplin et al., 2011), particularly musculoskeletal injuries such as sprains and strains, even though exercise also contributes to better physical fitness and diminishes the risk of non-exercise related injuries (Jahnke et al., 2013a). Given the characteristics of firefighting duties, these findings highlight the importance of investigating the predictors or correlates of musculoskeletal injuries in French firefighters.

Firefighters are among the employees who experience traumatic stressors and burnout with a relatively high frequency (Alexander and Klein, 2001). Burnout is viewed as an affective reaction to prolonged exposure to stress at work; that is, to situations in which job demands exceed the individual's adaptive resources. This affective reaction consists of feelings of emotional exhaustion, perceived physical fatigue, and cognitive weariness, all of which result from the gradual depletion of intrinsic energetic resources at work (Schaufeli and Buunk, 2003; Shirom, 1989). Recent research has shown that perceived stress may lead to burnout. More particularly, Lourel et al. (2008) found that job demands or job control positively predicted emotional exhaustion and depersonalization in rural French firefighters. These results indicate the importance of understanding the mechanisms related to psychological burnout among firefighters. However, the role of physical activity as a specific job demand and its relationships with firefighter burnout and musculoskeletal injuries remain to be established.

Given the potential costs of traumatic stressors in the work of firefighting, it is important to examine the factors that might protect these professionals from their negative effects. A few studies have investigated the associations between coping strategies and workplace stressors or psychological well-being. Coping strategies have been defined as behavioral and/or cognitive attempts to manage situational demands that are appraised as taxing or exceeding one's ability to adapt (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984). According to the authors, coping efforts may be directed at the demands themselves (problem-focused strategies) or at the emotional reactions to those demands (emotion-focused strategies). Problem-focused coping is based on planning and action to change the situation, while emotion-focused coping is focused on distancing, self-accusation, and avoidance. Inconsistent results have been reported concerning the relationships between the type of coping strategy and the occupational stress of firefighters. Problem-focused coping has been associated with both high (Marmar et al., 1996) and low levels of psychological distress (Brown et al., 2002). Emotion-focused coping was associated with lower psychological distress (Brown et al., 2002), but seeking social support for emotional reasons and emotional venting were not (Clohessy and Ehlers, 1999). Prati and Pietrantoni (2010) showed that emotion and support-coping positively mediated the relationship between stress appraisal and compassion fatigue, and that problem-focused coping positively mediated the relationship between stress appraisal and compassion satisfaction. Although the role of coping strategies in explaining firefighter stress is well known, their relationships with musculoskeletal injury has not been documented.

In light of these observations, the job of French firefighters can be characterized as a complex system of activities, including rescue and personal assistance, firefighting and physical exercise, all of which generate high constraints, stress and the risk of injuries. Although a French report from the Department of Public Safety (Pourny, 2003) indicated that most musculoskeletal injuries affect the lower limbs and mainly the ankle and knee joints, the types of injuries that French firefighters are subject to have not been systematically reported. Furthermore, burnout and coping strategies have been shown to be related to firefighter psychological well-being but no study to date has examined how these variables combine to explain firefighter injuries. Last, understanding how the physical exercise performed during sports sessions impacts injury rates is critical to developing workplace injury management and prevention programs. Thus, the goals of the present study were twofold: (a) to quantify and characterize the musculoskeletal injuries specific to French firefighters, and (b) to examine the contribution of physical exercise, burnout and coping strategies in explaining these injuries. We assumed that: (a) the majority of injuries would be to the lower limbs, and (b) adaptive coping strategies (i.e., problem-focused coping) would be negatively related to the number of injuries, whereas burnout would be positively related to the number of injuries. Given the contradictory findings in the literature, no hypothesis was formulated regarding the role of physical exercise.

@&#METHODS@&#

This retrospective study was designed to explore the injuries occurring in a Fire Department and Rescue Service of the South of France. Out of 320 eligible professional male firefighters contacted and informed about the purpose and procedures, 220 experienced firefighters (M
                        
                           years of service
                         = 9.23; SD = 4.58) from 20 to 62 years old (M
                        
                           age
                         = 36.23; SD = 6.94) volunteered to participate and completed a series of questionnaires. The participants met the following inclusion criteria: (a) on-duty, (b) in the operational section, and (c) present throughout the entire questionnaire session (i.e., not called out on a professional mission). The exclusion criteria were: (a) operationally unfit (i.e., according to annual physical performance tests including an aerobic capacity test, pull-ups, push-ups, plank exercise, a specific firefighter's task and a flexibility test), and (b) status of fire chief or other officer. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. The research procedure was approved by the University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis research ethics board and conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki. Anonymous structured questionnaires were filled out by the participants. An investigator was present to assist participants and answer any questions. The average time to completion was 30 min.


                        Previous injuries. The participants were asked to report the number of musculoskeletal injuries they had sustained since joining the Fire Department. The questionnaires were developed using information from Department of Public Safety (Pourny, 2003). Questions about injuries were preceded by the following explanation: “a musculoskeletal injury is defined as any event for which you have completed an accident report for the department, applied for or received workers compensation, or received medical care (i.e., by a physician or other medical professional).” Firefighters were asked to indicate the musculoskeletal injury type (e.g., sprains, tendinitis or muscle strains) and its location (e.g., ankle, knee, back or elbow). The injuries were classified according to the affected anatomical region and type of injury (i.e., self-reported muscle, tendon, bone, joint, and/or micro trauma). The questionnaire consisted of two items: (a) “How many injuries have you had since you joined the fire department?” and (b) “Specify the nature and location of each injury, and when it occurred (i.e., while on duty or during on-duty physical exercise sessions).”


                        Physical exercise. The weekly volume of physical exercise (excluding occupational exercise) performed by the firefighters was calculated by summing the hours of physical exercise performed during duty and rest days (Hootman et al., 2001) as follows: “In a week, how many hours of physical exercise do you perform while on-duty and on your days off, respectively?” The weekly volume of physical exercise was calculated by adding the hours of physical exercise performed during duty days and rest days.


                        Occupational burnout. Burnout was measured using the “Shirom Melamed Burnout Measure” (SMBM) (Shirom and Melamed, 2006). This questionnaire consists of 14 items subdivided into three subscales: (a) six items measure physical fatigue (e.g., “feeling tiredness and low energy at work”); (b) three items measure emotional exhaustion (e.g., “feeling lacking the energy to display empathy to others at work”); and (c) five items measure cognitive weariness (e.g., “feelings of reduced mental agility on the job”). Participants answered on a 6-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (completely disagree) to 6 (completely agree). Each subscale presented good reliability (α physical fatigue = .89, α emotional exhaustion = .90, α cognitive weariness = .88).


                        Coping. Coping was assessed using the “Ways of Coping Checklist” which was translated and validated in French (WCC) by Cousson et al. (1996). This scale has been used in studies in firefighters (Young et al., 2014). The questionnaire consists of 27 items subdivided into three coping strategies: (a) problem-focused coping (i.e., planning and action to change the situation), (b) emotion-focused coping (i.e., distancing, self-accusation and escape), and (c) social support seeking (i.e., informational, material and emotional). This questionnaire measures how individuals respond to a specific stressful situation. The firefighters were invited to think about the last stressful situation they had encountered in their work and answered accordingly. The participants responded on a 6-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (completely disagree) to 6 (completely agree). The internal consistency of each subscale was satisfactory (α problem-focused coping = .92, α problem-focused coping = .89, α problem-focused coping = .90).

Linear regression models (Cohen et al., 2003) were used to evaluate the associations among physical exercise, coping, and burnout (independent variables) and previous injuries (dependent variables) in the French firefighters.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The total number of injuries reported on the 220 questionnaires was 819. On average, each firefighter reported four injuries since starting the job. Sprains were the most frequently reported musculoskeletal injury and encountered by almost all participants (Table 1
                        ). The ankle was the most frequent site for injury (77%), although shoulder, knee and low back injuries were also reported (Table 2
                        ).

The professional French firefighters performed almost 10 h of physical exercise per week (M = 9.54; SD = 4.31) and reported relatively low scores for physical fatigue (M = 1.74; SD = .85), cognitive weariness (M = 1.48; SD = .78) and emotional exhaustion (M = 1.70; SD = .85). They had high scores for social support seeking (M = 3.74; SD = 1.01) and problem-focused coping (M = 3.85; SD = 1.01) and medium scores for emotion-focused coping (M = 2.59; SD = .85).

Multiple linear regression analysis (Table 3
                        ) revealed significant positive relationships between the number of injuries and the weekly hours of physical exercise (β = .07 p < .01), cognitive weariness (β = .12, p < .01), and social support seeking (β = .12, p < .01). This analysis also revealed significant negative relationships between the number of injuries and problem-focused coping (β = −.10, p < .05) and emotional exhaustion (β = −.11, p < 01). Collectively, these variables significantly predicted participant injuries, F(10, 211) = 89.2, p < .001, accounting for 27% of the variance.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The first purpose of the present study was to characterize the musculoskeletal injuries encountered by French firefighters. Based on the report of the Department of Public Safety (Pourny, 2003) and a previous investigation (Poplin et al., 2011), we hypothesized that the majority of these injuries would be to the lower limbs. In line with this hypothesis, we found that 77% of the firefighters participating in this investigation had sustained an ankle injury. Moreover, our findings were consistent with previous studies (Jahnke et al., 2013a; Poplin et al., 2011) and the NFPA survey (Karter and Molis, 2011), which reported that the most prevalent types of injury were sprains and strains (40.2–85.2%).

The second purpose was to examine the role of physical exercise, occupational burnout and coping strategies in explaining the musculoskeletal injuries of French firefighters. We found a significant positive relationship between weekly hours of physical exercise and injuries, suggesting that regular physical exercise might be considered as a risk factor for musculoskeletal injury in our population of firefighters. This conclusion is consistent with previous results indicating that both occupational training and physical exercise sessions may be etiologic factors for exercise-related injuries (Jahnke et al., 2013a). In addition, it was shown that firefighters in those US fire departments that had implemented health promotion programs including physical exercise were more likely to experience injuries (i.e., both occupational and exercise injuries) than were firefighters not involved in such programs (Poston et al., 2013).

However, contradictory findings have also been reported in the literature, providing support for the paradoxical role of physical exercise in firefighter fitness levels and injury rates. It has been shown that firefighters with low fitness levels as defined by relative aerobic capacity are more prone to injury than their fitter counterparts (Poplin et al., 2014, 2015). It has also been amply documented that obesity in firefighters is associated with greater risk of injury, absenteeism, illness and lower fitness level (Jahnke et al., 2013b; Kuehl et al., 2012; Poston et al., 2011b). In this context, the studies that have promoted health programs have shown the beneficial effects of physical exercise on injury occurrence and workers’ compensation claims (Elliot et al., 2007; Leffer and Grizzell, 2010). Nevertheless, although physical exercise contributes to improving the overall fitness level of firefighters, it can also increase the risk of injury (Poston et al., 2013). This observation in firefighters is consistent with previous studies that demonstrated in both adults enrolled in an aerobics center (Hootman et al., 2001) and US Air Force service members (Giovannetti et al., 2012) that an increase in injuries was associated with a higher fitness level or with beginning a fitness program. It is also worth mentioning that the firefighters who regularly performed physical exercise during their duties were less likely to experience a non-exercise injury (i.e., any injury not related to physical training, such as fire suppression, rescue and medical emergency tasks) (Jahnke et al., 2013a), which suggests the protective effects of physical fitness. As a whole, these observations emphasize the importance of physical exercise for firefighters to maintain physical fitness but also point out that the more firefighters spend time doing physical exercise, the greater their risk of injury.

We also hypothesized that the components of occupational burnout (i.e., emotional exhaustion, physical fatigue and cognitive weariness) would be significant predictors of firefighter injuries. Our findings showed that cognitive weariness positively predicted the number of injuries, providing support to previous research based on stress injury (Williams and Andersen, 1998). However, our results showed that emotional exhaustion was negatively related to the total number of injuries, and that physical fatigue and the number of injuries were not significantly related. These results differ from those observed in professional rugby players, as a significant positive relationship between emotional exhaustion and the number of injuries was reported (Cresswell and Eklund, 2005). These differences may be explained by the particularity of each professional context. It can be hypothesized that sources of emotional exhaustion in athletes are directly related to sport, whereas sources of emotional exhaustion in firefighters are related to emergency situations and work constraints. Another explanation could be that firefighters who are emotionally exhausted exercise less and thus have less risk of injury. Since this is a cross-sectional correlational study, more research is needed to determine causal relationships between these variables.

Last, we assumed that coping strategies would negatively predict the number of injuries. Our findings revealed that injuries were positively related to social support seeking and negatively related to problem-focused coping. No relationship between emotion-focused coping and the number of injuries was observed. The protective role of problem-focused coping with regard to injury suggested in the present study is consistent with previous findings in emergency work contexts (Marmar et al., 1996), and in sports reporting that this type of coping allows athletes to deal effectively with the adverse effects of stress on physical health (Williams and Andersen, 1998). The positive relationships between social support seeking and injuries lead to several interpretative assumptions. Increased social support has generally been associated with reduced stress in this population (Varvel et al., 2007). However social support seeking can also reflect vulnerability states and therefore predispose individuals to low scores of well-being (Kaufmann and Beehr, 1989) or injury. Furthermore since our study is correlational and cross-sectional, it can also be assumed that firefighters with greater number of injuries could be seeking more social support. Further research is necessary to better understand the relationships between social support and injury, and identify in which conditions social support has a positive effect on health outcomes or burnout and in which conditions it might be a risk factor for injury.

This study has several limitations. First, the correlational design used informs us about the relationships between variables at some point in time but does not provide information about causal relationships. It would be interesting to conduct a longitudinal study to examine the nature of these relationships over time. Second, methodologies based on self-report measures, although they allow for relatively large samples (Mills and Huebner, 1998), have several inherent limitations. Self-report data are potentially subject to impression-management bias (Kendzierski, 1990), with participants, for example, trying to present themselves positively. Third, the volume of physical activity was self-reported. Future research could consider the use of activity monitoring devices to control the respective physical activity performed during both physical training and occupational training to extend the present findings. Although high rates of overweight and obesity have been reported among firefighters (Munir et al., 2012; Poston et al., 2011a; Soteriades et al., 2005), their associations with musculoskeletal injury incidence have led to contradictory findings (Jahnke et al., 2013b). In the present investigation, overweight and obesity were not assessed but only “operationally fit” firefighters were included, so we can assume that the occurrence of overweight and/or obese firefighters in this investigation was low; this concern should nonetheless be controlled for in future studies. Finally, the results obtained here are specific to the fire department assessed and any extrapolation to another fire department should be done with caution.

Prospectively, another interesting predictor of injury that would enrich the present study is personality traits. Previous studies have focused on the relationships between personality traits and burnout in emergency medical services (Pajonk et al., 2011) and between personality traits and coping (Connor-Smith and Flachsbart, 2007), but only one study to our knowledge has sought to investigate the associations between personality traits and injuries in firefighters (Gordon and Larivière, 2014). In line with these studies, it would be interesting to simultaneously examine the contribution of personality traits, burnout and coping and physical activity to explain firefighter injury. Finally, given that our questionnaire about injuries covered a relatively long period in the past, the firefighters may have underestimated the number of injuries. A prospective study might therefore provide greater insight into firefighter injuries (Twellaar et al., 1996).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The results of this study are relevant because they suggest that physical exercise, burnout, and coping strategies are likely to have significant effects on the musculoskeletal injuries of firefighters. More particularly, physical exercise, cognitive weariness and social support seeking may be risk factors for French firefighter injuries, whereas problem-focused coping appears as a protective factor. Physical exercise is mandatory to meet the high demands of firefighting, and our results suggest that future health promotion programs should manage the risks of injury, which are mainly musculoskeletal. For example, strength training, proprioceptive training and multiple exposure programs were found to reduce the number of musculoskeletal injuries in sports competitors and army recruits (Lauersen et al., 2014). Although the optimal exercise program to prevent injury in firefighters has yet to be determined, it can be suggested that such a program should at least include both aerobic and strength/proprioception exercise. Future studies should therefore seek to identify the interventions best-suited to prevent injuries from occurring during physical exercise aimed at maintaining an adequate level of physical fitness in firefighters.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

