@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of team lifting on work demands, workload and workers' evaluation: An observational field study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The mass limit of 25kg per person is regularly violated when team lifting must be applied.


                        
                        
                           
                           Load mass is not the main determinant for the appropriate number of workers during lifting.


                        
                        
                           
                           Work demands are not different when handling loads up to 50kg or up to 100kg.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Team lifting

Manual material handling

Work demands

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The objective of this study was to assess differences in work demands, energetic workload and workers’ discomfort and physical effort in two regularly observable workdays in ironwork; one where loads up to 50kg were handled with two persons manually (T50) and one where loads up to 100kg were handled manually with four persons (T100). Differences between these typical workdays were assessed with an observational within-subject field study of 10 ironworkers. No significant differences were found for work demands, energetic workload or discomfort between T50 and T100 workdays. During team lifts, load mass exceeded 25kg per person in 57% (T50 workday) and 68% (T100 workday) of the lifts. Seven ironworkers rated team lifting with two persons as less physically demanding compared with lifting with four persons. When loads heavier than 25kg are lifted manually with a team, regulations of the maximum mass weight are frequently violated.
               
               
                  Statement of relevance
                  Loads heavier than 25kg are frequently lifted during concrete reinforcement work and should be lifted by a team of persons. However, the field study showed that loads above 25kg are most of the time not lifted with the appropriate number of workers. Therefore, loads heavier than 25kg should be lifted mechanically.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

From a health perspective, several threshold limits have been proposed for the safe manual lifting of loads (e.g., Jäger and Luttmann, 1991; Leamon, 1994; Waters et al., 1993). One profession in which manual material handling (MMH) frequently occurs is concrete reinforcement work (Buchholz et al., 2003; Paquet et al., 2005; Saari and Wickström, 1978; Vi, 2006). At work sites, concrete is reinforced with iron bars or lattices placed and tied together by ironworkers. The weight of the iron bars varies from less than 1kg to approximately 50kg (Buchholz et al., 2003; Saari and Wickström, 1978), and the weight of pre-assembled iron lattices can even exceed 100kg, depending on the size of the iron lattices and the diameter of the iron bars of the lattices.

In the Dutch construction industry, the maximum weight limit is set at 25kg under ideal manual lifting circumstances (Arbouw, 1997), loads heavier than 25g should be lifted mechanically. Due to organisational, technical and economical limitations, mechanical lifting of loads heavier than 25kg is not always feasible. In these situations, the load is lifted manually with more workers to comply with the maximum weight limit of 25kg in the Dutch construction industry. Lifting a load with additional persons is called team lifting and is a frequently used method when weight exceeds the individual threshold limits for safe MMH (Barrett and Dennis, 2005; Marras et al., 1999; Sharp et al., 1997). This implies that within reinforcement work, work settings occur in which ironworkers are allowed to lift upto 50kg with two persons manually (Dutch Labour Inspectorate, 2008) and consequently settings in which lifts upto 100kg with four persons are allowed.

Previous research on team lifting has mainly focused on its effect on the Maximal Acceptable Weight of Lift (MAWL) (Mital and Motorwala, 1995; Lee and Lee, 2001, Sharp et al., 1997) and biomechanical compression force at the lumbar spine (Dennis and Barrett 2002; Marras et al. 1999). While two studies found a team MAWL between 85% and 90% of the sum of individual MAWL for team lifts with 2–4 persons (Lee and Lee, 2001; Sharp et al., 1997), another study found a team MAWL of 112% (Mital and Motorwala, 1995). Despite these conflicting results, it is generally assumed that team MAWL is less than the sum of individual MAWL (Dennis and Barrett, 2003). The studies that focused on the biomechanical load at the low back found a decrease (660–1000N) in compression force on the lower back during two-persons lifts compared to individual lifts given a fixed load per person (Dennis and Barrett, 2002; Marras et al., 1999). The biomechanical load of team lifts with more than two persons were not subject of these studies. However, team lifting seems beneficial to reduce the biomechanical compression force on the lower back.

All of the previously mentioned studies on team lifting were performed in a laboratory and focused on the intensity of team lifting. However, the frequency and duration of lifting tasks are also important for quantifying daily exposure to physically demanding activities at work (Waters et al., 1993, Winkel and Mathiassen, 1994; Van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1998, Kuijer et al., 2012). Although team lifting seems beneficial to reduce workload, it is unclear how often and in what way team lifting is performed in practice on work sites when loads upto 50kg or upto 100kg are lifted manually. Because aspects other than weight may influence team lifting, we also wanted to learn from the experiences of workers who perform team lifting with two or more persons.

The aim of the present study is to establish the work demands and workload among ironworkers performing concrete reinforcement work between usual workdays at which two workers, in accordance with the policy of the Dutch Labour Inspectorate, lift loads up to 50kg and usual workdays at which four workers lift loads up to 100kg. Work demands and workload were assessed in terms of (1) frequency and duration of tasks and activities, (2) lifting characteristics, (3) energetic workload, (4) perceived discomfort of body regions and (5) perceived physical effort.

@&#METHOD@&#

A within-subjects observational field study was performed to assess the differences between workdays with MMH up to 50kg with two ironworkers (T50) and workdays with MMH up to 100kg with four ironworkers (T100).

Six companies identified by their employers' organisation agreed to participate in the study. The construction companies themselves recruited in total 10 ironworkers with at least six months of experience for participation. Before the first measurement, the ironworkers were informed about the purpose and content of the study, and they agreed to participate by signing an informed consent form. All ironworkers participating in this study were males. Mean (SD) age, body height, body weight and years of experience were 38 (7) years, 180 (9)cm, 81 (13)kg and 17 (9) years, respectively.

The work demands and workload of these 10 ironworkers were assessed twice, once during one T50 workday and once during one T100 workday. So, the observations were performed on 20 different workdays. Both workdays are common workdays in the work of ironworkers in the Netherlands. For four of the ten ironworkers, the T50 workday was the first workday to be observed. The other six ironworkers were first observed during the T100 workday. The time period between the two measurement days varied between one week and three months. The only lifting regulation in effect was that manual lifting of a maximum of 25kg per person was allowed for both workdays. During both workdays, the ironworkers worked with colleagues with whom they normally work. Employers provided work sites where the measurements could be performed. The study design was an observational study and not an intervention on the activities of the workers.

During the entire workday, the ironworkers wore a heart rate monitoring device, and their work demands were observed at the workplace by a trained observer. The outcome measures were work demands (duration and frequency of tasks and activities), lifting characteristics, energetic workload (percentage of heart rate reserve (%HRR)), perceived local discomfort and perceived physical effort for the T50 and T100 workdays.

Prior to the observations, ironworkers' tasks and activities during a typical workday were collected by exploratory observations at worksites and interviews with ironworkers. The frequency and duration of the tasks, activities and lifting characteristics were observed at the workplace by a single observer during the entire T50 and T100 workdays by means of a real-time hierarchical task analysis with the TRAC system (Task Recording and Analysis on Computer, Frings-Dresen and Kuijer 1995). The observer was trained in real-time observations using videos of ironworkers. After training, the reliability of the within-observer agreement was tested. Training was continued until an interclass correlation was reached for the tasks and activities of interest that was qualified as good (ICC>0.80) (Innes and Straker 1999). The following tasks, activities and lifting characteristics were observed.
                              
                                 −
                                 Tasks: manual material handling, mechanical material handling, rebartying, cutting, placing distance controllers, break, micro-pauses/supervising, other not specified tasks.

Activities: walking, standing, sitting, kneeling/squatting, bending, lifting and carrying, dropping, climbing, pushing and pulling.

Lifting characteristics:
                                       
                                          ○
                                          materials handled: bars, lattices or other prefabricated rebar constructions.

mass of materials in categories of 25kg.

Mass amount was assessed real time by looking at which material was lifted and the diameter of the material. Mostly, the mass of the lattices was written on a label. For the iron bars, the observer had a form in which the mass per metre for each different diameter was given. Mass of the materials was calculated by multiplying the mass per metre with the length of the materials.
                                       
                                          ○
                                          number of hands that the ironworker used to handle the load: one hand or two hands.

the main orientation of the load: flat (horizontal) or upright (vertical).

height of the hands when handling materials: above shoulder height, between shoulder and hip, between hip and knee, between knee and ankle, lower than ankle height; whether the load was laid upon a shoulder.

number of ironworkers who handled the load: 1–4.

To determine the energetic workload during the measurement days, heart rate was assessed by a Polar® heart rate monitoring device. Heart rate was continuously measured and registered every 15s. The energetic workload of the individual tasks was obtained by linking the task analysis and heart rate data. The workload was defined as the percentage of heart rate reserve (%HRR); %HRR=(HRavg
                           −(HRrest))/(HRmax
                           −(HRrest))×100% (Karvonen et al. 1957). HRavg was defined as the average heart rate during the workday, HRrest was the lowest heart rate during a workday for a five-minute period and HRmax was the maximal heart rate calculated by the formula of Gellish et al. (2007): HRmax
                           =207−(0.7×age).

During the workday, the ironworkers were asked to rate local discomfort of their lower back, shoulders, hips, knees and ankles/feet. Discomfort of the body regions was defined as local aches, stiffness, fatigue and/or pain. To assess local discomfort, a visual analogue scale (VAS) (Streiner and Norman 2000) was used with the extremes of 0 (‘no perceived discomfort at all’) to 100 (‘worst perceived discomfort’). Perceived local discomfort was assessed three times during the workday: (1) at the start of the workday, (2) at the beginning of a break halfway through the workday and (3) at the end of the workday.

At the end of the second day of observation, the ironworkers were asked how they rated team lifting up to100kg with four ironworkers in comparison to lifting up to50kg with two ironworkers using the question,‘ How do you rate team lifting with three to four persons in comparison with lifting with two persons?’. Possible answers to this question were ‘physically more demanding’, ‘physically less demanding’ or ‘no difference’. The ironworkers were also asked to provide arguments for their choice.

The data recorded with TRAC were corrected for obvious errors, such as incorrectly registered tasks or activities. After correction, the total duration (in minutes) and frequency of tasks and activities for an entire workday was calculated for the observed variables. Differences in the mean duration and frequency of tasks and activities, lifting characteristics and energetic workload between T50 and T100 workdays were tested with a paired-samples t-test. To determine whether the progression in perceived local discomfort of various body regions from the beginning to the end of the workday was affected by workday (T50 or T100), the interaction component of a 3×2 (time of assessment on workday [start, middle, end]×workday [T50, T100]) ANOVA for repeated measures was used. All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS 16.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Statistical significance was defined as p
                        <0.05. The perceived physical effort of the 10 ironworkers was categorised and ranked based on frequency.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Table 1
                         provides an overview of the mean (SD) duration of a workday and the main tasks and activities during a workday. On average, MMH lasted 99min and 109min for T50 and T100, respectively, accounting for 21% and 24% of an entire workday. No statistical differences were found for the duration of a workday and the duration and frequency of tasks and activities.

On both the T50 and T100 workdays, most loads were lifted by one ironworker (128 lifts (SD 23) vs. 95 lifts (SD 45), respectively; p
                        =0.126). Team lifting occurred in 23% of the cases on T50 workdays and in 37% of the cases on T100 workdays. Table 2
                         shows an overview of the percentage of times a load mass above 25kg was lifted by one, two, three or four ironworkers during both settings of ironwork. When team lifting was required to lift a load manually, the regulation of 25kg per person was violated 25 times (57%) on T50 workdays and 29 times (68%) on T100 workdays.


                        Table 3
                         shows an overview of the frequency of lifting characteristics. On T50 workdays, significantly fewer lattices were handled than on T100 workdays (4 (SD 8) vs. 26 (SD 23), respectively; p
                        =0.010). No differences were found for the number of hands an ironworker used to handle the load, the orientation of the load or the handle height when lifting and carrying.

The %HRR did not differ significantly between T50 and T100 (24% HRR (SD 5) and 24% HRR (SD 4), respectively). Furthermore, no significant difference was found between T50 and T100 for the %HRR within MMH (30% HRR (SD 5) vs. 30% HRR (SD 6), respectively).


                        Table 4
                         shows the perceived discomfort of body regions. The interaction between progression during the workday [start, middle, end] and workday [T50, T100] for perceived local discomfort was not significant for all body regions. The highest perceived discomfort on a T50 workday was found for the knees (an average VAS score of 13 (SD 19) on a scale from 0 to 100), whereas the lower back had the highest perceived discomfort on a T100 workday (an average VAS score of 21 (SD 20)).

Seven out of 10 ironworkers rated T100 workdays as physically more demanding than T50 workdays, and one ironworker rated T50 workdays as physically more demanding than T100 workdays. Two ironworkers did not favour one workday over the other. When the ironworkers were asked to give arguments for their ratings, their main argument for why the T100 workday was rated as physically more demanding was that loads heavier than 50kg were frequently handled by two ironworkers. According to the seven ironworkers, this was caused by the lack of space to lift and carry loads with four ironworkers at some work sites and an increase in the coordination required to lift and carry with four ironworkers. MMH with two persons can be performed more easily on smaller routes and in smaller spaces, and the handling of the load was easier with two ironworkers. Although the other three ironworkers found the T50 workday to be physically more demanding or did not have a preference towards one workday, they noticed that coordination between the ironworkers influenced the perceived physical effort.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study was performed to assess the differences in work demands, workload and workers' evaluation of perceived physical effort between two usual days of ironwork; one when loads up to 50kg are lifted manually, and one when loads up to 100kg are lifted manually. When team lifting is required, the load mass exceeded 25kg per person in 57% and 68% of the lifts, for T50 and T100 workdays, respectively. No differences were found for work demands and workload between T50 and T100 workdays. Seven of the 10 ironworkers perceived the T100 workday as physically more demanding.

Precision of the group mean estimate of the frequency and duration outcome measures of the 10 ironworkers is expected not to increase considerably when increasing the number of ironworkers. According to Hoozemans et al. (2001), the between subject variance for manual handling activities is usually larger than the within-subject variance during observations. In addition, the tasks and activities of ironworkers were observed for an entire workday. Therefore, the sample size in the present study can be considered sufficient. Due to the specific materials, in terms of sizes and shapes, used in concrete reinforcement work, the results are not generalizable towards other jobs and industries.

The observations were performed for an individual ironworkers working in a group. The only lifting regulation in effect was the maximum of 25kg per person as issued by the Dutch Labour Inspectorate. Furthermore, the ironworkers were free to perform their tasks and activities the way they normally did. The amount of lifting of load masses of the lifts were not manipulated by the researcher during the observation, therefore on some occasions, loads of more than 50kg were lifted in the T50 setting. However, this situation occurred for less than 10% of all rebar handled during these workdays. In addition, during the observations, we were not aware of any appointments regarding shifts in MMH between the observed ironworkers and their colleagues.

According to Van der Beek and Frings-Dresen (1998), real-time observations are generally suitable to accurately assess the actual working method, including physically demanding activities such as lifting, carrying, pushing or pulling. However, real-time observations are inaccurate for body movements and exerted force (De Looze et al., 1994). Both aspects contribute to the biomechanical workload during team lifting, and may be an explanation of the perceived physical effort of the ironworkers. For example, the exerted force may be higher during an uncoordinated four-person lift compared to a coordinated two-person lift. The outcome measures in the present study, frequency and duration of tasks and activities, %HRR and perceived discomfort showed no difference between T50 and T100 settings.

The two settings of ironwork did not result in differences in work demands, energetic workload, lifting characteristics or perceived discomfort of body regions. An explanation for the lack of differences between T50 and T100 workdays might be the overlap in load masses for both conditions. The load masses lifted on T100 work days were above 50kg, 21% of the time, which means that in 79% of the cases, the load mass was similar to the T50 workdays. This might explain the similarity of lifting characteristics and workload. However, the similarity in load masses does not explain why no differences were found for the duration of tasks and activities. Buchholz et al. (2003) stated that the use of cranes could reduce the time spent on MMH on a workday. One might expect that when heavier loads must be transported, cranes would be used more often. However, in this study an individual ironworker was observed and not the flow of materials or equipment. While heavier pieces of rebar were lifted mechanically, the ironworker could still perform other MMH tasks of (lighter) rebar. To make a good comparison for the duration of MMH between T50 and T100 workdays, the duration of MMH compared with the daily production of ironworkers should be considered. The daily production of ironworkers is determined by the mass amount of rebar handled on a workday. However, because of the dependency of the involvement of more ironworkers on a workday and the classification of mass into categories in the present study, it was not possible to determine the exact amount of rebar handled on a workday by an individual ironworker and by a team of ironworkers. As a result, the comparison of the duration of MMH and the daily production could not be made in the present study.

All ironworkers violated the maximum of 25kg per person during lifting, especially when lifting alone during the T50 workdays and lifting alone and with one co-ironworker during the T100 workdays. The maximum load mass of two-person lifts during T50 workdays and of three- and four-persons lifts during T100 workdays were violated by two, five and two ironworkers, respectively. An explanation for exceeding the maximum load mass of 25kg per person could be the characteristics of the work sites. For instance, at one work site, iron lattices did not fit through the entrance of a building when lifted by four ironworkers. Because a roof obstructed mechanical transportation, MMH with two ironworkers was necessary to transport these 100kg lattices to the work site. Therefore, factors other than load masses influence the decision to lift loads in teams. This is in line with the experience of seven ironworkers and in accordance with Barrett and Dennis (2005), who found that the distribution of load and effort between team members is influenced by the load (e.g., size, shape), task (e.g., height, distance moved) and environment (e.g., space, floor surface and obstructions). Furthermore, these factors influencing the distribution of load and effort also influence lifting behaviour of the ironworkers (i.e., how and with how many workers the load is lifted). MMH with four persons required a wider path compared with MMH with two persons, which is not always available at work sites, as stated previously.

The factors mentioned and the behaviour of ironworkers affect the biomechanical load on the spine. For instance, for single-worker lifts, a reduction in load masses and an increase of the initial lifting height resulted in an increase in the horizontal distance of the load relative to the body that attenuated the positive effects on lower back moment due to the reduction in load masses and the increase in lifting height (Faber et al., 2007). In a patient transfer study was showed that spinal load was not increased or decreased during team lifting per se compared with individual lifts (Varcin-Coad and Barrett, 1998). Similarly, Lavender et al. (2000) suggested that the nature of the lifting task rather than the weight of the patient determined the optimal patient transfer technique. These findings confirm that load mass is not the main determinant of lifting behaviour and characteristics of team lifting. Based on the ratings and experiences of the ironworkers, the choice of the number of workers is more dependent of the pathways during the handling tasks.

This study showed that frequency and duration of MMH were not affected by different workdays in ironwork. However, 57% and 68% of the times when loads above 25kg must be lifted manually during T50 and T100 workdays, respectively, less workers lifted the load than required. Therefore, team lifting in itself did not appear effective to prevent workers form lifting more than 25kg per person. Especially when loads above 50kg have to be transported manually with a sufficient number of workers, enough working space should be established.

The question remains whether the biomechanical load on the lower back differs between lifting 50kg with two persons and lifting 100kg with four persons during MMH rebar work situations, as observed in this field study. Additional insight is needed on the biomechanical load on the lower back when handling rebar in typical lifting and carrying situations.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Handling up to 50kg with two ironworkers (T50) and up to 100kg with four ironworkers (T100) did not result in differences in the duration and frequency of tasks, activities and lifting characteristics during a workday. In addition, the energetic workload and perceived discomfort of the body regions did not differ between T50 and T100 workdays. Seven out of 10 ironworkers rated the T100 workday as physically more demanding. During both workdays, up to 68% of the times loads above 25kg were not transported with the number of workers required based on load mass. Load mass appears therefore not to be the determinant factor for the number of persons during team lifting. Other factors like environment, task, and shape of the load also appear of importance.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank the employers and employees who participated in the present study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

