@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluating change in user error when using ruggedized handheld devices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           There are no significant differences between user error and age.


                        
                        
                           
                           Lack of corrective software may not impact user error as much as expected.


                        
                        
                           
                           Keypad devices had more character errors while touchscreen devices had more word.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

User error

Handheld devices

Generation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The increasing number of handheld mobile devices used today and the increasing dependency on them in the workplace makes understanding how users interact with these devices critical. This study seeks to understand how user error changes based on user age as well as input content type on ruggedized handheld devices. Participants completed data entry tasks of word and character input on two different devices, a physical keypad and touchscreen device. The number of errors and types of error, corrected and permanent were collected for each participant. Based on results on the study, touchscreen devices proved to be the optimal ruggedized handheld device to minimize user error.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Text entry research has evolved over time with the growing number of mobile devices in the market. As of January of 2014, 90% of American adults own a cell phone with 58% of those phones being a smartphone (Pew Research, 2014). With such a large smartphone penetration in the consumer market, text entry research can lead to a greater understanding of speed and accuracy of text input. This knowledge can feed back into the research and development of new text input technologies. A need for text entry research is driven by the necessity for mobile text input devices in the workforce. With new technologies, customer service response times are expected to quicken there by revealing a need for technology to become more accurate and efficient. These devices must have the technological capabilities to serve the dependency placed on them in industry. As mobile text entry devices become more ubiquitous in the workforce, the operation of these devices becomes more critical. Recent research has explored the impacts of mobile and portable devices on posture, muscle activation, response time, and usability in existing products and product upgrades (e.g. Arman et al., 2014; Hsiao et al., 2014; Pereira et al., 2013; Strawderman and Huang, 2012; Werth and Babski-Reeves, 2014). This study evaluates how error rate changes based on user age as well as input content type on ruggedized handheld devices. Observing these changes can help gain a better understanding of the accuracy of text input.

The two primary evaluation metrics for text input are accuracy and speed (MacKenzie and Soukoreff, 2002). Of these two metrics, accuracy is more difficult to obtain (Soukoreff and Mackenzie, 2001). To learn more about determining accuracy, many studies have created and contributed to the knowledge base of typing error categorization. The three primary categories of typing errors are substitution, omission, and insertion. These categories have been expanded in many studies as shown in Table 1
                     . This table was developed by Kano & Read to solve character level insertion ambiguities as a way to summarize the different typing error categorization methods that were developed between 1945 and 2007. Their research focused on eliminating the ambiguities of an error falling into multiple categories which occurs as a result of the expansion of the typing error categories. A blank cell in the table represents indicates that a method does not include that type of error categorization.

Physical keypad and touchscreen devices are two of the most common input methods for handheld mobile devices. While both types of devices are used for text input, keypads have physical key affordances which have been proved to be vital when typing (Paek and Hsu, 2011). When using a touchscreen, users are more prone to error without the affordances a keypad provides (Rudchenko et al., n.d.). As a result, users will perform worse on touch text entry than on a keyboard. A 1990 study asked participants to enter dates and airline flights on a keyboard and a touchscreen (both without autocomplete features). When looking at input speed, results showed that users of touchscreens took 73% longer when inputting text content in comparison to a keyboard; however, the ubiquity of devices in our daily lives could change these values today (Gould et al., 1990). In a study where participants performed tasks on an ATM with a numeric physical keypad and one with a touchscreen keypad, the input speed of older adults on a touchscreen was found to be faster than on a physical keypad (Chung et al., 2010; Rogers et al., 2005).

There have been a number of studies that seek to find age-related differences when using direct and indirect input devices (Chung et al., 2010; Mclaughlin et al., 2012; Pak et al., 2002; Rogers et al., 2005). A device is defined as indirect or direct by its manner of input and output of data (Mclaughlin et al., 2012). A device where input is completed on the output screen, such as a touchscreen, is considered a direct device. Devices that separate the method of input from the output screen, such as a keyboard or mouse, are considered indirect devices.


                     Chung et al. (2010) studied the impact of age on direct and indirect numeric keypad types. In his study, results showed that older adults perform faster when using touchscreen devices but tend to also make more errors on those devices compared to the physical keypad. The study attributes this increase in error to the lack of affordances on a touchscreen. Much of the literature concludes that the touchscreen yields faster input speeds for younger and older age groups and suggests this to be the optimal device but this is not always true. Rogers et al. (2005) found that, while for younger adults the type of task can often determine the optimal input device, older adults do not return a steady pattern. Rogers concludes that with older adults, individual differences may be the indicator impacting the optimal device for a specific task.

When comparing generations currently in the workforce, two commonly studied groups are the Baby Boomer-aged employees (born between 1945 and 1963) and Gamer-aged employees (born between 1979 and 1995). Studying these two generations is important as the Baby Boomer generation retires and more organizations begin hiring the incoming Gamer generation. Learning more about the differences of the two generations becomes relevant as organizations are impacted by this change (Burch and Strawderman, 2014).

@&#METHODS@&#

The experimental procedure consisted of three parts: 1) a questionnaire about demographics and device preference of the participant, 2) recorded data entry on the first ruggedized handheld device, 3) recorded entry on the second ruggedized handheld device. To begin, prior to data entry, participants began by answering a brief series of questions. The questions asked established what generational group the participant was a member of, their age, and their work job function. Additionally, participants were asked about their current status of ownership of a cell phone or smartphone and about their experience level with consumer-grade handheld devices that have a keypad or touchscreen. Participants then confirmed their years of experience with ruggedized handheld devices.

Data was collected from 40 participants. Of these 40 participants, 20 were from the Gamer generation and 20 from the Boomer generation. All of the participants were regular users of the ruggedized keypad device used in the study and were experienced with a touchscreen device. Participants began data entry with one of the two types of ruggedized handheld devices picked at random. For the purpose of counter balancing, ten participants from each generational group started with the keypad and ten started with the touchscreen.

The two ruggedized handheld devices used were the Motorola MC9500 and the Motorola ETI (Fig. 1
                        ). The devices were chosen based on similar functionality related to package scanning. The two devices also had very similar height, weight, and key size. This helped to ensure that participants would hold the devices in a similar fashion. The Motorola MC9500 was chosen to represent the standard device used in the participants' current company operations. Participants were familiar with this device as they used them in daily operations. The Motorola ET1 was chosen to more closely replicate the input type used in most consumer smart phones.

Once beginning the data entry task, each participant manually entered the contents of the task list into a word processor application that was installed on the ruggedized handheld device. Within the task list provided to each participant were 30 container names and 30 associated comments. The container names were composed of 10 characters, alpha and numeric, and the associated comments were composed of words, 19–24 characters. Both devices required the use of a shift key to access the numerical keys. Below is an excerpt from the task list (see Fig. 2
                        ).

After each line in the task list, one carriage return was required. Once each data entry set of the container name and comment were completed, an additional carriage return was required. Notes were provided to remind the participant of the rules regarding carriage returns and data entry format.

Participants were instructed to complete the data entry tasks as quick as possible but also to be as accurate as possible. Participants were encouraged to go back and correct mistakes. All participants' actions to complete the tasks, including hand movement and data entry on the screen, were video recorded using a Mr. Tappy filming kit and a Swann DIY Security Camera with built in microphone attached to the device. While all participants completed 30 data entry tasks, only the middle 20 tasks were used for data analysis. With possible learning curves for the typing tasks, removing the first and last five tasks would eliminate skewed results associated with the user's adaptation to the device as well as fatigue.

Participants included 20 participants from the Gamer generation and 20 participants from the Boomer generation. All were regular users of the physical keypad ruggedized handheld device and were experienced with the touchscreen device. Of the participants in the study, 85% of Boomers and 100% of the Gamer participants owned cell or smart phones. 85% of the participants were male due to the lack of availability of females at the locations of the study.

The two ruggedized handheld devices were the Motorola MC9500 and the Motorola ETI (Fig. 1), a touchscreen device and a physical keypad device. Each participant entered a task list on both types of ruggedized handheld devices. The word processing application on both devices did not have correction software. Both of these devices had similar characteristics, such as key surface area, height, and weight. Participants used the keypad device, the MC9500, on a daily basis and were experienced with touchscreen use.

When completing the data entry tasks, participants entered two different types of input content on the ruggedized handheld devices. The first input content type was character. Character input was composed of 10 characters, alpha and numeric. The second input content type was word consisting of strings of complete words that formed fragments of sentences composed of 19–24 characters total. The two input content types simulated the input content employees entered in the workplace. Below is an example of each input content type.
                              
                                 Character input content: AKE01241FX
                           
                           
                              
                                 Word input content: hold shipment at station
                           
                        

Due to the unequal number of characters for the two types of input content, the number of errors for tasks 6–25 was divided by the number of possible errors for that specific set of tasks. For character input, each entry always consisted of 10 characters. For word input, the number of possible errors was counted for each task from that specific task list. The sum of the possible number of errors for each input was used as the denominator in each percentage calculation. These percentage values were used to allow equal comparisons of all variables. All percentage of error values in this study were calculated using this method. Below, including Fig. 3
                           , is an example calculation for the method described.
                              Word Errors for Participant A3 using List 3 on Key Device Tasks 6–25:
                           
                           
                              
                                 7 word errors/(442 maximum possible errors for tasks 6–25) = 0.0158 = 1.58%
                              
                           
                        

Number of errors and error types were collected during the user's performance. The number of errors was counted for each user by classifying the errors into the following four categories: insertion, omission, sequence, and substitution. While sequence was not referenced as one of the main three categories in the literature, it was added to the study to better distinguish the number of errors committed. For example, if the user typed the word “Dnevet” instead of “Denver”, the number of errors would be two. The user committed a substitution error where the “r” should be placed at the end of the sentence and a sequence error by switching the “e” and the “n”. If sequence was not a category, the switch of two letters may be considered two substitution errors when it is most likely that the user only committed one error by switching the two letters, not substituting each.

Each error made in the study was also classified by error type, corrected or permanent. If at any point during the study the participant corrected an error, it was considered a corrected error. If participants attempted to resolve an error but again entered an incorrect error, they were considered to have committed two errors in total.

The video captured during the study was used to review participants' performance to count errors and classify the error types of the participant input. A screenshot of the video captured is below in Fig. 4
                        . Errors were recorded in spreadsheets and separated into three groups for tasks 1–5, 6–25, and 26–30 but only data from tasks 6–25 were used for analysis.

The analysis included descriptive statistics of the user error data. Statistical analysis was also conducted using independent sample t-tests and factorial ANOVAs to find significant differences among generation, input method, and input content for each dependent measure. An alpha value of 0.05, or confidence level of 95% was used to evaluate levels of significance.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The numbers of errors for each of the four error categories are reported in Table 2
                         below. These error categories were used to determine the number of errors for each participant. As seen in Table 2, users made more substitution errors in the study than the other three categories of error. There were twice as many corrected substitution errors than permanent errors committed by participants.


                        Table 3
                         provides the mean, standard deviation, and range of the number of errors for generation, input content, input method, and error type. While Boomers and Gamers made on average nearly the same amount of errors, Boomers had a much higher standard deviation and maximum number of errors.


                        Table 4
                         includes the percentage of errors committed in each of the error categories. The percentage values calculated in this table and the following were all calculated using the formula described previously in the section titled “Input Content”. Again, looking at the percentage values, substitution errors were made more often than the other three categories of error. Gamers made slightly more substitution, insertion, and sequence errors while Boomers made slightly more omission errors.

Percentage of errors for the mean, standard deviation, and range for generation, input content, input method, and error type are below in Table 5
                        . Overall, Gamers made slightly more errors on average than Boomers. The biggest difference in means of the variables in the study was between corrected and permanent errors.


                        Fig. 5
                         provides a summary of the percentage make-up of all errors for tasks 6–25 for generation, input method, input content, and error type. This graph emphasizes how close the numbers were between the two categories of generation and input method.

Overall, the Gamer generation made more overall errors than the Boomers. Regarding individual participants' performance within each variable, 53% of participants made more errors when entering character input compared to word. Of the 53% participants, 62% were from the Gamer generation and 38% were Boomers. The majority of participants from each generational group, 60% of Gamer participants and 60% of Boomer participants, made more errors on the touch device than the key device. Regarding error type, 85% of Gamer participants had more corrected errors than permanent while this was only true for 60% of Boomer participants.

The tables below include the percentage of average errors broken down by each of the variables. Tables 6–9
                        
                        
                        
                         provide a more detailed look at the impact of the variables upon each other. In Table 6, the difference in performance between the two generational groups is apparent. Gamers averaged more errors on touch while Boomers made more errors on key. Similarly, Gamers made more corrected errors while Boomers made more permanent.


                        Table 7 demonstrates the differences between the errors made on each of the two input methods. Gamers committed more errors on touch while Boomers made more on the key device. The average percentage of corrected errors and permanent errors made on each device were similar.

Between the two input content types shown in Table 8, both had more corrected errors than permanent. The Boomer generation averaged nearly the same between the two types of input content while Gamers average differently between the two types.

Overall, there were more corrected errors made than permanent errors. Within each variable in Table 9, more corrected errors were made with the exception of the Boomer generation; Boomers made more permanent errors than corrected.

Statistical analysis was performed to determine significant differences among the data. Each of the variables in the study was tested for significant differences among the categories within that variable. Generation (t(38) = 0.305, p = 0.305), input method (t(78) = -0.071, p = 0.943), input content (t(78) = -0.824, p = 0.412), and error type (t(78) = 1.763, p = 0.082) all yielded no significant difference between the two groups within each variable.

Interactions between the variables were also tested for significant differences. Error type and input content (F(3,159) = 3.818, p = 0.011) and input method and input content (F(3,159) = 3.026, p = 0.031) were all found to have statistically significant differences. Figs. 6 and 7
                        
                         below show the data for these interactions. The model for generation and error type (F(3,79) = 2.89, p = 0.041) was significant but the interaction between the two measures was not. Differences between generation and input content (F(3,159) = 0.682, p = 0.564), generation and input method (F(3,79) = 0.565, p = 0.640), and error type and input method (F(3,159) = 1.359, p = 0.257) were all found to be insignificant.

Each combination of input method and input content was tested to determine if there was a significant difference in between the error types on each combination. There was a significant difference in the number of corrected and permanent errors on the touch device (t(78) = 2.084, p = 0.040) and the key device (t(78) = 2.314, p = 0.023) when using character input content. The combinations of key/word (t(78) = -0.197, p = 0.844) and touch/word (t(78) = 0.972, p = 0.334) did not have significant differences.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The purpose of this study was to understand more about how ruggedized handheld devices are used. The study is aimed at targeting specific areas to show how different elements impact device usage.

Memorizing the location of the keys is the first step when learning to type, but as one becomes accustomed to the keyboard, patterns of words become familiar typing strokes. In this study, character input content was a ten-character strand of alpha and numeric values that did not contain any words. The lack of words could have led to an increase in attention to the output of the task due to the inability of the participant to use familiar typing patterns, resulting in less awareness of errors made by the participants. However, if this increase in attention could have led to more corrected errors, why would this not have decreased the total number of character input errors when using the key device? While the methods of data collection in this study hinder this from being evident, the number of character errors could be attributed to reading errors by the participants. Similar to remembering passwords, users tend to struggle with remembering random characters (Topkara et al., 2007). Reading and remembering words that form a fragment of a sentence to translate to a word processor is simpler than a random ten-character alpha numeric strand. This lack of tangible words or sentences could have led to an increase in errors when translating the character strands from the task list to the word processor.

The statistical significance between input method and input content highlights the possible impact of combining different input contents and input methods. When looking at the values in Fig. 7, it is apparent that each input device has an input content pairing that results in less errors. Word input on the key device and character input on the touch device yield fewer errors on average than the other two combinations. Contrary to much of the literature, the touch device's lack of haptic affordances did not seem to result in an increase in error compared to the physical keypad device. When incorporating error type with input content and input method, it exposes more about the type of errors made with these various combinations of input method and input content. The significance between error type and input content shows that the input content used could impact errors made. It is possible that the difference in keyboard layout between the devices could have influenced results (key device had alphabetical layout, touch device had QWERTY layout). However, all participants had experience with both keyboard layouts, so the influence of layout was perceived to be minimal. Additionally, both devices used were of similar size (∼9 inches high, 1.4 pounds in weight). Future research on the application and comparison of these results to larger or smaller devices (e.g. iPad or iPhone) would be beneficial. The change in device size whether smaller or larger could impact user error and provide a broad perspective on user error for those who use these devices in industry.

Of the four input content and input method combinations presented in Fig. 8
                     , two of the four combinations had a significant difference between the number of corrected and permanent errors, character input on the key device and character input on the touch device. The character/key combination has a high average percentage of corrected errors but also has the highest average percentage of errors overall. The character/touch key still has a higher corrected average than permanent average and overall has a lower total average error. In the workforce, a lower overall average will be more advantageous than the highest average of corrected errors. A lower average error insinuates fewer opportunities to make errors regardless of input type. Between the two significant combinations, the character/touch is the better choice since it still as a higher average of corrected errors over permanent but also has the lower overall average percentage of error.

As most users of mobile devices are accustomed to corrective software, it could be expected that errors would often be glanced over in anticipation of device auto-correction. It would be expected that an increase in errors would be present and amplified due to lack of auto-correction software when using word input on the touch device as this combination is so ubiquitous in daily activities. Devices with a lack of auto-correction software may not impact user performance as much as one may presume since the combination of word input content on the touch device did not result in the greatest average number of errors. When comparing generations and how they used the devices, it could be expected that the Gamer generation would be most impacted by the lack of correction software when using the devices, particularly when using word input since the Gamer generation is presumably accustomed to word input through technologies like text messaging. However, statistical analysis did not result in a significant difference between input method and generation. While the optimal device might not be apparent from this study alone, incorporating the input speed of participants' data entry tasks could provide an alternate perspective. Input speeds for participants on each device were collected during the initial study by Burch (Burch, 2014). Among the two input methods, all users took significantly less time completing the data entry tasks on the touch device. Gamers took significantly less time than the Boomers when using both key and touch input methods. While this study alone does not show a significant difference among the two generational groups, the input speeds can help determine an optimal device based on the particular user. Choosing touch devices to implement in the workforce will allow both user groups to perform tasks quicker.

When looking at how the errors participants made were categorized, descriptive statistics show the high number of substitution errors in comparison to the other three categories of error. Many of the substitution errors when using character input can be attributed to the mistake of participants not using the shift key when switching between alpha and numeric characters. Both devices required the shift key to be pressed to access numeric characters. Many participants continued to type with alpha characters substituted for the numeric. However, as show in Table 4, there were more corrected substitution errors (8.1%) than permanent errors (3.5%). Many participants realized their mistake once seeing alpha characters in place of the numeric and resolved their errors. Other substitution errors were attributed to hitting nearby and adjacent keys. It is not uncommon for fingers to slip to nearby keys when typing on mobile devices resulting in participants substituting the correct character for one nearby on the keyboard. After substitution, omission was the next highest average of the error categorization followed by insertion, then sequence. Noted previously in the discussion, reading errors could have been a reason for errors made in the study. Some participants omitted entire data entries when translating from the task list. Others often read shortened words like “doc” and “dest” and inserted the entire words, “document” and “destination.” Despite the word having the same meaning, these additional characters could translate differently into the system used by the organization; the translations from the task list had to be identical. The number of sequence errors was small in comparison to the other three categories. Sequence errors also could be attributed to hitting the improper key. Participants typing quickly could easily hit the two correct keys but in the incorrect order resulting in sequence errors; however, this was obviously not as frequent of an occurrence.

In the literature, error categorization was developed to reduce the ambiguity that exists when applying base error rate to all data entry tasks. When looking at the error rates for participants in this study, applying a base error would have been an inadequate decision. The range of error rates for participants in this study demonstrates the differences in how participants commit errors. The high standard deviation for average percentage of errors among the Gamers (9%) and the Boomers (16%) proves the necessity of calculating errors without the use of a baseline error rate. While collecting data it was observed that, when entering character input, there appeared to be a “chunking” issue that may have impacted users' perception of the tasks and their performance of the data entry tasks. As the task list was created to model familiar workplace tasks for the participants, it was not an issue for learning more about how employees from this organization would be impacted but could be a short coming in assuming that others outside of the organization would behave the same. As stated previously, character input content was a ten character strand of alpha and numeric characters; however, within that ten character strand, there were three significant “chunks” of characters. The first three characters were always a combination of three letters, the next five characters were always a random combination of five numeric characters, and the last two characters were always “FX”. How this chunking might have impacted the study is unknown but it can be viewed as a shortcoming of the experiment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study sought to learn more about how ruggedized handheld devices are used. Significant interactions between input method and input content suggest the importance of choosing the right combination of the two to reduce user error.

The lack of significant differences between the errors made by each generational group implies that age of the user will not impact user error. For organizations working to implement ruggedized handheld devices in the workforce, choosing the best device should be chosen by the task it's needed for and the quality of output that is expected from the device. Combining the input speed results from the initial study (Burch, 2014) and the significance between input method and input content, using touch devices would result in better performance overall. Both generational groups perform faster on touch devices. Even when considering a potential speed-error tradeoff, the touch device appears to be significantly better than the key device in this context. Also, of the input method and input content combinations, touch devices resulted in low total errors and significantly more corrected errors when entering character input. Since the type of input content used in the workforce is not always optional, using the touch device is still the suggested choice. Both input contents used on the touch device still have a significantly higher number of corrected errors. This combined with the quicker input speeds yields touch devices as the optimal choice.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

