@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Validity of a small low-cost triaxial accelerometer with integrated logger for uncomplicated measurements of postures and movements of head, upper back and upper arms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A new triaxial accelerometer was evaluated for measuring physical workload.


                        
                        
                           
                           The accelerometer is well suited for measuring postures and movements during work.


                        
                        
                           
                           The accelerometer is appropriate as objective method for ergonomic risk assessments.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Work-related musculoskeletal disorders

Quantitative exposure-response relationships

Technical measurements

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Repetitive work and work in constrained postures are risk factors for developing musculoskeletal disorders. Low-cost, user-friendly technical methods to quantify these risks are needed. The aims were to validate inclination angles and velocities of one model of the new generation of accelerometers with integrated data loggers against a previously validated one, and to compare meaurements when using a plain reference posture with that of a standardized one. All mean (n = 12 subjects) angular RMS-differences in 4 work tasks and 4 body parts were <2.5° and all mean median angular velocity differences <5.0 °/s. The mean correlation between the inclination signal-pairs was 0.996. This model of the new generation of triaxial accelerometers proved to be comparable to the validated accelerometer using a data logger. This makes it well-suited, for both researchers and practitioners, to measure postures and movements during work. Further work is needed for validation of the plain reference posture for upper arms.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Physical workload such as excessive and/or prolonged muscular load, repetitive work and work in awkward and constrained postures, are known risk factors for developing work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) in the neck/shoulder region and in arms and hands (da Costa and Vieira, 2010; European Agency for Safety and Health at Work, 2010; National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), 1997; National Research Council (NRC), 1999; Nordander et al., 2009; Staal et al., 2007). As an example, the 3rd European survey on working conditions (ESWC) from 2000, displayed that 37% of the workers in the European Union, who reported repetitive hand or arm movements at least 25% of the work time, reported muscular pain in neck/shoulders (Paoli and Merllié, 2001). Even though the risk factors have been known for a long time, there is limited knowledge about the quantitative exposure-response relationships and therefore regulations are difficult to implement. Still, some guidelines based on observations and expert ratings for reduction of WMSDs have been implemented. One example is the threshold limit value (TLV) based on Hand Activity Level (HAL) and peak hand force, used for control of workplace exposures in order to prevent disorders in hand, wrist and forearm (American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), 2001).

Some exposure-response relationships have been found in studies where technical measurements were used. Nordander et al. have shown a relationship between prevalence of reported complaints in elbow/hand the past seven days and technical measurements of wrist movements, where the slope of the regression line (β) for wrist angular velocity vs. complaints during the past seven days was 0.6%/(°/s) (Nordander et al., 2013). Another example is a study about work related shoulder disorders, where a duration increment of 1% of the daily working hours with the upper arm elevated more than 90° was associated with an OR of 1.23 for supraspinatus tendinitis (Svendsen et al., 2004). Such quantitative relationships are necessary for interpreting the measured exposure as risks for WMSDs.

Since technical measurements give numerical values in generic units, e.g. degrees (°) and °/s, of postures and movements, they are well suited for measuring exposure before and after changes in content and/or duration of work tasks and changes in the use of work stations, as well as when interventions, e.g. improved working techniques or use of new technical appliances, are implemented (Arvidsson et al., 2012; Forsman et al., 2012; Lindegård et al., 2012; Rislund et al., 2013).

Observational methods have been considered to be cheaper and easier to use than technical measurements (Winkel and Mathiassen, 1994), and have often been used to identify the risk factors for WMSDs. However, quantitative generic information is difficult to achieve with observational methods and no single method appears to have a clear advantage over any other (Takala et al., 2010). Further, different observational methods for categorizing the risks for musculoskeletal complaints often give various results (Chiasson et al., 2012; Kjellberg et al., 2015). In a recent study, comparing observations and inclinometer measurements, Trask et al. concluded; “Since observations were biased, inclinometers consistently outperformed observation when both bias and precision were included in statistical performance” (Trask et al., 2014). Moreover, dynamic work is best quantified with technical measurements (De Looze et al., 1994; Spielholz et al., 2001).

The general opinion about technical measurements is that they are time consuming, require expensive equipment and also demand technical knowledge to perform, and are therefore not suitable for actors in the work environment field, such as the occupational health services (David, 2005; van der Beek and Frings-Dresen, 1998). These actors need systematic and objective methods for their risk assessements that are user-friendly and cost effective (Kwak et al., 2011; Swedish Work Environment Authority, 2012), and until now, technical measurements have been considered to be too time-consuming and expensive. However, there are a number of low-cost (about $100–$300) technical devices available nowadays, used for monitoring human motions (Korshøj et al., 2014; Skotte et al., 2014; Yang and Hsu, 2010). This new generation of accelerometers with integrated data loggers would be an alternative to previous devices, since they do not have to be connected to a separate data logger. Still, the software for handling the data from some of these devices are rather time consuming and complicated, which makes the spreading to practioners limited. In addition to this study of validation, we have developed a protocol and user-friendly software, where the analysis process is fully automated as opposed to hitherto used software, and which give the same parameters of postures and movements as in scientific reports. The software for analysing data recorded with these new accelerometers is free to receive after contact with the authors (Forsman et al., 2015). With these improvements, actors in the work environment field will be able to use objective methods for ergonomic risk assessments. More feasible objective methods for measuring postures and movements during work may also extend the use of them among researchers, and thereby contribute to increase the knowledge about the relationship between exposure and WMSDs.

The main aim of the present study was to validate one model of the new generation of the small, low-cost and user-friendly triaxial accelerometers with integrated loggers by comparing the derived inclination angles and angular velocities against a previously validated traditional triaxial accelerometer using a data logger (Bernmark and Wiktorin, 2002; Hansson et al., 2001) in terms of accuracy and precision for using it as an objective method for measuring postures and movements during work. For further simplification of technical measurements, a second aim was to examine the methodological significance of a plain reference posture compared to our current, by comparing derived inclination angles and percentage of time above certain arm elevations when using plain reference postures, i.e. reference postures that are easy to perform, for which no extra material is needed, with corresponding data when using our current standardised reference posture where a dumbbell and a chair is used (Hansson et al., 2006).

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Twelve right-handed participants, six women and six men, participated in the study. For the women, the median age was 36 year (range 28–57), height 169 cm (156–172) and weight 61 kg (59–72) and corresponding data for the men were 39 year (21–57), height 180 cm (175–185) and weight 80 kg (70–110). The study has been approved by the Regional Ethics Committee in Lund (Dnr Etik:H15 2013/708), and all participants gave their written informed consent.

Each participant performed four different five-minute tasks in a random order with an approximate one-minute break between the work tasks. The tasks were: simulated painting work, simulated computer work, simulated furniture polishing work and rest with elevated, supported arms (Fig. 1
                        ). The tasks were selected to represent different combinations of high/low angles and high/low velocities and were used for comparison of data between the new accelerometers and the validated accelerometers. Each participant was instructed how the different work tasks should be performed. The participants also performed two plain reference postures for the upper arms (see below).

@&#METHODS@&#

Postures and movements for the head, the upper back and both upper arms were collected using two different models of triaxial accelerometers. Four small, low-cost devices (5.0 × 2.4 × 1.3 cm) containing a triaxial accelerometer, 2 Gb memory for data logging, a female micro USB-connector and a rechearable battery (USB Accelerometer Model X8M-3 Mini, Gulf Coast Data Concepts, LLC, Waveland, MS, USA, “GC-inclinometer”
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           Inclination is the angle relative to the line of gravity and the term inclinometer is used when measuring postures of different body parts. This measurement may be done by using triaxial accelerometers that registers force-signals of gravity and acceleration.
                        ) and 4 validated accelerometers (Logger Teknologi HB, Åkarp, Sweden, “LT-inclinometer”) in combination with a data logger (Logger Teknologi HB, Åkarp, Sweden) with a sampling frequency of 20 Hz (Hansson et al., 2001, 2003) were used. The sampling frequency for the GC-inclinometers was set to 25 Hz in an initiating text file. Four GC-inclinometers were tested for drift during 5.5 h and the maximum drift in any axis for the GC-inclinometers was 0.005 g, and the noise level, in the band 0–5 Hz, was 0.007 g. The mean absolute accuracy for the LT-inclinometers is 1.3° and the reproducibility is 0.2° (Hansson et al., 2001). The dynamic range is ±8 g for the GC-inclinometers and ±2 g for the LT-inclinometers.

One LT-inclinometer was fixed with double-sided adhesive tape, to each of the four GC-inclinometers. The GC-inclinometers were started one by one by holding a magnet near the USB-connector for 1 – 2 s. A LED verified that the logging had started. For synchronization of the 4 GC-inclinometers, the 4 pairs of inclinometers were put on a table and were rapidly pushed back and forth with one hand for 1 s. The time for the beginning of the pushing was noted. The pairs were then mounted, with double-sided adhesive tape, to the middle of the forehead just above the eyebrows, to the upper back to the right of the spine at the level of C7, and to both upper arms just below the insertion of the deltoid muscle (Fig. 2
                        ). These locations are commonly used, and the same as we use in our field measurements and it is likely that the inclinometers are not exactly parallel to e.g. the upper arm bone. By recording of a reference posture (defining 0° of inclination) the inclination may be calculated as the angle in relation to the reference posture (Hansson et al., 2006). All pairs were fixed with Tegaderm™ (3M Health Care, St Paul, MN, USA). After mounting, the LT-inclinometer logger was started and the time was noted.

The measurements started with recording of 5 toe jumps and continued with the reference posture for the head and back (0° inclination), performed with the subject standing upright and looking straight ahead into a mirror. The forward direction was recorded with the subject sitting, leaning forward, looking at the floor. The reference posture for each upper arm (0° elevation) was performed with the subject seated, with the side of the body leaning towards the back of a chair, and the arm hanging perpendicular over the back of the chair, with a 2-kg dumbbell in the hand (Hansson et al., 2006). These reference postures and forward direction are the same as we use in our field measurements (Hansson et al., 2010). All postures during the recordings were calculated in relation to these reference postures. The recording continued with the performance of the 4 work tasks, followed by the performance of 2 alternative, plain reference postures (posture 1 and posture 2) for the upper arms, giving a total recording duration of approximately 40 min. Posture 1 was performed with the subject standing upright, leaning to the right (or left) with the arm hanging perpendicular towards the floor with extended elbow and fingers, and with the wrist in neutral position. Posture 2 was performed as posture 1, but with relaxed fingers and hand (Fig. 3
                        ). The instructor showed the subjects how these postures should be performed. The collected data from the two different inclinometer models were then transferred to a computer, one file containing the data from the LT-inclinometers and 4 files, transferred via the USB-connector, containing the data from the GC-inclinometers.

The LT-inclinometer data were processed in EMINGO, a programme for analysing field recordings of ElectroMyography, INclinometry and GOniometry developed at Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Lund, Sweden: the data files are low-pass filtered (5 Hz), and calibration values generated at a previous recording (stored in a text file and used by the EMINGO programme during the analysis process) for +1 g and −1 g for all three axes for each inclinometer is used for calibration. The co-ordinates from the inclinometers are transformed to the body segment and a second transformation is also performed where the co-ordinates of the body segment are transformed to spherical co-ordinates. These spherical co-ordinates represents, e.g. for the head, the extent and the direction of the inclination (Hansson et al., 2001, 2006). The reference postures, used for deriving angles in relation to them, for all body parts and forward directions for head and back were marked in the files. The start and end time for each of the 4 different work tasks were written in text files. The recordings were then analysed, deriving the 1st, 10th, 50th, 90th and 99th percentiles of the angular distributions of head and back forward/backward inclination and upper arm elevation, the percentage of time with the arms elevated more than 30°, 60° and 90°, and the median of the forward/backward angular velocity distributions of head and back and the generalized angular velocity distributions for the upper arms (summary measures). These measures were computed for the 4 work tasks.

The signals from the GC-inclinometers were preprocessed in MATLAB (version 8.2, MathWorks INC., Natick, MA, USA). The four GC-inclinometers were synchronized to each other by using the rapid pushing back and forth (or using the 5 toe jumps, for the 1 recording where the rapid pushing back and forth was forgotten) in the beginning of each file (see above), and then digitally resampled to 20 Hz. The data files were then fused into one file and the remaining processing was made in EMINGO and, as for the LT-inclinometers, previously generated calibration values were used. The first step was to inspect the recording visually, and if necessary, adjust the starting time of the GC-inclinometer recording so that the starting time for the pushing back and forth, or the toe jumps, coincided with the noted time. The GC-inclinometer recording was then processed and analysed in the same way as the LT-inclinometer recording, deriving summary measures and the median angular velocity for the 4 work tasks and the 4 body parts. To assess the overall differences and the systematic differences between the inclinometers, the mean root-mean-square differences (RMSDs), and the mean differences (GC minus LT), for the 12 participants between the summary measures from the LT-inclinometer recording and the summary measures from the GC-inclinometer recording were calculated for the 4 work tasks and the 4 body parts.

For calculation of the sample by sample Pearson's correlations and differences between the two inclinometer models, the low-pass filtered (5 Hz) data files generated in EMINGO with a frequency of 20 Hz and containing data of all samples of the recording of forward/backward inclination angles for head and back and elevation angles for upper arms were used. The comparison of data files originating from separate pairs of inclinometers was made in MATLAB, and the cross-correlation function was used (Bendat and Piersol, 2000; Jonsson et al., 2011). Hence, one of the signals was stepwise delayed, and for each delay a correlation factor was computed. The maximum correlation coefficient was then used for comparison of similarity. The correlation coefficient and the mean sample by sample RMSDs were calculated for the 12 participants for the 4 work tasks and the 4 body parts.

For comparison between the standardised reference posture and postures 1 and 2 for the upper arms, the recordings from the GC-inclinometers were used. Inclination angles for postures 1 and 2 were derived for evaluation of the deviation of these postures from the standardised reference posture. In the next step, the same recording was used twice; one time with the standardised reference posture as the reference and one time with one of the new postures as the reference. New summary measures with one of the new postures as reference were derived, and the differences between these summary measures and those obtained with the standardized reference posture were calculated.

The statistical analysis was conducted in IBM SPSS Statistics Version 22 (SPSS, Chigago, IL, USA). A p-value of <0.05 (two-tailed) was considered significant. Comparisons between group means were performed using t-test and a confidence interval of 95% (CI95).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The mean RMSDs between the GC-inclinometers and the LT-inclinometers for the 12 participants are shown for the 4 work tasks and the 4 body parts at 1st, 10th, 50th, 90th and 99th percentiles of the angular distributions in Table 1
                        . The highest mean RMSDs, 2.4°, were seen for the left arm in simulated painting work at the 90th and 99th percentiles of the angular distribution. All other tasks and body parts at all percentiles of the distribution, gave a mean RMSD <1.7°. There were statistically significant differences (GC minus LT) for i.a. the left arm in simulated painting work, where the differences for the 90th and 99th percentiles were −2.4° (CI95 -3.1° – -1.6°) and -2.4° (CI95 -3.1° – -1.7°), respectively.

The mean RMSDs of the percentage of time between the GC-inclinometers and the LT-inclinometers for the 12 participants for the 4 work tasks and for upper arm elevation above 30°, 60° and 90° were <1.3%time (Table 1). There were small, but statistically significant differences (GC minus LT) for 7 of the 24 differences, e.g. for the right and left arm elevation above 60° in simulated painting work, where the mean differences were, for the right arm elevation -0.2%time (CI95 -0.3%time – -0.1%time), and for the left -1.0%time (CI95 -1.4%time – -0.7%time).

The mean RMSDs of the median angular velocity distribution between the GC-inclinometers and the LT-inclinometers for the 12 participants for the 4 work tasks and the 4 body parts were <5.0 °/s. There were statistically significant differences (GC minus LT) for most of the different body parts and work tasks, with the highest difference for the left arm in rest with elevated, supported arms, with a mean of 5.0 °/s (CI95 4.8 °/s – 5.2 °/s). The median velocities for the LT-inclinometers ranged from 1.2°/s for the head in rest with elevated, supported arms to 108°/s for the right arm in simulated furniture polishing.

The mean and minimum cross correlation coefficients and the mean sample by sample RMSDs between the GC-inclinometers and the LT-inclinometers for the 12 participants are shown for the 4 work tasks and the 4 body parts in Table 2
                        . The mean correlations for the 4 work tasks and the 4 body parts were >0.98, except for rest with elevated, supported arms where the mean correlation across body parts ranged between 0.91 and 0.98. This work task was very static, the median angular velocities were <5 °/s (not in table), resulting in low minimum correlations for back and both upper arms (range between 0.58 and 0.78, Table 2). Further, the mean sample by sample RMSDs were <2.5° for all work tasks and body parts. An illustration of a representative correlation between a single pair of inclinometers derived from a measurement of forward/backward inclination angles for head is shown in Fig. 4
                        . In this example, the correlation between the signals was 0.997 and the sample by sample RMSD was 2.6°.

For the right arm and the 12 participants, the mean RMSDs in relation to the standardised reference posture were, 5.8° (SD 2.0°, range 2.4° – 9.9°) for posture 1, and 5.3° (SD 2.5°, 1.0° – 8.0°) for posture 2. For the left arm, the corresponding differences were, 8.3° (SD 3.2°, 2.8° – 14.0°) for posture 1, and 8.5° (SD 2.5°, 4.9° – 12.1°) for posture 2.

The differences for posture 1 and 2 in relation to the standardised reference posture were very similar. Posture 2 was considered to be the easier one to perform, since the hand was relaxed and was therefore chosen as an alternative reference posture. The mean RMSDs between the results when posture 2 was used as reference posture and the results when the standardised reference posture was used as reference posture for the 12 participants are shown for the 4 work tasks and for both upper arms at 1st, 10th, 50th, 90th and 99th percentiles of the angular distributions and for the percentage of time above 30°, 60° and 90° in Table 3
                        . The mean RMSDs of the angular distributions were more than twice as high for the left arm than for the right arm in rest with elevated, supported arms. Further, the overall mean RMSD across work tasks was 3° for the right arm and 4° for the left. Corresponding differences between the GC-inclinometer and the LT-inclinometer (Table 1) was 0.7° for both right and left arm. There were no statistically significant differences for any of the percentiles for the 4 work tasks of right arm, e.g. the rest with supported, elevated arms, with a difference of -1.0° (CI95 -2.9°− 1.0°) for the 99th percentile. Contrary, for the left arm, the higher percentiles for 3 of the work tasks and all percentiles for rest with elevated, supported arms were statistical significant. The highest mean difference for this task was seen for the 99th percentile; -6.0° (CI95 -8.1°− -3.9°). Moreover, the mean RMSDs for the percentage of time above 30° in simulated computer work for both upper arms for the recording when posture 2 was used as reference, were approximately 25% of the time percentages measured with the recording when the standardised reference was used. The corresponding differences between the GC-inclinometers and the LT-inclinometers (Table 1) was approximately 1% of the time percentages.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study of validating a small, low-cost and user-friendly accelerometer with integrated datalogger against a validated accelerometer during different work tasks, the mean RMSDs between the two devices were similar for percentiles of inclination angles (<2.5°) and for the percentage of time above certain arm elevations (<1.5 %time). Further, the mean RMSD of the median velocity was also similar (<5 °/s). Compared to the standardized reference posture, the plain reference posture showed rather high overall mean RMSD across work tasks in percentile values, 3° for the right arm and 4° for the left one, in relation to the overall RMSDs across work tasks between the two devices (0.7° and 0.7°, respectively).

Inclinometers in general, determine their tilt angle relative the vector that is the sum of gravity and the dynamic accelerations; during more rapid motions this vector does not coincide with gravity, and a principal error is introduced. It was concluded in a study by Bernmark and Wiktorin, that the LT-inclinometer was not influenced by dynamic accelerations at slow (0.1 Hz) rates of arm swings; the curves from the LT-inclinometer and the optoelectric measuring system “coincided”. For very fast (0.75 Hz) arm swings, the curves differed more; the LT-inclinometer was “influenced by dynamic accelerations [that] altered the direction of the total acceleration and caused a deviation from the vertical line” (Bernmark and Wiktorin, 2002). Also, in a recent study, Korshøj et al. concluded that the root-mean-square error (RMSE) values of inclination, at slow (0.125 Hz) and intermediate (0.25 Hz) frequencies, and for most of the simulated work tasks, between a triaxial accelerometer and a magnetic tracking device were “in close agreement”. However, the inclination estimated by the triaxial accelerometer at high (0.5 Hz) frequency deviated from the reference measurements, where RMSE values up to ∼10° were noted (Korshøj et al., 2014). In the current study, the frequency of large movements was highest for the simulated painting work and was estimated to 0.25–0.5 Hz.

It has been suggested that the mounting of the inclinometers may introduce a methodological error, such as underestimating upper arm elevation. This may be due to that the relative position of the inclinometer to the underlying bone, will change throughout the range of motion, to different extents at different arm elevations, i.e. soft tissue artifact. In a recent study, Jackson et al. showed an underestimation of about 10° at instructed arm elevations of 90° (Jackson et al., 2015). However, our experience shows a difference of <1° at instructed arm elevations of 90° (Hansson, 2015). In the current study, we followed the same instructions for arm elevations of 90° as in those 80 measurements that Hansson referred to in his Letter to the editor (Hansson, 2015). These instructions differ from those performed in Jackson et al. The arm elevations of 90° in Jackson and coworkers study was performed with the arms abducted, while the arm elevations in the current study (and in all our studies), were performed with the arms abducted, but somewhat flexed (20°–30°). There were also differences in the performance of the reference posture. Jackson and coworkers asked their subjects to sit, leaning to the right with the arm hanging vertically, while the subjects in the current study were asked to sit, with the side of the body leaning towards the back of a chair, and the arm hanging perpendicular over the back of the chair. Other methodological errors may also be introduced when using different sampling frequencies and filters when processing accelerometer data and calculating the summary measures.

As the signals from the GC-inclinometers and the LT-inclinometers of compared inclinometers were sampled and stored separately, with only manual synchronization, there were differences in the times arriving from the noted start times, which was used to define the time interval for the computation of the summary measures. Further, the reference postures for the GC- and LT-inclinometer recordings were marked separately in the two different inclinometer recordings, and were therefore not exactly the same. When comparing the start times for the toe jumps, the time differences between the two recordings for the 12 subjects were <1.2 s. This maximal time difference is negligible for the summary measures, since the work task durations were about 300 s. This maximal time difference is also well below the 5 – 7 s that the reference postures were held. Thus, the time differences have, if any, only a marginal impact on the summary measures and the reference postures.

The different work tasks were selected to accomplish a wide range of postures and movements. With these tasks, the GC-inclinometers were tested in different combinations of high/low angles and high/low velocities in order to find out if they influenced the overall differences. The mean RMSDs for the 12 subjects for the 4 work tasks and the 4 body parts were <1.7° for the angular distributions, except for the left arm in the simulated painting work, where the left arm showed mean RMSDs of 2.4° for the high percentiles (90th and 99th; Table 1). When scrutinizing the data, this task and this body part showed a combination of high angles and high velocity (71 °/s). Other combinations, e.g. high angles and low velocity, i.e. the left arm in rest with elevated, supported arms, showed a lower mean RMSD, on average 0.7° for the high percentiles. An additional combination, e.g. low angles and high velocity (108 °/s) was seen for the right arm in the simulated furniture polishing, where the mean RMSD was 0.5° for the high percentiles. High angular velocities in combination with high angles at the same time resulted in deviating values for the high angles when measuring with the GC-inclinometer compared to the LT-inclinometer.

The GC-inclinometers showed significant differences of the inclination and the median angular velocity compared to the LT-inclinometers for some occasions, where the most conspicuous were seen for the high percentiles of the inclination for the left arm in simulated painting work and for the median angular velocity for the left arm in rest with elevated, supported arms. Still, the differences for the percentiles across tasks and body parts between the GC-inclinometers and the LT-inclinometers, are smaller compared to methodological errors, e.g. soft tissue artifacts (10°). The differences are also below relevant differences that can be seen between occupational groups; it was shown in an earlier study by Hansson et al., that the head flexion and the arm elevation varied between 9° and 63° and 49° − 124°, respectively, in 43 types of work (Hansson et al., 2010). Further, the present differences of the arm elevation are also less than the between-days and between-subjects variability (3.4° and 4.0°, respectively) that has been seen during strictly standardized work tasks (Hansson et al., 2006).

The correlations between paired readouts in the present study were >0.98, except for one work task. The lower correlations for rest with elevated, supported arms across body parts are most likely due to the very low activity. The noise in the separate devices was “visible” in the output signals and since the noise behaves irregularly in comparison to each other, the co-variation became low. Still, the absolute error was low also for this case, <2.5° (c.f. Table 2). The RMSD and the cross-correlation values complement each other. The RMSD is a measure of how far away the output signals are from each other while the cross-correlations is a measure of how well they follow each other. In 3 of the 4 tasks, there is a high cross-correlation value (>0.98) and a low RMSD (<2.5°) for all body parts. The reason for a lower cross-correlation in the 4th task, the rest with elevated, supported arms, is discussed above.

The overall mean RMSDs between the percentile values derived using the plain reference posture and the percentile values derived using the standardized reference, across work tasks, was 3° for the right arm and 4° for the left one (derived from Table 3). These differences are four times higher for the right arm and almost six times higher for the left, than the corresponding differences between the GC-inclinometer and the LT-inclinometer, across work tasks (derived from Table 1). Further, the percentage of time above 30° elevation, differed considerably between the plain reference posture and the standardized reference posture for both arms during the computer work (Table 3; 11 %time and 12 %time, respectively). These differences are most likely due to that this work was carried out in a small range of elevations of approximately 20° – 50°, which includes the 30° elevation cut off. The differences between the plain reference posture and the standardized reference posture in the current study was 5° for the right arm and 8° for the left one. The methodological significance of a plain reference posture had implications on the percentage of time above certain elevations for this type of work task. Furthermore, the left arm showed considerable, and statistically significant, differences between the two reference postures for all higher percentiles of all 4 work tasks, which indicate a non-negligible difference between the two reference postures.

In addition to this study, we developed a protocol and a user-friendly software for analysing the recorded data obtained with the new accelerometers that has been tested by practitioners (Forsman et al., 2015). The software has the same calculation algorithms as EMINGO and the protocol is basically: “Attach 1 to 4 inclinometers, start each of them when the subject is in the reference posture position (of that body part). Ask the subject to do 5 jumps and note the time at the first jump. Also note other times, as those of different tasks, and breaks. Ask the subject to hold the arms in a 90°-abduction, and to bow forward once”. After the recording, the accelerometers are connected to a computer. In the user-friendly software, the user is asked to write the start time for jump and start and stop time for work. The accelerometers are synchronized, and the reference postures for the different body parts are automatically taken as the first couple of seconds of each recording. The software finds the start of the jumps, analyses the recording, and immediately presents postures and movements of the recorded workload in figures and in tables (in an Excel file). The procedure for measuring and analysing data with this protocol and software is less time consuming and more user-friendly than for the validated accelerometers. The estimated time for mounting, and starting recordings including reference posture measurements, is about 3 – 5 min, where the corresponding time for the validated accelerometers, with cables and an external logger, is about 12 – 15 min. The system (accelerometers, protocol and software) give actors in the work environment field, because of the low costs and usability, opportunities to objectively measure the workload in different occupations. This may increase the quality of their risk assessments. The system may also give clearer support for prioritizing actions and clearer evaluations of implemented changes than observation methods do. The new accelerometers are also better suited than the validated ones in certain types of work, e.g. work that is carried out in confined spaces e.g. plumbing; there are no cables that may get stuck and there is no external data logger that may be in the way.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This model of the new generation of accelerometers with integrated data loggers proved to be fully comparable to a previously validated traditional triaxial accelerometer using an external data logger. With this new generation of accelerometers, in combination with the software and protocol, actors in the work environment field now have a cost effective, user-friendly and scientifically based objective method available for their risk assessments. The new accelerometers are also well-suited for researchers to measure postures and movements during work. However, different types of new accelerometers may have different properties regarding drift and noise level, which can contribute to methodological errors. Therefore we recommend testing other accelerometers concerning noise level and drift before use. Further investigation is needed in a larger material for validation of the plain reference posture for the upper arms.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This study was supported by AFA Insurance (Dnr: 120237), Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare, the Medical Faculty of Lund University, and the County Councils of Southern Sweden. Skilful technical assistance was given by Ms Lothy Granqvist.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

