@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Exposure–response relationships for work-related neck and shoulder musculoskeletal disorders – Analyses of pooled uniform data sets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study explored relationships between work factors and neck/shoulder disorders.


                        
                        
                           
                           We recorded complaints/diagnoses in 33 groups (3141 workers), within which workers performed similar tasks.


                        
                        
                           
                           We assessed postures and muscular activity in sub-groups by direct measurements with technical instruments.


                        
                        
                           
                           Neck disorders were associated with head and arm posture, trapezius and forearm muscle activity, and wrist velocity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Shoulder disorders were associated with head, arm and wrist velocity, and trapezius and forearm muscle activity.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Occupational exposure

Physical

Psychosocial

Velocity

Movement

Posture

Muscular activity

Wrist

Upper arm

Neck

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  There is a lack of quantitative data regarding exposure–response relationships between occupational risk factors and musculoskeletal disorders in the neck and shoulders. We explored such relationships in pooled data from a series of our cross-sectional studies.
                  We recorded the prevalence of complaints/discomfort (Nordic Questionnaire) and diagnoses (physical examination) in 33 groups (24 female and 9 male) within which the workers had similar work tasks (3141 workers, of which 817 were males). In representative sub-groups, we recorded postures and velocities of the head (N = 299) and right upper arm (inclinometry; N = 306), right wrist postures and velocities (electrogoniometry; N = 499), and muscular activity (electromyography) in the right trapezius muscle (N = 431) and forearm extensors (N = 206). We also assessed the psychosocial work environment (Job Content Questionnaire).
                  Uni- and multivariate linear meta-regression analysis revealed several statistically significant group-wise associations. Neck disorders were associated with head inclination, upper arm elevation, muscle activity of the trapezius and forearm extensors and wrist posture and angular velocity. Right-side shoulder disorders were associated with head and upper arm velocity, activity in the trapezius and forearm extensor muscles and wrist posture and angular velocity.
                  The psychosocial work environment (low job control, job strain and isostrain) was also associated with disorders. Women exhibited a higher prevalence of neck and shoulder complaints and tension neck syndrome than men, when adjusting for postures, velocities, muscular activity or psychosocial exposure.
                  In conclusion, the analyses established quantitative exposure–response relationships between neck and shoulder disorders and objective measures of the physical workload on the arm. Such information can be used for risk assessment in different occupations/work tasks, to establish quantitative exposure limits, and for the evaluation of preventive measures.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A large number of studies have shown that intense manual work is a risk factor for neck and shoulder disorders (Andersen et al., 2003; David et al., 2008; Edling et al., 2012; Gallagher and Heberger, 2013; Palmer and Smedley, 2007). It involves repetitive work tasks, short cycles, high velocities (movements), high force, extreme postures (positions), and lack of recovery, Further, sex/gender (Arvidsson et al., 2006; Nordander et al., 2008) and the psychosocial work environment (high job demands and low job control) are associated with the prevalence of these disorders (Andersen et al., 2007; Edling et al., 2012; Menzel, 2007).

Almost all knowledge concerning work-related musculoskeletal disorders is based on self-reported or observed physical exposure (IJmker et al., 2007; Occhipinti and Colombini, 2007; Takala et al., 2010). However, such methods have serious limitations, for example, different methods are used in different studies, important characteristics such as posture, velocity and force are not sufficiently precise (Dale et al., 2011), or categorical exposure data are used. Furthermore, subjective assessments of exposure through self-reporting may not be reliable, and may lead to information bias (Hansson et al., 2001).

For the past 25 years, research at our department has focused on the use of direct measurements of physical exposure with technical instruments. This is to obtain objective quantitative information expressed in physical units, regardless of the equipment or method employed. Using such methods, we have been able to establish quantitative exposure–response relationships between the physical work load (wrist angular velocity, measured by electrogoniometry, and lower arm extensor muscle activity, measured by electromyography), and the prevalence of musculoskeletal elbow and hand disorders (Nordander et al., 2013).

In the present study we have investigated the hypothesis that there are also quantitative exposure–response relationships between musculoskeletal disorders in the neck and shoulders, and measurements of velocities, postures and muscular activity.

In a number of cross-sectional epidemiological studies we have collected data on disorders in many different occupational groups and working situations with large contrasts in physical exposure. The results of these studies have been published previously (Arvidsson et al., 2006, 2012; Balogh et al., 2006; Balogh et al., 2004; Hansson et al., 1997, 2000a; Nordander et al., 2009, 2008, 1999; Ohlsson et al., 1995; Ohlsson et al., 1994b; Unge et al., 2007; Åkesson et al., 2012, 1997, 1999, 2000). All these studies used the same methods for data collection, concerning both physical exposure and musculoskeletal complaints and diagnoses.

The present study pooled data from the previous ones. It involved an enormous amount of data. Thus, only a limited fraction, restricted to the statistically significant findings in uni- and/or multivariate analyses, is in the tables. Only complaints during the past seven days are presented, and not those during the past 12 months. The total data set and all analyses are presented in the Supplementary material.

The study included twenty-four female occupational groups (N = 2324 workers) and nine male occupational groups (N = 817) engaged in industrial, office and other work (e.g. dentistry, hairdressing and cleaning). The work tasks ranged from repetitive and/or constrained, to varied/mobile tasks. Table 1
                        a provides an overview of the occupational groups, and the measurements performed in each group.

The Ethics Committee of Lund University had already approved each of the separate studies from which the data were taken for this study.

We recorded complaints (i.e. pain or discomfort) in the neck and shoulders during the past 12 months and the past seven days in all workers, including those on sick-leave (participation rates 92% among the women and 95% among the men), using the Nordic Questionnaire (Descatha et al., 2007; Kuorinka et al., 1987) (Table 1a; Supplementary Table S1a). The mean age and mean employment time in the present company, doing the present kind of work, was recorded for each group.

In 23 of the 33 occupational groups (Table 1
                           b; Supplementary Table S1b), an experienced physician or physiotherapist performed a standardized physical examination of the neck and arms (participation rates 95% and 95% among women and men, respectively), and made diagnoses according to predefined criteria (Supplementary Table S2) (Nordander et al., 2009; Ohlsson et al., 1994a). We considered nine specific diagnoses, and recorded the prevalence of diagnosed disorders in the neck and right shoulder. It was not possible to blind the examiners to the kind of task, as they performed all examinations at the workers' work place. (Supplementary Table S3 shows the correlations between the prevalences of complaints and diagnoses.)

Workers within each occupational group performed identical or very similar work tasks. In a sub-sample of workers in each group, we recorded physical exposure to obtain representative group means (Table 2
                        a–c
                        ; Supplementary Table S4a-c). In most groups, we recorded the full workday (excluding the lunch break). However, in the early studies, we only monitored representative work tasks, due to temporary technical limitations. As these work tasks were performed during most of the working day, measurements were representative of each job.

A large number of exposure metrics can be derived from the measurements. The properties of the metrics, e.g. distributions and correlations evaluated in previous studies (Hansson et al., 2009, 2010), guided our choices. Although mean power frequency has been suggested as “a generalised measure of repetitiveness” (Hansson et al., 1966), we chose velocity, since this metric represents the combination of the amplitude and repetition of the movement. We chose the activity of the forearm extensor muscles as a general measure of the force exerted by the hand and forearm.

We performed inclinometry measurements with triaxial accelerometers fixed on the forehead in 24 groups (N = 299), and on the outside of the upper arms in 22 groups (N = 304, right side reported here) (Hansson et al., 2001, 2010; Arvidsson et al., 2012). Data loggers collected information at 20 Hz (Logger Teknologi HB, Åkarp, Sweden). Before work we recorded reference postures, defined as 0° flexion of the head and 0° elevation of the arm. For each worker, we recorded seven summary exposure measures: the distribution of angle amplitude (1st, 50th, and 90th percentiles of head flexion, positive forwards, negative backwards; the 50th and 99th percentiles of arm elevation), and the angular velocities of the head and arm (50th percentiles) over the full working day.

To record the muscular load we used bipolar surface electromyography (EMG) on the right trapezius muscle, in 26 groups (431 workers), and on the forearm extensor muscles in 19 groups (206 workers) (Hansson et al., 2009, 2010, 2000b; Nordander et al., 2004; Nordander et al., 2000). We sampled data at 1024 Hz, and stored it in data loggers. To describe the muscular load, we used the root mean square value, calculated for epochs of 1/8 s. Data were normalized to the maximal EMG activity (maximal voluntary electric activity: MVE) recorded at 90° arm elevation and handgrip, respectively. We derived muscular activity in terms of ‘the static load’ (10th percentile of the amplitude distributions) and ‘the peak load’ (90th percentile). Muscular rest was defined as the fraction of time when the activity was <0.5% MVE. Hence, we calculated six summary measures describing muscular activity, for each worker.

We measured right wrist posture and velocity in 30 groups (499 workers), using biaxial flexible electrogoniometers (Biometrics Ltd., Cwmfelinfach, Gwent, UK*) (Hansson et al., 1996, 2004). According to the manufacturer, the accuracy of the goniometers was ±2° over a range of ±90°. We recorded flexion/extension angles at a sampling rate of 20 Hz using data loggers (DL1001, Biometrics Ltd., and a GON-logger, Logger Teknologi HB, Åkarp, Sweden*) (Hansson et al., 2003). Positive values denote palmar flexion and negative ones dorsal extension. Neutral wrist posture (0°) was defined with the hand hanging relaxed alongside the body (Balogh et al., 2009; Hansson et al., 1996, 2004). We recorded four summary measures for each worker: the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles of the angular distributions, and the 50th percentile of the absolute angular velocity distributions.

In 21 of the 33 occupational groups, we measured Job demands, job control and job support (see overview in Table 3
                        ; Supplementary Table S5). Most often, we used a Swedish version of the Job Content Questionnaire (JCQ) (Johnson, 1986; Karasek et al., 1998; Karasek and Theorell, 1990). We transformed data collected in four groups using the Rubinowitz standardized questionnaire (Rubinowitz, 1984), and in two groups using the Copenhagen Psychosocial Questionnaire (Kristensen et al., 2005), into the JCQ (Nordander et al., 2013). We classed each worker as reporting high or low demands, control and support (Carlsson et al., 2006). We then calculated the group proportions of high job demands, low job control, job strain (high demands and low control) and isostrain (job strain and low job support).

For all statistical analysis we used SPSS 22.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). We calculated the means of SD standard deviations (SD) of physical exposure across occupational groups, presented in Table 2 and Supplementary Table S4. They represent the mean of variation among workers within groups. The range of means and the SD of means across groups represent the variation among occupational groups. Table 3 and Supplementary Table S5 give corresponding data concerning self-reported psychosocial factors. We calculated correlations between group means of the various definitions of exposure, age and employment time using Spearman rank correlation (Table 4
                        ; Supplementary Table S6). These exposure parameters were considered independent variables in the regression models presented below.

The response, i.e. the dependent variables, were the prevalences of complaints in the neck and right shoulder, and the disorders diagnosed in these regions, in each occupational group. Table 1 and Supplementary Table S1 present the range of prevalences, and of group means of age and employment time. Supplementary Table S3 presents correlations, by Spearman rank correlation, between these measures of response.

We calculated linear exposure–response relationships between group means of physical exposure and psychosocial factors, as well as age and employment time, and group prevalence of neck/shoulder disorders, by meta-regression (Hansson et al., 2009, 2010; Nordander et al., 2009, 2013). In these analyses, we weighted each group by the number of workers examined to identify disorders, as we consider larger groups to give a more reliable estimate of prevalence. We performed univariate, weighted, linear least-squares regression on the group means of each of the exposure measures (physical as well as psychosocial, age and employment time). We determined the slopes of the regression lines (β) with regard to group prevalence of each definition of disorder (based on neck or shoulder complaints during the past 7 days, one or more diagnosed disorders and the above mentioned nine separate diagnoses). Each value of β then represents the increase in the prevalence of disorders (%) per unit exposure. For wrist angular velocity, for example, we expressed β as %/(°/s), representing the increase in the prevalence of the disorder with every 1°/s increase in wrist angular velocity. Table 5
                        
                        ; Supplementary Table S7 report the slopes, with 95% confidence intervals (CIs).

We tested the associations for interaction between exposure and sex. When no such interaction was present, i.e. when the p-value for the interaction term was not below 0.05, we present β for women and men together, including an adjustment for sex. To enable modelling of the curves, we report the prevalence at a reference exposure level within the range of the data for each value of β. Supplementary Table S7 presents exposure–response relationships separately for women and men.

As we measured physical exposure on sub groups, not on all workers, there was an uncertainty in group mean of exposure. To assess the magnitude of this uncertainty we performed bootstrapping simulations. For each relationship between exposure and disorder, we simulated 1000 new sets of 33 occupational groups. The presence of a disorder in each worker was then based on resampling with replacement, the likelihood being based on the size of the group and the prevalence of the disorder (Efron and Tibshirani, 1993; Nordander et al., 2013). Exposure was randomly assigned to each individual based on a normal distribution for the group, with its mean and standard deviation. Individual exposures were also resampled with replacement. Each bootstrap simulation gave a new set of study groups, to which weighted linear regression was applied, using the number of workers in the study group as weighting. We estimated the 95% CIs for the slopes from the 1000 sets of simulated study groups (Table 5; and Figs. 1–3
                        
                        
                        ).

Finally, we carried out multivariate linear regressions (forward procedure) for complaints and diagnoses. Then, we tested physical and psychosocial exposures, averages of age and exposure time for each group. Sex was always included in the models. The regressions were weighted by the number of workers examined in each group. We tested the final models for interactions among included factors. Table 6
                        
                         and Supplementary Table S8 give the slopes of the regression lines with 95% CIs, for the factors included. Statistically significant interaction terms are presented together with the group-level explained variance (adjusted R2).

@&#RESULTS@&#

There was a wide range of exposure among the occupational groups regarding posture and velocity of the head and right upper arm (Table 2a; Supplementary Table S4a), activity of the right trapezius muscle (Table 2b; Supplementary Table S4b), as well as posture and velocity of the right wrist and forearm extensor muscles (Table 2c; Supplementary Table S4c). For example, the upper arm velocity ranged from 6 to 103°/s. There was also considerable variation between groups regarding self-reported psychosocial work environment (Table 3; Supplementary Table S5). Such variation in exposure between the groups provides a solid base for exploring exposure–response relationships.

There were many correlations between the measures of physical exposure (Table 4; Supplementary Table S6). For example, posture and velocity of the head were closely positively correlated with the activity of the trapezius muscle and with the velocity of the right upper arm.

As expected, the proportions of workers reporting high job demands or low job control were positively correlated with proportion reporting job strain (Table 4; Supplementary Table S6), and proportions reporting job strain and isostrain were correlated. Furthermore, proportions reporting low control and job strain were positively associated with the activity of the trapezius muscle, as well as with velocity of the right upper arm and wrist.

The prevalence of neck and right shoulder complaints (Table 1a; Supplementary Table S1a), as well as diagnoses (Table 1b; Supplementary Table S1b) varied considerably between different occupational groups. Some of them were closely correlated. For example, the correlation coefficient between neck complaints during the past seven days and one or more diagnosed disorder in the neck or shoulder was as high as 0.9 (Supplementary Table S3). In contrast, among males the corresponding coefficient was only 0.3, not statistically significant.

Among the measures of physical exposure, higher activity in the right forearm muscles showed a statistically significant association with prevalence of neck complaints (Table 5a; Supplementary Table S7a). Higher right upper arm velocity, the higher activity of the right trapezius muscle, and higher right wrist palmar flexion and angular velocity were associated with right shoulder complaints (Table 5b; Supplementary Table S7a). For example, an increase in wrist angular velocity of 1°/s was associated with an increase in shoulder complaints of 0.4%.

Regarding psychosocial work environment factors, prevalence of neck complaints were associated with higher proportions of high job demands and job strain, and shoulder complaints with higher proportion job strain (Table 5a and b; Supplementary Table S7a). Women had a much higher prevalence of neck and shoulder complaints than men subjected to the same physical exposure in terms of postures and movements of head, upper arm and wrist, and muscular activity in trapezius and the forearm extensors (Table 5a and b; Supplementary Table S7a). The same was true for psychosocial exposures in terms of group prevalence of high job demands, low job control, job strain as well as isostrain.

According to the multivariate models, neck complaints increased with increasing activity of the right forearm extensor muscles (Table 6a; Supplementary Table S8a). Furthermore, right shoulder complaints increased with higher right wrist angular velocity, but decreased with higher head velocity (Table 6b; Supplementary Table S8b). Women reported 17% more neck complaints and 16% more shoulder complaints than men. There were no statistically significant interaction terms. The models included none of the psychosocial factors.

The explained variance in the models ranged from 58% (neck, past 7 days) to 83% (shoulder, past 12 months; Table 6a and b; Supplementary Table S8a).

There were a number of associations between physical exposure, and neck and shoulder diagnoses (Table 5a and b; Supplementary Table S7b and c). For example, an increase in the right trapezius MVE% of 1% (10th percentile) was associated with a 1.6% increase in tension neck syndrome (Table 5a; Fig. 2). Higher velocity of the right shoulder was associated with an increased prevalence of right-side infraspinatus tendonitis [0.04%/(°/s) Table 5b; Fig. 1]. Furthermore, higher right wrist flexion and angular velocity were correlated with higher prevalence of almost all shoulder diagnoses. For example, an increase in right wrist angular velocity of 1°/s was associated with a 0.2% increase in right-side bicipital tendonitis (Table 5b; Fig. 3).

Regarding psychosocial exposures, higher proportions of workers reporting low control, job strain and isostrain were associated with increasing prevalence of diagnoses of the shoulder (Table 5a and b; Supplementary Table S7b and c).

Women exhibited a 10–15% higher prevalence of tension neck syndrome than men subjected to the same physical or psychosocial exposure (Table 5a; Supplementary Table S7b). For other neck and shoulder diagnoses, in general, we found no sex differences when taking physical or psychosocial exposures into account. (Table 5a and b; Supplementary Table S7b and c). The prevalence of cervical, thoracic outlet and acromioclavicular syndromes, decreased with increasing exposure time (estimated from employment time), which was somewhat surprising.

According to the multivariate models, several physical exposures were associated with neck and shoulder diagnoses. For example, higher forward head inclination was associated with increased prevalence of thoracic outlet syndrome, higher right upper arm elevation with tension neck syndrome, higher activity of the right trapezius muscle with cervical syndrome (Table 6a; Supplementary Table S8b), higher right wrist flexion with right-side frozen shoulder, and higher right wrist angular velocity with right-side bicipital tendonitis (Table 6b; Supplementary Table S8c). Unexpectedly, higher activity of the right trapezius muscle was associated with decreasing prevalence of frozen shoulder.

Higher proportion of job strain was associated with higher prevalence of tension neck syndrome and infraspinatus tendonitis (Table 6a and b; Supplementary Table S8b and c). There was a statistically significant interaction between the activity of the right trapezius muscle and low job control, regarding the prevalence of supraspinatus tendonitis.

Women showed a 10% higher prevalence of tension neck syndrome, and 0.3% higher prevalence of frozen shoulder, than men. There was a significant interaction was found between sex and isostrain regarding acromioclavicular syndrome (steeper slope in women; Table 6a and b; Supplementary Table S8b and c). We found no other statistically significant associations with sex in the multivariate models. Furthermore, tension neck syndrome increased with age in both men and women.

The explained variance in the multivariate models varied from 38% (frozen shoulder) to 85% (supraspinatus tendinitis) (Table 6a and b; Supplementary Table S8b and c).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Uni- and multivariate linear meta-regression analysis revealed statistically significant associations between group prevalence of neck complaints and diagnoses, and head inclination, right upper arm elevation, activity of the right trapezius muscle and of the right forearm extensor muscles and right wrist posture and angular velocity. Right-side shoulder complaints and diagnoses were associated with head and right upper arm velocity, activity of the right trapezius and forearm extensor muscles and right wrist palmar flexion and angular velocity. The psychosocial work environment (low job control, job strain and isostrain) was also associated with disorders. Women exhibited a higher prevalence of neck and shoulder complaints, and of tension neck syndrome, than men when adjusting for physical exposure in terms postures and movements of head, upper arm and wrist, muscular activity in trapezius and the forearm extensors, or for psychosocial exposure. In the multivariate models sex was associated with tension neck syndrome and frozen shoulder. There was an interaction between sex and isostrain regarding acromioclavicular syndrome.

A strength of the present study is that the same methods for assessment on data on exposure and disorders were used in a wide range of occupations, though data collection was done over several years.

We chose occupations so as to give a wide variation in the physical workload, which made it possible to examine the impact of exposure variables. Together, these occupations should cover a broad range of working environments in industrialized societies. However, a number of potential methodological issues must be addressed.

We employed direct measures of the physical workload, in contrast to self-reporting or expert observations used in most prior studies. More sophisticated methods can be used to assess physical exposure under laboratory conditions, but the methods used in our studies are suitable for fieldwork. Also, they are all reasonably accurate, although their precision varies. Data from electrogoniometry of the wrist are very exact (Balogh et al., 2009), while EMG of the forearm extensor muscles provides less precise data (Nordander et al., 2004). This may partly explain the greater prevalence of associations seen for the former than for the latter (which was also applied to fewer occupations, leading to lower statistical power).

Measurements of physical exposure provided detailed data, but required considerable effort. Although we made 1741 measurements, mostly whole-day ones, we could only study a limited number of workers in the same occupation. Each measurement obviously represented a limited time period of a long working life. Since physical exposure often varies over time, the variation between subjects was probably overestimated, while the group average should be reasonably accurate. To address the problem of missing information we made extensive bootstrapping simulations, which should give fairly good group averages of physical workloads, and provide information on the uncertainty of the estimates. We avoided direct measurements on workers with more than minor disorders, since such disorders may cause a change in the work pattern (Åkesson et al., 1997).

The number of workers for which we assessed physical exposure was relatively small, but a study of exposure and low back disorders, based on observations of physical exposure of workers at risk of such disorders (Coenen et al., 2015), indicates that our data should give reasonably unbiased results. Also, the number of individuals examined for diagnostic purposes should provide sufficient statistical power for most disorders.

In contrast to the objective measurements of physical exposure, we assessed the psychosocial work environment by questionnaires. This is associated with several problems, the main one being subjective reporting (Persson et al., 2012). Furthermore, workers with health problems tend to over-emphasize psychosocial problems (reverse causality). Also, some of the issues addressed in the questionnaire were closely related to physical conditions (e.g. repetitivity). A high physical workload may also affect the perception of the psychosocial environment, which may cause confounding problems.

In all the groups studied, we used questionnaires to estimate the group prevalence of health complaints. This also involves subjectivity, with the inherent risk of reporting bias. Also, the biological basis of a complaint is not well defined. Therefore, we also employed standardized physical examinations by a few carefully trained examiners, who had been checked for cross-reliability (Nordander, 2004).

All the study groups were examined cross-sectionally. This impairs the possibility of drawing conclusions regarding causality. It is unlikely that individuals with disorders would prefer work tasks with a high workload, as measured objectively. Bias towards the selection of healthy workers might thus be a problem, and would result in underestimation of an exposure-induced increase in prevalence, in particular among workers with long employment times. Indeed, we found that the prevalence of some diagnoses (thoracic outlet and acromio-clavicular syndromes) decreased with increasing employment time, which indicates disorder-associated selection.

The method of statistical analysis of the data set is not self-evident. In particular, the impact of several simultaneous physical and psychosocial risk factors is a problem, since they were all fairly closely correlated. As physical exposure was the main object of our meta-analysis, we studied the measures of physical exposure separately in the univariate analyses. We also included the effects of psychosocial factors. The exposure–response relationship may be overestimated when considering individual risk factors, due to confounding interactions. To explore this, we also employed multivariate analyses. However, this leads to a clear risk of over-adjustment, which would cause underestimation of the exposure–response relationships. Because of the sometimes very close correlations between the physical exposure parameters, we may not always have been able to pinpoint those most associated with disorders.

Results are presented for recti-linear statistical models. However, we also explored non-linear relationships, but their fits were no better than the recti-linear ones.

We have tested a large number of parameters, including sex, age and employment time. Therefore, the risk of bias resulting from multiple comparisons must be considered. However, since testing was based on biologically plausible and well-founded hypotheses of associations between all the workloads (velocities, postures and force) and disorders (complaints and diagnoses), and because consistent patterns appeared, it is unlikely that the majority of the reported associations are the result of chance only. However, it should be noted that several of the hypotheses are general, and not based on specific associations between certain workloads and disorders.

Disorders of the neck and shoulders are a major societal problem in many countries, and these are often caused by exposure in the workplace (Andersen et al., 2008; Larsman and Hanse, 2009; Tornqvist et al., 2009; Wahlström et al., 2004; Östergren et al., 2005). These disorders lead to suffering of the individual, as well as high costs to society (Pålsson et al., 1998). Thus, there is good reason for their prevention. In the present study, the multivariate models seemed to be reasonably good, in most cases explaining more than half of the total variance. Thus, we may have identified the most important risk determinants.

We found associations between physical work load in terms of neck flexion, upper arm elevation and velocity, and neck disorders, in accordance with earlier – though less precise – observations (Andersen et al., 2003; Ariens et al., 2001, 2002; Hamberg-van Reenen et al., 2006; Herin et al., 2014; Lindegard et al., 2012; Palmer and Smedley, 2007; Viikari-Juntura et al., 2001). As expected, though not previously reported, we also found exposure–response relationships for the activity of the trapezius muscle.

We also found associations between the prevalence of shoulder disorders and upper arm velocity and trapezius muscle activity. Several research groups have described such associations, although not in terms of quantitative exposure–response relationships (Miranda et al., 2008; van Rijn et al., 2010). We found no statistically significant associations between upper arm posture and shoulder disorders, although working with elevated arms is a well-established risk factor for such disorders (Bodin et al., 2012; van Rijn et al., 2010). We believe that this is because the material did not include occupations such as painters and electricians who do a lot of overhead work. Also, some workers with prolonged upper arm inclination might have an arm support (e.g. a desk). Unfortunately, we were not able to distinguish between loaded and unloaded arms.

Furthermore, the study revealed associations between neck and shoulder disorders and wrist posture and velocity as well as with forearm muscle activity. This is not surprising, as an association between hand-intense and often repetitive work has been reported previously (Cote et al., 2008; Mayer et al., 2012). The pathophysiological pathway is probably that hand-intense work gives rise to static muscle activation and long term forward inclination of the head due to eyesight demands. Further, repetitive work requires stabilisation of the scapulae, and is often associated with repetitive arm movements. Thus, wrist electrogoniometry can probably be used to assess not only the risk of disorders in the elbows and hands (Nordander et al., 2013), but also that in the neck and shoulders.

Regarding associations with psychosocial risk factors, low job control was the main one (also included in job strain and isostrain), while job demand was only associated with neck complaints. Low job control was closely correlated with wrist velocity, although it is highly unlikely that the former caused the latter. Adverse psychosocial conditions may aggravate symptoms caused by adverse physical load (Widanarko et al., 2014).

Numerous studies have shown that musculoskeletal disorders are more common among women than among men (Cote, 2012{; Nordander et al., 2009). Researchers have suggested several explanations, among others that as women are weaker than men they have a higher %MVE when performing the same work (Heilskov-Hansen et al., 2014; Meyland et al., 2014; Nordander et al., 2008). In the present study, women exhibited a higher prevalence of neck and shoulder complaints than men, also after adjustment for postures, movements and even muscular activity at work. This was also true for tension neck syndrome, and in the multivariate model for frozen shoulder.

In this study, we have presented quantitative exposure-response relations for a number of different physical exposures. Such information can be of practical use for several purposes. For example, measurements can be made on an existing or a planned work task, and used to predict the risks associated with it. Alternative working routines can then be compared to minimize the predicted risk.

These findings can also be used to establish exposure limits for physical exposure of the musculoskeletal system, corresponding to those in use for chemical, physical and biological risk factors. The findings of this study provide a starting point, although there is a need for more measurements, preferably using the same or similar methods, in a wider range of working environments. It is also important to consider not only neck and shoulder disorders, but also the prevalence of elbow and hand disorders (Nordander et al., 2013).

Establishment of exposure limits is a political and economic issue, not a scientific one. Still, it may be of some interest to indicate how such a limit may look, e.g. base on a shoulder disorders (infraspinatus tendonitis). A possible choice could be a doubling of the prevalence above the baseline at zero exposure. Then a value for shoulder velocity of about 50°/s would be suitable for the average woman (and most men; Fig. 1).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The study presents quantitative exposure–response relationships between physical workload on the neck and arms, and musculoskeletal disorders of the neck and shoulders. Apart from its theoretical interest, such information may be valuable for the assessment of risk in different occupations/work tasks, the establishment of quantitative exposure limits, and for the evaluation of preventive measures.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Support was provided by AFA Insurance Grant number 070068, the Swedish Council for Working Life and Social Research FAS 2007-0044, the Swedish Research Council, the Medical Faculty of Lund University and the County Councils of Southern Sweden. Contributions by Dr Ingrid Åkesson, Ms Jeanette Unge, Dr Dirk Jonker, Dr Birgit Juul-Kristensen, Dr Sigurd Mikkelsen, Dr Marianne Ståhl and Dr Bo Veiersted are gratefully acknowledged. Skilled field measurements of physical exposure were made by Ms Lothy Granqvist.

The following are the supplementary data related to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2016.01.010.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

