@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Practitioner versus analyst methods: A nuclear decommissioning case study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Are the hazard identification methods that have proven useful in one phase of the system lifecycle just as useful in another?


                        
                        
                           
                           Study undertaken in the nuclear decommissioning sector in which the risks have changed, challenging the adequacy of ‘normal’ risk identification methods.


                        
                        
                           
                           A formative risk identification approach was compared with a normative approach, with the latter detecting additional risks.


                        
                        
                           
                           The ‘analyst method’ (CWA) was comparable in application effort and time to an established ‘practitioner method’ (SWIFT).


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Hazard identification

SWIFT

CWA

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A requirement arose during decommissioning work at a UK Magnox Nuclear Power Station to identify the hazards involved in removing High Dose Rate Items from a Cartridge Cooling Pond. Removing objects from the cooling pond under normal situations is a routine event with well understood risks but the situation described in this paper is not a routine event. The power station has shifted from an operational phase in its life-cycle to a decommissioning phase, and as such the risks, and procedures to deal with them, have become more novel and uncertain. This raises an important question. Are the hazard identification methods that have proven useful in one phase of the system lifecycle just as useful in another, and if not, what methods should be used? An opportunity arose at this site to put the issue to a direct test. Two methods were used, one practitioner focussed and in widespread use during the plant's operational phase (the Structured What-If method), the other was an analyst method (Cognitive Work Analysis). The former is proven on this site but might not be best suited to the novelty and uncertainty brought about by a shift in context from operations to decommissioning. The latter is not proven on this site but it is designed for novelty and uncertainty. The paper presents the outcomes of applying both methods to a real-world hazard identification task.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

As many nuclear sites around the world make the transition from operations to decommissioning, the problem space in which they operate is changing and so too is the appropriateness of methods aimed at managing risks therein. Stated simply, just because hazard identification methods have worked in the past no longer means they are guaranteed to work in the future. This paper describes an opportunity which arose at a UK Magnox nuclear site to subject this broad question to a more specific test through the comparison of two methods: the Structured What-If (SWIFT) approach and Cognitive Work Analysis (CWA). Underwood and Waterson (2013) make an interesting distinction between two broad method types. On these terms SWIFT might be termed a ‘practitioner’ method, one that was used extensively during the plant's operational phase. The latter might be termed an ‘analyst’ method of the sort more commonly found in the academic literature. The former is ‘proven’ in the present problem domain, but there are doubts about the extent to which it can cope with the uncertainty and novelty brought about by nuclear decommissioning. The latter is not proven at the present site – it has not been used before in this location – but it is designed to cope with uncertainty and novelty. This paper explores how these tradeoffs manifest themselves when both methods are applied in a real-world setting.

The nuclear power station at which this study took place is a 360 MW Magnox site constructed in the early 1960s. Magnox reactors are fuelled with uranium fuel elements which are loaded into a graphite reactor ‘core’. The term Magnox refers to the non-oxidising magnesium alloy used to clad these elements. This design feature confers a number of technical advantages relating to containment of fissile material and the relative ease of material handling during reprocessing, and is a feature unique to British reactors of this era, albeit one that is now considered obsolete. The graphite in the reactor core, into which the Magnox encased fuel elements are placed, is known as the ‘moderator’. So-called ‘fast neutrons’ released in the fission process have to be slowed in order to sustain an on-going chain reaction and graphite provides this function. Control rods are also raised and lowered into the reactor core in order to control the reaction by absorbing excess neutrons. The heat energy released by the fission process is continually moved from the reactor core by a coolant which, in the case of Magnox reactors, is pressurised carbon dioxide gas. The coolant flows from the core to heat exchangers where water is converted into steam which, in turn, powers a number of conventional turbo alternators which supply electrical energy to the national grid.

Fuel rods have a finite lifespan and once they are ‘spent’, typically after a year, they are removed from the core, passed through a desplittering process to separate the fuel rods from the Magnox cladding, then loaded into crates and stored underwater in the Cartridge Cooling Pond (CCP). The cooling process takes several months. Once cooled the fuel is removed from the CCP, placed in flasks and transported offsite for safe storage or reprocessing.

The CCP at the present site has a capacity of over one million gallons. It consists of a 1.2 m thick reinforced concrete slab with reinforced concrete internal and external walls and has a depth of 6.7 m. The pond enclosure is divided into three sections; fuel handling bay (FHB) 1 and 2 and the CCP Main Enclosure. During the operational life of the station FHB 1 was used to accept and desplitter discharged fuel cartridges, while FHB 2 was available for emergencies and has the capacity to store all fuel from the reactor. The main enclosure was used to store spent desplittered fuel cartridges in skips. A skip crane runs the width of the pond and was used to transport the skips from one area to another Fig. 1
                        .

In the mid-1990s, following a successful generating period of over twenty years, the power station ceased operation and preparations began for decommissioning. At the time of writing, the Station is currently undertaking a programme to preserve the site in a ‘safe state’. During safe-state no further projects will be undertaken and only care and maintenance regimes are required to assure the integrity of the civil structures on the Station until such time that the structures can be safely removed and the site returned to its original condition. Under the programme of decommissioning a project has been established to decommission the CCP. This project involves retrieval, decontamination and safe disposal of pond furniture, followed by removal of sludge (desludging) which has built up on surfaces within the CCP, and then eventual draining of the CCP (dewatering). Before this stage is reached, however, two High Dose Rate Items (HDRIs) have to be removed. These HDRIs give a dose reading of 14Sieverts (Sv)which is the equivalent of a 5.25 s unshielded exposure time before the annual legal allowable dose uptake of 20 mSv is exceeded. It should be pointed out that 20 mSv is a maximum dose. In practice, workers would not be expected to exceed half of this value in a year. It is vital, therefore, that all required measures are taken to protect operators against such a scenario, and it is this specific risk that the methods described in this paper are orientated around.

The imperative to ensure operator safety when dealing with these HDRIs is compounded by the change in circumstances from ‘operations’ to ‘decommissioning’. Many of the tasks required to decommission the CCP have, by definition, never been performed before on this site. Added to which, over the 40 years since the plant was commissioned it has naturally degraded and aged, creating as yet unforeseen conditions such as CCP sludge, unusual ‘left-over’ HDRI's, non-standard removal tasks and complex storage requirements. This increase in complexity also increases the chance of unexpected yet still highly credible hazards to personnel.

The first strategy for dealing with this is to use hazard identification methods that were routinely employed during the operational life of the facility. On this site the ‘Structured What If’ (SWIFT) method was common. This method can be described as a practitioner tool and was originally developed for use in the chemical and petrochemical sectors, but has since become established as a useful technique throughout a number of high risk industries (BS EN 31010, 2010 pg.49). SWIFT is similar to the HAZOP technique in that it requires a multi-disciplinary team to work through the system in a systematic manner, asking questions of the form ‘What if …’ or ‘How could …’. SWIFT relies on task decomposition and a systematic application of ‘what if’ questions applied to each and every identified task. In other words, the task is taken apart, assessed for hazards, then re-assembled on the tacit assumption that the reassembled ‘whole’ should not be more than the sum of its parts (Walker et al., 2010).SWIFT, therefore, has a large deterministic element well matched to stable problems involving well understood parts.

The presence of various age-related degradations in the system, combined with the need to perform novel tasks, makes it potentially more difficult to discern final states from initial conditions. This property is referred to as ‘emergence’ (Gleik, 1987; Halley and Winkler, 2008; Walker et al., 2010). Emergence creates an analytical problem in that “calculation of system level emergent properties [such as unforeseen hazards and risks] from the component level rapidly becomes intractable” (Halley and Winkler, 2008, p. 12). In other words, it becomes increasingly difficult and effortful to deduce what ‘could’ happen via deterministic methods such as SWIFT which work at the component level. That being said, it is important to point out an important benefit inherent in SWIFT's team based methodology. Personnel with close experience of the system in question are brought together and, in effect, prompted to construct narratives about how it works and the potential for different sorts of hazards to arise. Those narratives can reveal previously un-thought of interactions and risks, however, equally importantly are the Decommissioning Safety Case Handbook (DSCH, 2011) recommendations that SWIFT is only used in cases where the nature of the proposed work is sufficiently broad to require input from a range of engineering disciplines or subject matter experts, but the hazard is intermediate or low and the design requirements are relatively straightforward (DSCH, 2011, p. B3). In other words, the ability of SWIFT to diagnose emergent risk issues is limited and recognised as such.

A further distinction can be drawn between practitioner methods like SWIFT, HAZOP etc that are based around data on how the task ‘should’ be performed, and methods like Cognitive Work Analysis (CWA; Vincente, 1999; Jenkins et al., 2009). CWA focuses on the constraint sand purposes which define the ‘space’ within which all possibilities for how a task ‘could’ be performed are shown. To clarify, the possibilities for action that link these constraints and purposes together enable a much more systematic diagnosis of interactive complexity and the subsequent emergence of hazards to be made. Like all methods, this is dependent on the quality of the inputs. The point is that given a set of data of the same quality, CWA should be able to more systematically map the interactive complexity between system elements compared to SWIFT. Or at least, the chance to miss important linkages will be reduced. In simpler ‘Rumsfeldian’ terms, deterministic methods (like SWIFT) can only deal with ‘known unknowns’ (i.e. what the analysis team can think up for themselves) whereas formative methods (like CWA) can help to discover ‘unknown unknowns’. CWA is noteworthy for another reason: it was originally developed by, and for use within, the nuclear sector.

CWA was developed in Denmark at the Risø National Laboratory in the 1960s for use at the opposite end of the decommissioning phase (i.e. commissioning). The conceptual problem of detecting emergent hazards is not a new one, and CWA was created as a way to design new systems (particularly control room systems) for maximum adaptability. This need was determined from a study of industrial accidents which the Risø researchers found began with non-routine operations. Clearly these are as much a feature of the decommissioning tasks described above as they are of ‘commissioning’ tasks such as those which informed the development of CWA. According to Fidel and Peijtersen (2005), CWA's theoretical roots are in General Systems Thinking, Adaptive Control Systems and Gibson's Ecological Psychology. This is quite different to SWIFT (and other deterministic methods), which trace their origins back to Reliability Engineering, Operations Research, Control Theory and Cybernetics. CWA is a formative technique which requires the analyst to consider the system as a whole and the way in which different components are linked together, and how those links conspire to ‘afford’ actions and behaviours. This is a distinctly different approach to that taken by traditional normative techniques (including SWIFT) which concentrate on the way in which the system should perform, or descriptive techniques which focus on the way in which the system currently performs.

The CWA framework has been developed and applied for a number of purposes, including system modelling (e.g. Hajdukiewicz, 1998); system design (e.g. Bisantz et al., 2003); training needs analysis (e.g. Naikar and Sanderson, 1999), training program evaluation and design (e.g. Naikar and Sanderson, 1999); interface design and evaluation (Vicente, 1999); information requirements specification (e.g. Ahlstrom, 2005); tender evaluation (Lintern and Naikar, 2000; Naikar and Sanderson, 2001); team design (Naikar et al., 2003); the development of human performance measures (e.g. Crone et al., 2003, 2007; Yu et al., 2002); and error management strategy design (Naikar and Saunders, 2003). Notable by their absence are recent examples within the nuclear sector. As we enter a new phase in the life-cycle of many nuclear facilities world-wide (i.e. decommissioning) and encounter new problems of complexity, emergence and potentially very high risk, perhaps now is a good time to investigate CWA's return to its original domain? Indeed, we pick up again on a theme recently presented by Underwood and Waterson (2013) that there is a growing gap between research (in which formative, systems methods are the dominant mode of thought) and practice (in which deterministic methods are much more common). The remainder of this paper will explore these issues via two case studies. One deals with the application of SWIFT to the problem of removing a High Dose Rate Item from a soon-to-be decommissioned Cartridge Cooling Pond. The other case study applies CWA to the same problem. The practical and methodological outcomes of this exercise will be discussed.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

Seven individuals took part in the SWIFT study, as detailed in Table 1
                         The work domain had been subject to several previous detailed studies including HAZOPs, SWIFTs and human factors task analysis, and the analysis team was composed of individuals with experience of this previous work. The CWA analysis took place concurrently. A lead analyst who was part of the project, and who worked closely with the Pond Project Engineer and Safety Case Author, produced the results with the Pond Project Engineer reviewing the outputs.

SWIFT provides a straightforward logical approach to hazard identification and is particularly attractive to project teams who are working within time and cost constraints. There are seven generic steps for carrying out an SWIFT analysis in accordance with BS EN 31010 (2010) and these were adhered to for the purposes of the current study.
                           
                              1.
                              Prior to the start of the study the Facilitator (Chairman) prepared a list of prompt words or phrases. (see Table 2
                                 ).

During the workshop the activity which will impact the system was agreed. This scoping step was important so that all members of the team agree on the boundaries or ‘nodes’ of the system that were to be discussed. This aids focussed discussion.

Managed by the Facilitator (Chairman) the SWIFT team discussed known risks and hazards, using knowledge gained from previous experience and incidents, bearing in mind any applicable regulatory or legislative constraints.

The Facilitator (Chairman) managed the discussion through each prompt word using questions beginning ‘What if … ?’, ‘What would happen if … ?’, ‘Could something … ?’ with the team exploring potentially hazardous scenarios, causes, consequences and impacts.

The team identified any existing controls which mitigate against the potentially hazardous scenarios identified.

The team reviewed each control measure and decided whether they were adequate. Where existing control measures were deemed to be inadequate further action was agreed. These actions were ranked in order of priority for completion.

Further ‘what if … ?’ led discussions took place until the team agreed that all potentially hazardous scenarios have been considered.

The SWIFT study considered all activities associated with the movement, identification and storage of the HDRI within the cooling pond. The process was divided into the following nodes for consideration:
                           
                              •
                              Node 1: Preparation for movement, movement underwater and identification and placement of High Dose Rate Item into designated receptacle within the pond.

Node 2: Movement of basket containing High Dose Rate Item in pond.

The following assumptions applied throughout the SWIFT study:
                           
                              •
                              No desludging or HDRI removal operations shall be carried out simultaneously in the same area of the CCP or FHBs.

The existing SQEP personnel who are undertaking HDRI recovery operations will be used to conduct operations (along with any specialist assistance where required).

Occupancy in the working area will be kept to minimum levels during the identification and isolation activities.

In summary, SWIFT is an extremely practical and expedient method but it cannot be used where unfamiliar tools and techniques are proposed, neither should it be used purely because it is simple and cost effective. These more commonly acknowledged disadvantages do not cover the more fundamental arguments being advanced in this paper around uncertainty, novelty and emergence. Where these are recognised as being features of a problem, and where the need arises to go beyond SWIFT, it is recommended that more detailed methods of the same (deterministic) type, such as HAZOP and FMEA, are used. In this case, however, CWA is put forward as an alternative.

SWIFT presents a structured method for taking a normative task description and subjecting it to interrogation via ‘what if’ questions. CWA is conceptually very different. Instead of looking at tasks and asking ‘what if’ it instead looks at the ‘system’ and ask what are the ‘constraints’. Specifically, what are the:
                           
                              1.
                              Constraints on people's behaviour imposed by the purposive context

Constraints on people's behaviour imposed by the physical situation

Constraints on activity that are imposed by specific situations

Constraints imposed by the available means by which activities can be performed

Constraints imposed by organisational structures, specific actor roles and definitions

Constraints imposed by human capabilities and limitations

CWA answers the ‘what if’ question with a ‘space of possible outcomes’, a multidimensional space bounded by six types of constraint. Multiple constraints require multiple dimensions of analysis and this is what CWA offers with five phases (as shown in Table 3
                        . The reader is also directed to Vincente, 1999; Jenkins et al., 2009 for a comprehensive description of the method).

WDA identifies the constraints on people's behaviour imposed by the purposive and physical context in which workers operate (Naikar, 2006a & b). The task environment is represented at a number of conceptual levels via an Abstraction Hierarchy. At the highest level, the system's ultimate ‘reason for being’ is represented while,at the lowest level, the physical objects within the system are described. In between are various specific and general functions the system performs. Physical objects are linked to higher-level functions to address not only what is performed, but also how and why.

Control Task Analysis addresses the constraints on activity imposed by specific situations. ConTA is used to understand the task in terms of the requirements associated with known, recurring classes of situations. This phase specifies the input and end goal without explicitly describing the process in the middle, thus identifying what needs to be done independently of how or by whom.

Strategies Analysis addresses the constraints influencing the way in which activity can be conducted. StrA looks at all the different ways of carrying out the same task. The previous phase dealt with the question of what needs to be done; this phase addresses how it ‘could conceivably’ be done.

Social Organisation & Cooperation Analysis addresses the constraints imposed by organisational structures or specific actor roles and definitions. SOCA investigates the division of tasks between different resources and looks at how different elements of the system communicate and cooperate. The objective is to determine how the social and technical factors combine to form a functioning sociotechnical system.

WCA investigates the behaviour required by the humans within the system to complete tasks. This behaviour is modelled using Rasmussen's (1983) Skills, Rules and Knowledge (SRK) Taxonomy which, in turn, reveals whether any of the previous four phases (and the constraints therein) impose unreasonable/unattainable demands.

The task under analysis is to safely lift the HDRIs out of the CCP and place them into storage baskets. The main items of plant that will be used during the operation are as follows:
                           
                              •
                              Pond Area crane

10Te hoist

Load cell (for sensing lifting loads)

Long Lifting Chains

Storage Basket

Long Lifting Tongs

Gamma Probe (for radiation sensing)

Camera and Monitor

The planned tasks and their sequence are shown in Table 4
                        :

@&#RESULTS@&#

The SWIFT method described above generated 24 credible hazard scenarios for the HDRI lifting task, as shown in Table 5
                        .

The identified hazards were grouped into four generic hazard types.
                           
                              •
                              Hazard 1 – Over-raising of HDRI out of pond caused by operator error.

Hazard 2 – Drop of, or impact onto, HDRI caused by operator error, crane control system failure or mechanical failure.

Hazard 3 – HDRI damaged by handling tool caused by compressor fault or operator error.

Hazard 4 – Complete loss of shielding due to pond leakage or inadvertent use of pumps caused by operator error or civil structure failure.

The following actions (Table 6
                        ) were identified, all of which are to be addressed prior to the HDRI removal operation.

The functional purpose of the system (the top level of the WDA) was defined by three ‘reasons the HDRI task existed in the first place’: these were to take the cartridge cooling pond out of use, deal with ‘orphan’ waste and discharge the pond water. Thirty five physical objects (the bottom level of the WDA) were defined, including skip crane, outer building structure, storage basket and so on. Structural means-ends links were established between these two outer layers of the abstraction hierarchy. All the nodes in the WDA were scrutinised for ‘what’ it does, then linked to all of the nodes in the level directly above to answer the question ‘why’ it is needed. The means-ends links knit together physical objects, object related processes, purpose related functions, values and priority measures and functional purposes to represent the ‘affordances’ embedded in the system. For example, underwater lighting in the cooling pond ‘affords’ visibility and allows Operators to obtain visual information during the HDRI lift operation thus contributing to the functional purpose ‘remove orphan waste’. Conversely, sludge ‘affords’ reduced pond water clarity, potentially impeding the functional purpose by making the HDRI more difficult to access and lift. The main purpose of the WDA was to feed into subsequent CWA phases. In particular, it was important to show how different purposes and objects (layers of the system) related to different phases and actors involved in the task. Nevertheless, what the WDA also succeeded in doing was raising the analyst's perspective, helping them to consider how this individual task related to the higher level functional purpose of the ‘total system’ (Fig. 2
                           ).

The Contextual Action Template (CAT) was used in this phase. It employed the steps of the established methodology for retrieval of HDRI as the ‘situation’ and the purpose related functions identified through the abstraction hierarchy to provide the functions. The outputs are shown in Fig. 3
                            and demonstrated the following:
                              
                                 •
                                 Shielding is needed, and provided, throughout the retrieval stages of the process.

Cleaning, monitoring and storage of lifting equipment protects against external hazards and contamination in atmosphere, and the protection of personnel against injury and contamination.

Water level indication typically occurs during lifting preparations and retrieval operations, effectively occurring during lifting of the HDRI, but also at the initial testing stages of the process. This is particularly important as, if the water level is not known prior to setting the lifting path, the incorrect length of lifting chains could be deployed resulting in potential risk to personnel from exposure to the HDRI.

Provision of lighting and access for working typically occurs throughout crane movements, lifting and movement operations.

Protection of personnel against injury and contamination typically occurs throughout most stages of the operations. Protection of personnel against injury occurs while the long lifting chain arrangement is tested. This is undertaken by raising the crane hook to the fully raised position while ensuring the tongs remain submerged underwater. This is important as over-raise of the HDRI would put operators at risk of injury through exposure to high dose rates.

Provision of visual information effectively occurs throughout hoist testing and HDRI retrieval to allow Operators to ascertain that the long lifting chains are of suitable length to prevent over-raise and that the HDRI has been retrieved.

The ability of the crane to lift up to 10Te and the provision of load indication are typically used during tong and hoist operation and during lifting and positioning of basket.

The provision of audible information is typically used throughout the lifting and retrieval process. Operators, the health physicist and work supervisor communicate with one another to ensure operations are successful. Audible alarms are fitted to personal exposure rate monitors to warn operators of increasing dose rates.

The ConTA shown in Fig. 3 demonstrates that the order in which activities are undertaken is important, moreover, there are a number of functions that influence all stages of the task. The contextual task analysis identified the importance of monitoring pond water level prior to undertaking any of the ‘setting to work’ steps detailed in the methodology. This was not identified during the course of the SWIFT. It was assumed that as pond water level is monitored on a daily basis this information would have been made available to the operators undertaking the HDRI retrieval task. However, it is vital information and should be considered as a documented step in the methodology as after many years of very little movement in the CCP, it may be easy to underestimate the importance of maintaining a suitable CCP water level.

The Strategies Analysis Flowchart identified five different strategies which could be adopted in order to achieve the required end state of CCP decommissioning (Fig. 4
                           ). Each strategy can be seen to follow the pattern of HDRI retrieval, with a period of short term storage followed by long term storage. The means by which these storage stages can be undertaken differ. A decision ladder was created for each strategy. It demonstrated that Strategy 1 required the most detailed planning and procedures. Strategies 2–5 relied on established procedures, thus simplifying the decisions required. Strategies 2-4are potentially constrained by external factors such as availability of flasks for long term storage and other project timescales. Given these it is likely that strategy 5 will be adopted as a means to allow progress towards CCP decommissioning.

This form of strategies analysis is not covered by an SWIFT or similar hazard analysis techniques. It would be performed during an ‘Optioneering’ study which would assess various options to ensure appropriateness from a time and cost perspective. Using strategies analysis is beneficial for understanding the larger objectives at an early stage and defining the constraints of each smaller component task. The StrA phase also helps to predict deviations from the planned process. If a simpler, more hazardous process is identified, control measures can be put in place to prevent their adoption during the operation, either as part of optimisation or in response to an unexpected event.

The SOCA is undertaken to show the way in which actors in the domain interact, communicate and cooperate. Both human and non-human actors were identified in the system as follows:

Human actors:
                              
                                 •
                                 Operators

Accredited Health Physicists

Work Supervisors

Non-human Actors:
                              
                                 •
                                 Physical Pond Structure

Personnel Protective Equipment

The work domain analysis, contextual activities template, decision ladder and strategies flowchart were annotated to demonstrate which stages of the system required actor interaction. This allowed the analyst to identify stages in the process where actors play key roles and, specifically, which actors are involved. The analysis showed the interacting nature of the Operator, Accredited Health Physicist and Works Supervisor roles. These individuals are required to work closely as a team. The SWIFT does not identify the stages in which key actors will be involved in the activity, rather, it is assumed that the existing team will be used and that they will perform in accordance with their SQEP status. CWA enables these assumptions to be tested from first principles.

The final stage of the analysis looked at worker competencies in order to define the skills that each human actor requires in order to complete the tasks as required to reach a successful outcome.

Required skill based behaviours can be summarised as:
                              
                                 •
                                 Undertaking monitoring tasks

Adhering to methodologies or method statements

Understanding of importance of successful completion of the task.

Required rule based behaviours can be summarised as:
                              
                                 •
                                 Using information as provided

Adhering to process and procedures including methodology and document preparation processes

Understanding working rules and adhering to them

Required knowledge based behaviour can be summarised as:
                              
                                 •
                                 Use previous experience to understand working environment and associated constraints, understand the way in which the operation may affect others and appreciate the importance of the operation as a means to achieve the overall goal of CCP decommissioning.

The Worker Competency Analysis (WCA)shows the actors are required to have knowledge of the operating procedures and working practices they must adhere to, combined with experience of conducting similar work within the confines of the CCP. The SWIFT recognised from the outset that the CCP Decommissioning Team would be used to undertake this activity, therefore, it was not necessary to identify team requirements as the team were classed as ‘Suitably Qualified and Experienced’. The WCA went further by identifying the need for actors to have an understanding of the role their work plays in meeting the overall objective of the project.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

Both techniques identified the vital role that Suitably Qualified and Experienced (SQEP) status would play in planning, organising and undertaking the retrieval operation. Both techniques also recognised that maintaining shielding was the most important factor during this operation as exposure to an unshielded HDRI for 5.25 s would mean exceeding the legal annual allowable dose. The CWA method identified a range of more systemic factors to do with relating this individual task to wider objectives. The SWIFT method identified a range of physical hazards. CWA, however, was able to identify a further physical hazard not detected by SWIFT related to pond water level monitoring. As for the time and effort required to produce these outputs, the methods were broadly comparable (Table 7
                     ). SWIFT was undoubtedly easier and quicker, but required more people to be involved. CWA was more complex and lengthy, but required fewer people. In monetary terms the differences were not great.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The authors of this paper are not alone in noticing a gulf between the methods used by researchers and academia and those used by practitioners and industry. Practitioner methods rely on a common-sense deterministic logic, one that is easy to follow, well defined, explicit, all of which fits well with method end-users (who tend to be from engineering disciplines). They also have a long legacy of practical application, something that is very important in highly regulated industries. Analyst methods often have few of these attributes. Rather than logical and deterministic they appear complex and ‘woolly’, features that are at odds with method end-user expectations and needs. Whilst they may have a long (sometimes longer) application track record in research domains they often appear ‘unproven’ in practical settings. Expressed in these terms the reason for a gulf between analyst and practitioner methods is understandable. But there is a problem. In some cases existing methods are having difficulty adapting to new contexts, such as the case here, where a relatively stable operational phase is giving way to a less predictable, more uncertain decommissioning phase. Answers to the challenges posed by different phases of a system lifecycle are to be found in analyst methods but their benefits need to be demonstrated and the reason for their lack of uptake explored.

SWIFT is a normative process that considers problems, mitigations, actions and solutions, relying on the ability of experts to construct narratives about how the system works and the possibilities for hazards to arise. As with most analyses the quality of the output is dependent on the quality of the inputs. These two factors interact. Meeting quality objectives in the face of high uncertainty requires ever more detailed analyses, there is no stop rule, taken to its limit the effort required to undertake a fully exhaustive deterministic analysis on a complex (rather than simple) system rapidly becomes intractable. If the analysis stops too early then the possibility of failing to detect all credible hazard types increases and yet to be fully resilient all possible task deviations need to be considered. This is where certain analyst methods can be helpful. By focussing on the constraints in the system, CWA offers a mechanism for considering complex deviations to the standard operating procedures that may result in an unplanned emergency operation, but in a way that has an in-built stop rule.

CWA is a formative process that promotes abstract thinking and potentially more creative solutions. CWA requires more information, is more time consuming and is perhaps less well known. Despite this, it provides useful information and is flexible enough to be used alongside or within existing business practices. Taking the operation to retrieve the HDRIs as an example, the WDA section of the CWA could be used to establish a formative understanding of the work domain to be analysed. This would provide a picture with no assumptions or prejudice. The CAT could be used to determine the order that work should be performed and allow this to be changed and reordered, ensuring that focus is given to the correct situations. The strategy flowchart could be used alongside an Optioneering study to demonstrate the possible strategies and the associated decision-making processes required to achieve the final outcome. Similarly, the WCA could be used in addition to appraisals or team design to ensure that the required skills and awareness of the team are recognised. Collectively, CWA provides a framework for exploring how users may respond in response to abnormal events, revealing critical areas of risk.

The reality is that long-standing techniques are often used simply because it is ‘just something we have to do’, with little time being spent on considering the nature of the situation and what other techniques might be better suited. This is particularly true in highly regulated industries where oversight is based upon accepted and agreed methods that are clearly auditable. This paper shows the risks inherent in this are significant. Using an inappropriate technique can result in a great deal of time and effort being wasted. A systems-based method such as CWA would be too resource intensive for many ‘standard’ risks, but so too could a deterministic method (like SWIFT) if applied to a problem with high degrees of complexity and emergence. The main risk, however, is failing to detect all credible hazards. The current study provides a powerful example of what is at stake. A 5.25 s exposure to the HDRI item would be all it takes for an individual to reach their annual yearly radiation uptake, a value they would almost never routinely receive. If the pond water level did fall unexpectedly then it would be extremely challenging for an organisation to subsequently discover that a more appropriate hazard identification method would have detected this in advance. The results, then, point strongly towards a contingent approach to method selection. Practically this involves a little more abstract thinking about the problem space and the degrees of complexity and emergence likely to be found therein. It may also require a larger repertoire of methods, going beyond the established norm, combined with greater awareness of their conceptual underpinnings (deterministic or systems-based, formative or normative). Ultimately, as the example used in this paper has shown, hazard identification methods are often complementary. In a highly regulated industry it is unlikely that a direct method replacement would gain universal acceptance (see Lundberg et al., 2012) thus, in the short term at least, the most practical option may be to introduce new methods alongside the accepted de-facto standards. Indeed, in this case the two worked in complimentary ways, with many of the analysis inputs required to ‘drive’ an SWIFT analysis also being useful in the production of a CWA.

For the nuclear industry, SWIFT is a clear, concise, well understood and a recognised methodology. CWA is less well known, rather abstract in its application, difficult to follow, not very certain in terms of its methodology and output. Despite this, it was acknowledged by power station personnel that one of the key outcomes of the CWA analysis, that it raised awareness of the overall objectives of the project and the roles that smaller projects play in achieving these objectives, was highly useful. Is now a good time for formative methods like CWA to make a return to their domain of origin? Are atomic methods – in terms of reductionism and determinism – suitable for the new ‘atomic age’ of decommissioning? As many nuclear facilities around the world enter this phase are the hazard identification methods appropriate for ‘operations’ still appropriate for ‘decommissioning’? The results of this study show that formative methods do have something to contribute but we will leave the final insight to those involved in the practical, day-to-day realities of this site: “I agree that CWA with its multiplicity could assist in these uncertain tasks, but the risk adverse nature of our industry and relative lack of knowledge of CWA is not conclusive to its use on site. SWIFT is a clear, concise, well understood and a recognised methodology. CWA is less well known, rather abstract in its application, difficult to follow, not very certain in terms of its methodology and output. Perhaps it's these difficulties that need to be tackled in order to return CWA to use within the nuclear industry.”

@&#REFERENCES@&#

