@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Ergonomic evaluation of the operating characteristics of the 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We measured HR, EMG and the degree of fatigue of 14 subjects operating the 6MF-30.


                        
                        
                           
                           The effects of carrying posture on HR and EMG data were significant.


                        
                        
                           
                           The effects of carrying posture on the degree of fatigue were significant.


                        
                        
                           
                           The strap of the 6MF-30 lessens physical stress.


                        
                        
                           
                           The optimal carrying posture adopted when using 6MF-30 includes the oblique strap.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Portable pneumatic extinguisher

Ergonomics

Heart rate

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher, which is one of the most widely used pieces of equipment for fighting forest fires in China, can produce great physical discomfort for the wearer. To mitigate the physical discomfort associated with the use of the 6MF-30, the operating characteristics of this machine were ergonomically evaluated. Fourteen subjects were instructed to operate the 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher using three different carrying postures (oblique strap, vertical strap and no strap) two different motions (stationary and swinging) during a simulated firefighting task. Dependent measures included heart rate (HR), electromyography (EMG) data and a subjective assessment (measured as the degree of fatigue in the left arm, right arm and waist). The EMG data were acquired from the palmaris longus and the biceps brachii of the left arm of each subject. Variance analysis indicated that the effects of the carrying posture on the HR (p < 0.001), the EMG data of the left arm (the p value of the palmaris longus is 0.001 and the p value of the biceps brachii is 0.015), and the degree of fatigue of the left and right arms (p < 0.001) were significant, while the effects of motion on all of the dependent measures, and the effects of carrying posture on the degree of fatigue of the waist were not significant. The effect of an oblique strap on the whole-body load is minimal, and the use of the equipment without a strap produced significantly greater physical discomfort for the wearer than did the oblique strap and the vertical strap. The results suggest that the strap of the 6MF-30 can help Chinese forest firefighters to lessen physical stress when operating the 6MF-30, and the use of the oblique strap should be adopted as the standard position.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The portable pneumatic extinguisher is a model of fire extinguisher that is used in China to extinguish low-intensity forest fires (where the fire height is less than 1.5 m and the fire intensity is less than 3140 kJ/m) of class A (the definition is provided in GB 4351.1). This equipment is widely used for wildfire suppression in China, and it has been used as the primary extinguisher in several large Chinese forest fires (Wei and Wang, 2006). Most forest firefighting departments in China possess large numbers of portable pneumatic extinguishers that are made in China. The design defects of these extinguishers can lead to certain negative effects, such as vibration, noise, excessive heat and so on. These effects can produce a physiological load on the users of the equipment. Moreover, uncomfortable carrying postures may lead to an increased physiological load. The same problems that occur with the use of portable pneumatic extinguishers also exist with other portable forestry machines.

A chainsaw is one type of portable forestry machine. The effects of the dynamic and static characteristics of chainsaw use on the fatigue of arm muscles have been studied using Chinese anthropometric data (Li et al., 1997, 1998a, 1998b). The optimization of the man–machine interface with chainsaws has been studied, and the optimal value of the man–machine interface within the geometrical parameters of chainsaws has been acquired from Chinese anthropometric data (Li et al., 2000). The results of these studies have helped to make chainsaws more suitable for Chinese users. The ergonomic effects of chainsaw use have been studied in the context of Chinese anthropometry, but the ergonomic evaluation of portable pneumatic extinguishers has not been researched, and consequently, we did not find any relevant literature. Most of the studies on portable pneumatic extinguishers conducted by Chinese scholars have concentrated on the mechanical characteristics of these extinguishers (Xin et al., 2011). Hand tools such as screwdrivers, pliers and scrapers are also portable instruments. The comfort/discomfort factors associated with using hand tools (according to users) have been studied. These results can aid in the design of comfortable hand tools (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). The electric screwdriver is a powered hand tool. The factors contributing towards hand-arm stress while operating an electric screwdriver have also been evaluated (Chang and Wang, 2000). Hand tools and portable pneumatic extinguishers cause similar physical stress problems when used. The task of firefighting for Chinese people who operate portable pneumatic extinguishers is hard labour, and the ergonomic effects of these extinguishers produced in China need to be evaluated to mitigate the physiological load.

Many ergonomic studies were based on the physical employment tests of firefighters. A critical wildfire-fighting task was used (Lord et al., 2012; Netto et al., 2013). While these tests may be appropriate for Australian fire crews, they may not be suitable for Chinese firefighters because the portable pneumatic extinguisher is only widely applied to wildfire fighting in China. The tests should consider the influence of the specialised product. The subjective discomfort ratings, heart rate, and muscle fatigue were significantly influenced by body posture (Jung et al., 2010). Therefore, body posture should be considered when carrying portable pneumatic extinguishers.

In this study, operating characteristics of the 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher that is produced in China were evaluated using indices (i.e., heart rate, surface electromyography, and a subjective assessment) to determine a reasonable portable method and mode of operation. The operating characteristics included carrying posture and motion. The task involved simulated firefighting using the 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher. The 6MF-30 is available on the market and has been widely used for wildfire suppression in China. Currently, the relevant product manual or standard does not regulate the carrying posture associated with the use of the 6MF-30. We believed that the product strap is an important factor for carrying posture when we obtained the machine. Finally, three carrying postures with respect to the strap were selected. These are common postures when manipulating the machine. In addition, motion was used as a factor in this study. A more comfortable posture and motion can lessen the physical stress experienced by Chinese forest firefighters using the machine.

Forest firefighters are generally male, because forest firefighting involves a considerable degree of gruelling work. Fourteen healthy male volunteers from Beijing Forestry University in China aged between 19 and 26 years (mean = 22.8 years) participated in the experiment. Their mean height and weight were 1.74 m (1.62–1.84 m) and 67.1 kg (57.9–83.1 kg), respectively. None of the subjects had a history of musculoskeletal injuries. All subjects were requested to abstain from strenuous exercises during the 24 h prior to the experiment. All of the subjects signed informed consent documents.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

The full factorial experimental design used in this study comprised two independent factors: carrying posture and motion. There were three types of carrying posture, which were associated with an oblique strap (strap was placed on the left shoulder, and the machine was on the right-hand side), a vertical strap (strap was placed on the right shoulder, and the machine was on the right-hand side), or no strap (machine was supported only by the hands), as presented in Fig. 1
                        . Motion had two levels: stationary (the machine did not swing), and swinging (the diffuser would swing the machine at a rate of 30 beat/minute). Each subject was advised to maintain an identical posture (left hand gripped the front handle, right hand gripped the rear handle, the machine was positioned in the right front of subjects, and the longitudinal section of the machine was vertical) during all of the experiments.

In this experiment, the task of simulated firefighting was conducted. In the task, a simulated fire source was located 1 m in front of the subject. The task is illustrated in Fig. 2
                        . Point A and B in Fig. 2 indicate the edges of the simulated fire source. Point A is directly in front of the left foot of the subject. The distance between A and B is 35 cm. At the stationary level, subjects simulated fighting a fire at point A, i.e., the diffuser pointed to Point A. At the swing level, the diffuser swung between point A and point B at rate of 30 beats/minute which was controlled by a digital metronome. One beat indicates that the diffuser swings from A to B, then back to A.

The 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher was not started and the experiments were conducted in a quiet environment and the tasks were performed at a comfortable temperature. Starting the 6MF-30 produced erratic vibration and noise, which are difficult to control under identical conditions. In addition, the weight of the machine would decrease and smoke would be produced when the 6MF-30 burnt gasoline when the extinguisher was started. The vibration, noise, weight and smoke would affect the accuracy of the experiment and a field study would be complicated. Therefore, in the experiment, the engine was shut down and the experiments were conducted indoors.

The common method of operation of portable pneumatic extinguishers is that the subject grips the front handle using his left hand and grips the rear handle using his right hand. According to force analysis, the weight load of the machine on the left arm is clearly greater than on the right arm. In this experiment, the muscle load of the left arm was measured to obtain better results. There are three main forces that occur during the operation of the machine: the grasping force of the left hand on the front handle, the tensile force of the left arm on the front handle, and the supporting force of the shoulder on the strap. Thus, the palmaris longus and biceps brachii muscles were selected to evaluate the grasping force and tensile force, respectively.

The 6MF-30 portable pneumatic extinguisher that is produced in China is widely employed in Chinese forest firefighting. Portable pneumatic extinguishers have the advantage of portability and a long firefighting time, making them suitable for Chinese forestry firefighting (Zhang and Yu, 2012). The high-speed airflow, produced from a wind wheel driven by a two-stroke gasoline engine, is used to fight fire. The total mass of the experimental machine is 10.3 kg, which includes the mass of the 6MF-30 (9.3 kg) and the mass of the gasoline within the extinguisher (1 kg). The length of the wind tube is 80 cm and the diameter of the front handle is 2.9 cm. The strap of the 6MF-30, which is used to support the machine during use, is an adjustable strap with a maximum length of 170 cm. The width of the strap is 3.4 cm. Because the majority of the pneumatic extinguisher is metal, the total mass is heavy and the load associated with operating the machine is large.

Heart rate (HR) and electromyography (EMG) measurements were the physiological responses used in our study to evaluate muscle stress. To measure and analyse the HR and EMG data of subjects and to further evaluate the labour load, this study used technology produced by the TEA company in France. This technology consisted of a portable data acquisition station (T-Log Datalogger), a wireless module for heart rate measurements (T-Sens HRM), a wireless module for surface electromyography measurements (T-Sens sEMG), and software for data analysis (CAPTIV L7000). In our experiments, the HR sensor was tightly fastened around the chest of each subject using an elastic electrode strap. To ensure the accurate HR measurements, the contact between the skin and electrodes needs to be constant. The HR sampling frequency was 16 Hz, and the unit of measurement is beats per minute (bpm). The electrodes for the EMG were placed and fixed on the palmaris longus (PL) and biceps brachii (BB) of the left arm. The sampling frequency of the T-Sens sEMG was 2048 Hz and the root mean square (RMS) value was calculated and transmitted directly by the T-Sens module. The frequency of the RMS calculation was 128 Hz and the unit is μV.

All of the experiments were conducted indoors. First, the sensors were placed on the bodies of the subjects. Then, the HR of the subjects at rest was measured for three minutes and the average bpm were calculated.

The maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) of the PL and BB muscles was measured to eliminate systematic error induced by the diversity of muscle strength and physiological age among the subjects on the muscle measurement and analysis (Hamberg-Van Reenen et al., 2009). Measuring the MVC of the PL required a subject to grip a cylinder with a 35 mm diameter with his left hand using extreme strength. The method of measuring the MVC of the BB required that the subject use his left hand (with the palm turned upward) to lift a desk that was fixed in the ground using his left forearm in a horizontal position. The duration of the MVC measurement was 5 s and the mean MVC over the 5-second period was used as the MVC value.

Then, six tasks (3 carrying postures × 2 motions) were conducted by each subject. The HR and the EMG output were simultaneously recorded for 5 min, and the average values were calculated. To eliminate the effect of fatigue, the interval time between the experiments was not less than 0.5 h. The experimental order was randomized using the RAND function in Excel software.

All of the subjects were required to answer a subjective assessment questionnaire after each experiment. The subjective assessments were scored according to a 7-point scale (0–6 points) (Hsu et al., 2000), which included three items: degree of fatigue of the left arm, right arm and waist. Based this evaluation scale, a score of 0 points indicated that a subject had a very strong negative impression of the experiment, while 6 points indicated that the subject had a very strong positive impression. Therefore, this questionnaire adopted the adjectives “weary” (0 point) and “comfortable” (6 point).

The average HR and EMG data of each subject were calculated for three minutes while at rest. The average HR and EMG data measured during each five-minute task were calculated. The increasing ratio (IR) of the HR of each task was calculated using the following equation: IR = (HR-HRrest)/HRrest, where HR is the mean heart rate for the task and HRrest is the mean heart rate at rest (Chen and Li, 2009). The %MVC of each subject was calculated using the equation %MVC = EMG/MVC, where EMG is the mean electromyography data for the tasks, and MVC is the maximal voluntary contraction of the subjects.

@&#RESULTS@&#

ANOVA results for the subjects, carrying posture and motion of the portable pneumatic extinguisher with regard to the IR (increasing ratio of the HR), PL%MVC (%MVC of the palmaris longus), and BB%MVC (%MVC of the biceps brachii) are summarized in Table 1
                        . These data indicate that the effects of carrying posture on IR, PL%MVC and BB%MVC were significant, while the effects of the motion on IR, PL%MVC, and BB%MVC were not significant.

The presents the effects of carrying posture on IR, PL%MVC and BB%MVC are presented in Fig. 3
                        . These data reveal a high labour load of IR, PL%MVC and BB%MVC under the condition of no strap. This means that the strap can alleviate the load on the subjects while they are operating portable pneumatic extinguishers. The IR of the oblique strap was slightly lower than that of the vertical strap, and the PL%MVC and BB%MVC of the oblique strap were slightly higher than those of the vertical strap.

Each subject rated his fatigue at the end of a 5-minute testing period. ANOVA results of the subjects, carrying posture and motion of the portable pneumatic extinguisher on the degree of fatigue of the left arm, right arm and waist are shown in Table 2
                        . The effect of carrying posture on the degree of fatigue of the left and right arms was significant. The carrying posture did not significantly change the degree of fatigue of the waist. The effect of motion on the degree of fatigue of the left arm, right arm and waist was not significant.

The degree of fatigue of the left and right arms resulting different carrying postures is shown in Fig. 4
                        . The figure indicates that the differences in the degree of fatigue of the left arm and right arm without the use of the strap are minimal, which means that using the extinguisher without the strap led to greater fatigue in the arms. The degree of fatigue of the left arm when using the oblique strap was greater than that when using the vertical strap, while the opposite results were observed for the right arm.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Portable pneumatic extinguishers belong in the class of portable forestry machinery and their operational standard can guide the optimization of other portable forestry machinery. Li attempted to evaluate the handholding posture adopted while operating chainsaws, which also belong to the group of portable forestry machines, but did not discover any differences when using the factors of the angle of the forearm and upper arm (Li et al., 1997). In the current experiment, we found that the highest IR, PL%MVC and BB%MVC values and the lowest degree of fatigue of the left and right arms were obtained without the use of the strap, which indicates the significant effects of the strap of portable pneumatic extinguishers on the labour load of subjects. The strap can effectively reduce the working load of operating portable forestry machines and it is advised that the portable pneumatic extinguisher be equipped with a strap.

The carrying postures significantly changed the HR and EMG data and the degree of fatigue of the left and right arms. In this study, the EMG data of the left arm muscle were measured, but those of the right arm muscle were not. The oblique strap had the least influence on the HR, and the vertical strap had the least influence on the EMG data. In addition, the oblique strap had the least influence on the degree of fatigue of the left arm and the vertical strap had the least influence on the degree of fatigue of the right arm. The degree of fatigue of the left arm was consistent with the EMG data, which indicates that the oblique strap had a greater effect on the left arm muscle than the vertical strap. By contrast, the vertical strap had a greater effect on the right arm muscle than the oblique strap. The EMG data showed that the oblique and vertical straps resulted in differences in the local muscle fatigue of the left and right arm muscles. The reason may be that a different carrying posture results in a change in body balance, which in turn influences the physiological load of the left and right arms. Because the heart rate reflects the whole body load, we should consider the heart rate as a primary factor. Therefore, the carrying posture adopted when using portable pneumatic extinguishers should include the use of an oblique strap.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The different carrying postures adopted when using the 6MF-30 resulted in significant differences in the HR and EMG data and the degree of fatigue. When the subjects operated the 6MF-30 without the support of a strap, the physiological load was larger compared with other circumstances and the degree of fatigue was greater. The strap of the 6MF-30 can help lessen firefighters' physical stress, and a more suitable strap for Chinese people operating the portable pneumatic extinguisher should be included in the design of the extinguisher. The oblique strap had a smaller effect on the HR compared with the vertical strap. However, the effect of the oblique strap on the EMG data of the left arm was larger than that of the vertical strap. Moreover, the fatigue of the left arm was greater when using the oblique strap compared with the vertical strap, while the opposite result was observed for the right arm. Therefore, the carrying postures adopted should include the use of an oblique strap. The study is suitable for Chinese forestry firefighters because we used Chinese anthropometic data in the analyses.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was supported by the Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (20120014110012) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (YX2013-25).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

