@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Influence of musculoskeletal pain on workers' ergonomic risk-factor assessments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study compares the workstation assessments of workers with and without musculoskeletal pain.


                        
                        
                           
                           Workers reporting pain assessed their workstations more negatively with respect to certain aspects related to ergonomic risk factors.


                        
                        
                           
                           Findings indicate that from an MSD prevention point of view, an ergonomics expert assessment may be more suitable to detect at risk workstations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Self-assessment

Musculoskeletal pain

MSD risk factors

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study compares the ergonomic risk-factor assessments of workers with and without musculoskeletal pain. A questionnaire on the musculoskeletal pain experienced in various body regions during the 12 months and seven days preceding the data collection was administered to 473 workers from three industrial sectors. The Ergonomic Workplace Analysis method, developed by the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (FIOH), was then used by the workers and an ergonomics expert to assess the workstations. The ergonomic quality of the workstations and the need for change were also assessed by the expert and the workers at the workstation, using visual analog scales (VAS). Results show that the workers in this study were exposed to significant musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) risk factors, according to the FIOH assessment and the high percentages of reported pain. The results also show that those who reported pain in the seven days prior to the assessment evaluated their workstations more negatively than subjects who reported no pain, while the expert found no difference between the two groups' exposure to MSD risk factors.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in workplaces is a major problem (NRC/IM, 2001; Stock et al., 2011). Several studies have been conducted to assess exposure to ergonomic risk factors in worker populations. For extensive surveys, worker self-report questionnaires are used to estimate the worker's exposure to a variety of risk factors (Burdorf and van der Beek, 1999). Self-assessment can also be used by ergonomics practitioners when implementing an ergonomic intervention project in a company. Measuring exposure to risk factors is an important MSD prevention tool for both epidemiologists and ergonomists.

Some studies have examined the factors influencing the reliability and validity of workers' self-reports and self-assessments (Burdorf, 1992; Stock et al., 2005; Winkel et al., 1991). Sources of error and bias in subjective ratings have also been studied, among others, by Poulton (1982) and Toomingas et al. (1997). Other studies have focused specifically on the effect of musculoskeletal pain on the worker's assessment of physical workload (Leijon et al., 2002; Roskes et al., 2005; Wiktorin et al., 1993; Viikari-Juntura et al., 1996). This question is becoming particularly important for epidemiological studies with large-sized samples as well as for ergonomics practitioners and merits attention when an employee's assessment is taken into account to determine the workstation risk level and establish intervention priorities.

The assessment of a workstation's MSD risk factors usually relies on observational methods. Several methods from the ergonomics literature are available to researchers and practitioners (David, 2005; Li and Buckle, 1999). Many have the advantage of being fast and inexpensive to implement (Viikari-Juntura et al., 1996). Some were developed with the intention of supporting industry-led MSD-prevention efforts (Cole et al., 2003). Among other things, they can help prioritize ergonomic interventions. Some of these methods combine worker and expert assessments to determine a workstation's MSD risk level. Given the significant presence of MSDs in the population, it is only natural to assume that these methods can be used to assess workstations where workers are experiencing MSD symptoms. Therefore, it is important to know whether the workers' perception may be influenced if they are experiencing pain when these methods are being used. So far, only a few studies have focused on this subject. Some researchers have observed that workers with MSDs and those who were in pain reported greater exposure to MSD risk factors (Balogh et al., 2004; Hansson et al., 2001; Leijon et al., 2002; Viikari-Juntura et al., 1996; Wiktorin et al., 1993). These studies compare the differences between the exposure ratings of workers with pain and those with no pain in relation to exposure variables such as manual handling activity, movement repetitiveness and the posture of specific body regions. According to the findings of Donders et al. (2007), workers suffering from illness or chronic pain responded more negatively to questions characterizing their work than those not suffering from illness or chronic pain. Since all the study subjects worked for the same company and at similar workstations, this study shows that a negative perception of the job was strongly related to chronic pain rather than actual poor working conditions. The studies published to date have revealed similar levels of exposure to MSD risk factors. Furthermore, since none of these studies used an observational method developed for ergonomics practitioners, it is not clear whether such methods used in the context of an ergonomics practice would produce the same results as those developed by researchers for a specific research project.

Observational methods are still those most commonly used by practitioners (Takala et al., 2010; Dempsey et al., 2005). Often developed for practitioners and adapted to requirements of SMEs in a context of health and safety management at work, they are easier to use, less costly and more flexible when it comes to collecting data in the field. Many methods have been proposed over the last 30 years for the systematic and comprehensive assessment of a workstation. The Ergonomics Workplace Analysis method developed by the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (FIOH) (Ahonen et al., 1989) which includes both expert and worker opinions, is one of them and among the best known (Malchaire, 1997, 2002).

The goal of the present study is to determine whether a worker's report of musculoskeletal pain during the prior 12 months or 7 days influences the worker's perception of his/her workstation's ergonomic risk factors, when assessed using the FIOH's Ergonomics Workplace Analysis observational method (thereafter named FIOH). This is the first study to use this type of method to examine the influence of reported pain on workers' perceptions.

@&#METHODS@&#

The characteristics of the 473 subjects participating in the study are described in Table 1
                        . They were employed in either of one appliance assembly plant, four plastics and composites plants, or six public-sector tree nurseries. The workstations assessed in the various plants were chosen either because they had been targeted by CSST (Quebec's Workers Compensation Board) inspectors as having a history of MSDs or because the company had identified them to be at risk for causing MSDs or following workers' complaints. The 473 workers were interviewed at 182 workstations over a four-year period. In the tree nurseries, up to 22 workers could be working at similar workstations. Subjects participated in the study on a voluntary basis.

While the overall sample was 60% female, their representation in the tree nursery sector (69%) was higher than in the other two sectors (36%). Workers were between 17 and 66 years of age and had between 0.02 and 42 years of seniority in the company.

All subjects were interviewed at their workstations. They were released for a period of about 45 min to respond to the pain questionnaire and conduct the ergonomic assessment of their workstation. While the workers were given a copy of the questionnaire, the ergonomics expert asked the questions in the form of an interview, noting the worker's responses and providing clarification whenever necessary. The data for this study were collected by three experienced ergonomics practitioners and four graduate students with training and field experience in ergonomics, all of whom are referred to as “experts” for this study. The experts had no employment relationship with the companies that participated in this study. The first part of the questionnaire established the subjects' general characteristics: age, sex, weight, height and length of employment. The second part of the questionnaire can be separated into three sections: musculoskeletal pain, worker self-assessment of ergonomic risk factors at the workstation, expert assessment of ergonomic risk factors at the workstation.

The workers' musculoskeletal pain was assessed using two series of questions from the Enquête sociale et de santé du Québec of 1998 (Daveluy et al., 2001), which was adapted from the Standardized Nordic Questionnaire (Kuorinka et al., 1987). A first set of questions pertained to pain experienced in 11 body regions (neck, shoulders, arms, elbows, forearms/wrists, upper back, lower back, hips/thighs, knees, calves and ankles/feet) during the 12 months preceding the data collection. A second set of questions related to pain felt in the same body areas in the seven days prior to the data collection. For each body region, workers were to indicated whether they had experienced any pain that had interfered with their normal activity over the past 12 months: no, never; yes, sometimes; yes, often; yes, all the time. In the case of musculoskeletal pain experienced during the past seven days they were to indicate whether or not the pain was work-related for the same 11 body regions: no pain; yes, entirely related to my work; yes, partly related to my work; I don't know if related to my work; not related to my work.

The FIOH method covers 14 topics: (1) work site, (2) general physical activity, (3) lifting, (4) work postures and movements, (5) accident risk, (6) job content, (7) job constraints, (8) worker communication and personal contact, (9) decision making, (10) repetitiveness, (11) attentiveness, (12) lighting, (13) thermal environment and (14) noise. In the FIOH method, the worker subjectively assesses his workstation on each topic using a four-level rating scale: very poor, poor, good, very good. With this method, the expert assesses the workstation on the same 14 topics using a four or five level scale (in the FIOH some topics use a four-level scale while others use five for the expert assessment only). A score of five (or four for some topics), represents maximum risk for the worker on the topic being evaluated. For each workstation assessed, the data collected not only provided the information needed to complete the 14-point FIOH assessment, but also included other useful information as well (e.g., weight of loads handled, magnitude and direction of forces applied to objects as measured with a digital force gauge, working heights, any significant distances or movement, shift length, light and noise levels). A video recording was made at each workstation and the Video Event Analysis software (Chappe, 2006) was used to conduct a time-motion study. About ten work cycles were observed at the workstations with short cycle times, i.e., the majority of workstations in the sample. For those with very long cycle times, at least the most critical tasks of the cycle were observed. For the purposes of this article, only the results from the FIOH topics related to mechanical risk factors or MSDs are presented (i.e. FIOH topics 1, 2, 3, 4, and 10).

Following the workstation assessment with the FIOH method, each worker was asked to answer two questions using visual analog scales (VAS): 1) “What is your perception of the ergonomic quality of your workstation?” (scale anchors: very poor ergonomics to perfect ergonomics); 2) “What is your perception of the need for changes to your workstation?” (scale anchors: no changes needed to changes truly necessary). The questions were asked by the expert immediately following the FIOH assessment and a discussion with the worker to determine whether or not he/she had an opinion on the workstation's overall design quality with regards to ergonomics. Through this discussion the term was defined and explained to the worker to make sure he/she understood what needed to be assessed. The prior FIOH workstation evaluation helped workers better understand the assessment to be done. The expert then had to answer the same two questions using the same scales to provide his/her overall assessment of the workstation.

For this study, the answers regarding the presence of pain were categorized into two groups: the “pain” group and the “no pain” group. The answers pertaining to the pain reported in the last 12 months were processed in two ways. In Case 1, if the respondent answered “yes, often” or “yes, all the time” for at least one body region, the response was categorized in the “pain” group, but when the subject answered “no, never” or “yes, sometimes” for all body regions, the response was categorized in the “no pain” group. In Case 2, it was only when the worker answered “no, never” for all body regions that the response was classified as in the “no pain” group. If the respondent answered “yes, sometimes”, “yes, often” or “yes, all the time” for at least one body region his/her answer was included in the “pain” group. As for the data on pain experienced in the past 7 days, the “no pain” group was associated with a “no pain” response, while any of the other four responses for at least one body region was classified in the “pain” group.

The influence of pain on the perception of ergonomic risk factors at the workstation was measured using three categories of reported pain: 1) pain experienced in at least one body region in the seven days preceding the study, 2) pain experienced in at least one body region “often” or “all the time” (Case 1) in the 12 months preceding the study, 3) pain experienced “sometimes”, “often” or “all the time” (Case 2) in the 12 months preceding the study.

One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the workers' assessments between the pain and the no-pain groups. Thus, three comparisons (three pain categorizations) were done for each of the five FIOH topics (1, 2, 3, 4, 10) assessed by the workers and for each of the two questions (ergonomics quality of the workstation and need for change with the VAS) (Table 4). The same comparison process between the pain and the no-pain groups was repeated with the expert assessments (Table 4). The 4-level scale used for the workers' assessments and the 5 or 4-level scales used by the expert were presumed to be interval type, as were the two VAS assessments.

JMP statistical software for Windows (SAS Institute Inc. version 9.0.2) was used for the data analysis. The pain data reported by the study subjects were compared with the prevalence of musculoskeletal pain in the reference population of Quebec as a whole, using data from the Enquête sociale et de santé du Québec of 1998 (Daveluy et al., 2001).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Of the 473 subjects who participated in the study, 469 completed the survey on the presence of musculoskeletal pain in the previous seven days. The responses of 461 subjects were collected regarding the 12-month period.


                        Table 2
                         compares the prevalence of musculoskeletal pain for the 12-month reference period. The prevalence of musculoskeletal pain felt “often” or “all the time” in at least one body region during the 12-month period (Case 1) was compared to that of the Quebec population as a whole (Daveluy et al., 2001). Workers in the three sectors reported significantly more upper-limb pain during the 12-month period than did the general Quebec population (p < 0.05). Workers in the appliances sector also reported significantly more back pain than the reference population.


                        Table 3
                         shows the prevalence of pain experienced during a 7-day period and that experienced during a 12-month period for Case 1 and Case 2, by sector. Proportionally, the prevalence of pain experienced in at least one body region during the seven days preceding the study is similar for all three sectors. In terms of pain experienced in the 12 months preceding the study, workers in different sectors responded in varying proportions regarding pain experienced “often” and “all the time” (Case 1). Subjects from the tree nursery sector reported less pain experienced “often” and “all the time” over a 12-month period (48.7%) as compared to workers in the appliances and plastics/composites sectors, who reported pain 80.0% and 58.5% of the time, respectively. Case 2, which takes into account pain experienced “sometimes”, “often” and “all the time” during the past 12 months, shows higher numbers because it includes one additional pain category (i.e. “sometimes”) as compared to Case 1. Smaller differences between the sectors in Case 2 indicate that proportionally more workers in the tree nursery sector reported experiencing pain “sometimes” in a 12-month period. In tree nurseries, 371 subjects responded to the questionnaire on pain within a 7-day period, while 363 completed the questionnaire on pain during a 12-month period. In the other two sectors, all subjects responded to the pain questionnaire for both periods under study.


                        Table 4
                         compares the averages of the workers' and experts' assessments, according to the pain reported for the two periods. The first value in the table is the ANOVA F-ratio. Under the F-ratio, between brackets, the average scores expressed as a percentage of the scale (to ease comparisons between different scales) of both groups of workers (with no pain and with pain) are shown. A positive sign (+) indicates a higher score assigned by workers suffering from pain.

The analysis of the scores for the five FIOH points, the score regarding the ergonomic quality of the workstation and that related to the need for changes to the workstation show significant differences between the two pain groups. Workers who reported pain in the seven days preceding the evaluation of their workstation assessed each of the five FIOH points significantly more severely (p < 0.05) although the expert's workstation assessment indicated no difference between the two groups. For example, workers who reported pain in the prior seven days assessed work site (FIOH 1) less favorably than did their colleagues who reported no pain. For the same topic, the expert's evaluation showed no difference between the two groups. The averages for workers who had reported pain “often” or “all the time” over a 12-month period differed significantly from those of workers with no pain and not significantly from the expert's for FIOH points 1, 2, and 3. In the case of workstations occupied by workers who had reported pain in one area of the body over the past 12 months “sometimes,” “often,” or “all the time” (Case 2), the expert perceived no difference for FIOH points 2 and 10 while the workers themselves assessed these points significantly differently than their colleagues. For Case 2, workers in the two groups also provided significantly different assessments of the ergonomic quality of their workstation and the need for changes, while the expert noticed no significant difference.

It is interesting to note that the expert assessed the workstations more negatively than the workers themselves on all five topics covered by the FIOH assessment. Generally, the expert saw a greater need for modification than did the workers and assessed a workstation's ergonomic quality as lower than the workers themselves did.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

While the goal of this study is not to compare the prevalence of musculoskeletal pain to that of a reference population, we have done so using certain criteria in order to better characterize the sample of workers with respect to reported pain. More than eight workers out of ten reported pain in at least one body region in the seven days preceding the data collection (Table 3). The workers reported more musculoskeletal disorder symptoms than the overall Quebec reference population (Daveluy et al., 2001). The significance of this result could not, however, be confirmed since we could not collect information for each of the 11 body regions to create comparable data. For the entire sample, it was only possible to identify whether pain had been reported for at least one body region. Workers declared between 9% and 36% less pain in a 12-month reference period (Case 1) compared to a 7-day period. The tree nursery sector reported the greatest difference (35.9%) between the two periods. The seasonal character of the work in the tree-nursery sector can partly explain this result. With most production occurring between May and October, it is plausible that most symptoms disappear during the off season (November to April).

In spite of the fact that tree nurseries are the sector in which workers declared the least pain for the entire body over a 12-month period, tree nursery workers nonetheless reported more upper-limb pain (27.3%) than the reference population (20.6%) (Table 2). Workers in the two other sectors also reported significantly more pain in the upper limbs. Subjects from the appliances sector had a significantly higher prevalence of back pain than the reference population. These results can be explained by the fact that the workers in the sample were probably more exposed to MSD risk factors than the general population since the nature of the work in all three sectors strains the upper limbs. In the appliances sector, a high proportion of workstations involved static postures that are held for long periods of time and working heights that are too low (Chiasson et al., 2012).

As other studies have demonstrated, women tend to have a higher prevalence of symptoms than men (Zetterberg et al., 1997). However, despite the greater proportion of female study participants in the tree nurseries, the pain reported for the 12-month period was not significantly different from that observed in the two other sectors when compared to the reference population.


                        Landen and Hendricks (1995) found that recall errors can skew retrospective pain-report findings when the reference period is too long. An underestimation of the pain experienced during the 12-month period might therefore be a possibility. In other words, a larger proportion of workers could actually have experienced pain in the 12 months prior to the data collection. However, for a shorter reference period, such as the pain reported for the previous seven days, there is a reduced possibility for memory bias.

According to the expert's assessment, the workstations all presented risks, with the average FIOH scores indicating a moderate to high risk of developing MSDs. The sample of workstations assessed produced an average score that varied in percentage from 46.2 to 94%. Work postures and movements received an average score above 90% in all the comparisons. The workstations examined for this study thus presented significant MSD risk factors.

While the scores of the workers from the two groups (pain and no-pain) varied between 40% and 83.3%, the expert rated them 2–35% higher, depending on the FIOH topic being assessed. This finding clearly illustrates that the expert did not come to the same conclusions as the workers regarding risks at the workstations and assessed them more severely, on average.

The workers who had reported pain in the seven days prior to the workstation assessment evaluated their workstation more negatively. The scores of the no-pain worker group were on average 7–11% lower than those of the worker group who reported pain. The five mechanical-risk-factor related FIOH topics assessed in this study (work site, general physical activity, lifting, work posture and movements, repetitiveness) received significantly higher scores by workers who reported pain. This negative perception appears to be unrelated to the task and its components since the expert's assessment did not find any significant difference between the workstations of the two groups of workers.

With respect to the pain reported in the last 12 months (Cases 1 and 2), average scores were also all higher for the group of workers reporting pain. However, the less significant results might be explained by a reference period that is too long, and work characteristics unique to the tree nursery sector (i.e. seasonal work). Our findings show that the impact of pain reported close to the time the worker is questioned about his/her workstation (i.e., 7 days) seems to make a more significant difference.

The results presented for the 12-month period Case 2 (“sometimes, often, all the time”) are probably less reliable. Over 90% of workers in the three sectors reported some pain in this case, leaving few subjects who reported no pain. This large imbalance between the two groups of workers for Case 2, could have caused difficulties with the statistical test although according to the JMP software, the minimum 8.02% of subjects in the no-pain group across all sectors required to detect a statistical difference between the groups was exceeded. For the 12-month Case 1 and pain in the last 7 days the statistical tests were more robust since a substantial part of the sample fell in the no-pain group (i.e., 12-months Case 1: 47% in the no-pain group; 7 days: 19% in the no-pain group) (Table 3).


                           Donders et al. (2007) explain their findings by noting that people suffering from pain or chronic disease perceive their job as more difficult because they feel more vulnerable. Hays et al. (1996) suggest that workers may experience a heavier workload because pain or health problems lead them to perceive it as greater. In other words, the subjects in our study could have assessed their workstation more severely because they think their pain is due to poor workstation design or because their pain makes it harder for them to occupy their workstation. On the other hand, our finding is in contradiction with those of Toomingas et al. (1997) who found no support for a bias in rating behavior among subjects who experience pain and others symptoms.

For all the comparisons made using VAS scores (i.e. ergonomic quality and the need for changes), the results show a statistically significant difference between workers reporting musculoskeletal pain and those reporting no pain for the 12-month and 7-day periods.

Unlike the results obtained with the FIOH method, in this instance the expert noted a significant difference in the ergonomic quality of the workstations occupied by workers reporting pain and those workers who reported no pain in the last 12-month Case 1 and in the past 7 days. While this result is harder to explain, it may be that the expert's subjective assessment of the workstation takes into account factors not considered by the FIOH method's topics used here.

In contrast to a workstation's ergonomic quality, the need for changes may be easier to assess on a VAS. Workers who are in pain may have already thought of possible changes to their workstation to reduce the workload. In other words, if the worker believes that their pain is related to a poorly designed workstation, they would regard workstation modifications as essential to reducing pain. Since the expert's assessment on the need for changes to the workstation did not show any significant difference with respect to the reporting of pain in a 7-day period (i.e., pain group vs no pain group), these findings suggest that the perceived need for changes may be related more to the worker's perception and less to an actual need for changes to the workstation.

Finally, it is also plausible to hypothesize that the workers had been influenced by their interview with the expert when they answered these two questions. The FIOH method was administered before the assessment of ergonomic quality and need for changes. Workers from both groups could therefore have been influenced one way or another since their knowledge of ergonomics increased as the interview progressed.

Although the study shows that an experience of musculoskeletal pain can negatively affect the worker's perception of a workstation, workers' opinions remain necessary to provide a better understanding of the work situation. Although this information is subjective, it helps to collect data that is otherwise difficult to obtain through workstation observation alone (Chiasson et al., 2012). The process of administering the FIOH also helps provide a basis for discussing workstation strengths and weaknesses with workers. For example, the poor quality of a hand coupling on a load being handled at work is a good example of the type of information that can be obtained when collecting the worker's perception of the effort required to perform a task. It is the type of information needed when planning an ergonomic intervention to improve a workstation. Since no single method seems perfect for assessing risk (Burdorf and van der Beek, 1999), an approach that combines several methods would seem preferable (Chiasson et al., 2012; Stock et al., 2005). However, the findings highlight the importance of considering the opinions of more than one worker when a method that takes into account the worker's perception is used to determine the risk level of a workstation.

The manner of administering the questionnaires may have influenced the workers' responses regarding the assessment of their workstations. It also would have been beneficial to have even more workstations with multiple workers. The tree nursery sector provided this option for the majority of its workstations in the sample, but the number of workers able to answer questions about the same workstation in the two other sectors studied was more limited. Further studies should be conducted with a larger sample of workstations and workers. The sample should be comprised of workstations considered of concern for MSDs as well as lower-risk workstations.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study measured the impact of pain on workers' assessment of their workstation. The findings show that workers reporting pain assessed their workstations more negatively with respect to certain aspects related to ergonomic risk factors as measured by the FIOH Ergonomic Workplace Analysis method, developed for practitioners. More specifically, workers who reported pain in the seven days preceding the workstation assessment assigned significantly higher scores for MSD-related mechanical risk factors than workers who reported no pain. Those reporting pain also perceived their workstation to be of lower ergonomic quality and indicated a greater need for its improvement. The expert's ratings were systematically more severe than those of the workers on the same topics. Finally, it is interesting to note that the expert's overall assessment of a workstation's ergonomic quality seemed to take into account aspects that were not reflected in the five FIOH method topics used. These results highlight the importance of having the practitioner collect assessments from more than one worker when possible for each workstation being analyzed and check whether these respondents have reported pain in the preceding seven days. The findings also indicate that from an MSD prevention point of view, an ergonomics expert assessment may be more suitable to detect at risk workstations.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors wish to thank Bruno Farbos, Catherine Simms and Catherine Piette for the field work and data preparation.

This project was funded jointly by Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through the Chaire de recherche du Canada en ergonomie of Polytechnique Montréal and the Institut de recherche Robert-Sauvé en santé et en sécurité du travail du Québec (IRSST).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

