@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Feedback has a positive effect on cognitive function during total sleep deprivation if there is sufficient time for it to be effectively processed

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined performance on the psychomotor vigilance task—a serial simple reaction time test—during 28 h of sustained wake.


                        
                        
                           
                           The provision of feedback and the length of the inter-stimulus interval (ISI) interacted to affect performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Feedback after each response resulted in better performance when the ISI ranged from 2–10 s.


                        
                        
                           
                           Feedback after each response did not affect performance when the ISI ranged from 1–5 s.


                        
                        
                           
                           When the ISI is long, it is possible that feedback provides motivation.


                        
                        
                           
                           When the ISI is short, it is likely that there is not time to both attend to feedback and prepare for the next stimulus.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Fatigue

Sustained wake

Psychomotor vigilance task

Inter-stimulus interval

Response time

Lapse

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study examined whether the provision of feedback and the interval between successive stimuli interact to affect performance on a serial simple reaction time test during sleep deprivation. Sixteen participants (9 female, 7 male, aged 18–27 yr) completed four versions of the 5-min psychomotor vigilance task for a handheld personal digital assistant (PalmPVT) every 2 h during 28 h of sustained wakefulness. The four versions differed in terms of whether or not they provided feedback immediately after each response, and whether the inter-stimulus intervals (ISIs) were long (2–10 s) or short (1–5 s). Cognitive function was assessed using reciprocal response time and percentage of responses that were lapses (i.e., had a response time ≥ 500 ms). Data were analysed using repeated measures ANOVA with three within-subjects factors: test session, feedback, and ISI. For both measures, the only significant interaction was between feedback and ISI. Cognitive function was enhanced by feedback when the ISIs were long because it provided motivation. Cognitive function was not affected by feedback when the ISIs were short because there was insufficient time to both attend to the feedback and prepare for the subsequent stimulus.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the 1970s, Wilkinson (1975) argued the need for portable devices that could be used to assess the impact of stressors, such as sleep loss and circadian disruption, on basic cognitive function. In an early version of one such device, Wilkinson and Haughton (1982) built a serial simple reaction time test with a visual stimulus into a battery-powered cassette tape recorder, and a few years later, Dinges and Powell (1985) developed software for this device to simplify the process of generating performance metrics. This reaction time test, which has become known as the psychomotor vigilance task (PVT), has been shown to be sensitive to total sleep deprivation (Doran et al., 2001; Jewett et al., 1999), partial sleep restriction (Belenky et al., 2003; Van Dongen et al., 2003), and circadian misalignment (Wyatt et al., 1999; Zhou et al., 2011).

The PVT is commonly used to assess sustained attention in laboratory studies (Lim and Dinges, 2008). However, the standard handheld version (PVT-192; Ambulatory Monitoring Inc., Ardsley, NY) has a 10-min duration, which makes it impractical for use in workplace studies in industries in which free time during shifts is scarce, such as long-haul transportation, natural resource extraction, and primary health care. In response, 3- and 5-min versions of the PVT that operate on the standard handheld hardware have been developed and validated (Basner et al., 2011; Basner and Rubinstein, 2011; Loh et al., 2004; Roach et al., 2006). In addition, a 5-min version of the PVT that operates on a handheld personal digital assistant (PalmPVT; Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD) has also been developed and validated (Lamond et al., 2005, 2008; Thorne et al., 2005). The 5-min version of the standard PVT has been used in some workplace studies (e.g., Baulk et al., 2007, 2009), but the PalmPVT has been favoured in most cases (e.g., Ferguson et al., 2011; Gander et al., 2013; Lamond et al., 2006; Petrilli et al., 2006; Roach et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2007), probably because the hardware on which it operates is smaller, lighter and less expensive than the standard PVT's hardware.

The PalmPVT can be configured to provide feedback immediately after each stimulus presentation or not, and to have a longer or shorter interval between successive stimulus presentations (i.e., inter-stimulus interval). There is some evidence that performance on cognitive tasks is enhanced by feedback (Eckner et al., 2011; Wilkinson, 1961, 1963), and impaired if the inter-stimulus interval is too long or too short (Los et al., 2001), but the relationship between these two factors has not previously been considered. It is critical to determine whether or not these factors interact to influence cognitive function, because there are important implications for theory, such as an improved understanding of the nature of motivation, distraction, and preparedness; and for practice, such as the determination of a preferred configuration of the PalmPVT for use in workplace settings. Consequently, the aim of this study was to examine the interactive effects of feedback and inter-stimulus interval on cognitive function when participants are fatigued.

@&#METHOD@&#

Sixteen volunteers (9 female, 7 male), aged 18–27 yr, with good mental and physical health, and normal habitual sleep/wake patterns (i.e., 7–9 h in bed each night), participated in the study. With the exception of female participants who were taking birth control medication, participants were medication-free. Participants had not undertaken shiftwork or transmeridian flight in the month prior to the study. Prior to volunteering for the study, participants were informed about its nature and purpose by reading an information sheet and asking questions of the researchers. All participants signed a written consent form before beginning the study and received a nominal payment after completing the study.

Cognitive function was assessed using the psychomotor vigilance task for a personal digital assistant (PalmPVT; Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD), administered using a Zire71 Handheld (PalmOne Inc., Milpitas, CA). To complete the task, participants attend to a liquid crystal display screen for the duration of the test – set at 5 min for the current study. During the task, successive visual stimuli in the form of a bullseye are presented on the screen at variable intervals (for an image of the device and stimulus, see Thorne et al., 2005). Participants respond to each presentation of the stimulus as quickly as possible by pressing a response key with their dominant thumb. Four versions of the PalmPVT were used in the current study (see details below).

In addition to the duration of the task, there are two major aspects of the PalmPVT's configuration that can be manipulated: (i) Provision of feedback – After each response, i.e., during the foreperiod for the subsequent stimulus presentation, the PalmPVT screen can either display the response time in hundredths of a second (i.e., with feedback) or it can display nothing (i.e., without feedback). In the current study, for the two versions of the PalmPVT that provided post-response feedback, it was displayed immediately after each response for a period of 0.25 s (ii) Inter-stimulus interval – The minimum and maximum intervals between a response and the subsequent stimulus presentation can be varied in the PalmPVT. In the current study, the two most common inter-stimulus interval ranges were used (Thorne et al., 2005). Two of the versions of the PalmPVT had ‘long’ inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., ranging from 2 to 10 s, in 2-s increments, with a mean of 6 s), and two versions had ‘short’ inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., ranging from 1 to 5 s, in 1-s increments, with a mean of 3 s).

The four versions of the PalmPVT used in the current study differed in terms of whether or not they provided post-response feedback, and in the range of the inter-stimulus interval:
                           
                              •
                              version A: long inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., 2–10 s) with post-response feedback,

version B: long inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., 2–10 s) without post-response feedback,

version C: short inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., 1–5 s) with post-response feedback,

version D: short inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., 1–5 s) without post-response feedback.

Post-task feedback, i.e., a summary of overall performance presented at the completion of a task, was not provided for any of the four versions of the PalmPVT.

Performance on all four versions of the PalmPVT was measured using two variables: (i) reciprocal response time – mean of the reciprocal response times for each stimulus presentation, and (ii) percentage of lapses – number of responses with a response time ≥ 500 ms, divided by the total number of stimulus presentations, multiplied by 100 (Lamond et al., 2005; Loh et al., 2004). A lower reciprocal response time and a higher percentage of lapses indicate poorer performance.

At least ten outcome metrics are commonly reported for the 10-min version of the standard PVT, but reciprocal response time and percentage of lapses were used in the current study because measures of response speed and frequency of lapses are the most sensitive to fatigue (Basner and Dinges, 2011). Percentage of lapses was used instead of number of lapses, even though the latter is more common (Basner and Dinges, 2011), to correct for differences in the total number of stimulus presentations. Versions of the 5-min PalmPVT with short inter-stimulus intervals (mean of 3 s) have approximately twice as many stimulus presentations, and thus twice as many opportunities to lapse, as versions of the 5-min PalmPVT with long inter-stimulus intervals (mean of 6 s).


                        Participants spent two consecutive nights in a sleep laboratory; the first was a preparatory night, and the second was a night of total sleep deprivation. On the preparatory night, participants arrived at the laboratory at 19:00 h. Prior to bedtime, participants were inducted into the study, had dinner, and completed four preliminary trials of the 5-min PalmPVT (and one preliminary trial of the 10-min standard PVT). These trials were conducted to familiarise participants with the apparatus and procedures, make them aware of the four versions of the PalmPVT, and extinguish any practice effects. Participants then went to bed for 9 h from 23:00 to 08:00 h. After rising, participants ate breakfast and showered prior to beginning the first test session at 09:00 h. Subsequently, performance was assessed every 2 h until 11:00 h the following day. Ultimately, participants completed 14 test sessions during 28 h of sustained wakefulness – from waking at 08:00 h on day 2, to completing the last 1-h test session at 12:00 h on day 3.

During each 1-h test session, participants performed all four versions of the 5-min PalmPVT, and one version of the 10-min standard PVT, at 12-min intervals, with the order counterbalanced, albeit imperfectly (see Section 3.4). Data from the 10-min standard PVT are not reported here, but a comparison of data from version A of the 5-min PalmPVT and the 10-min standard PVT has been reported previously (Lamond et al., 2005). Prior to beginning each PVT within a test session, participants were advised which version they were about to perform, and they were instructed to respond to each presentation of the stimulus as quickly as possible. Participants were kept free from distraction during test sessions by being seated alone in a quiet room in front of a blank wall.

Participants had free time every second hour between test sessions. During free time, participants were required to remain in the laboratory where they participated in activities such as reading, studying, listening to music, watching television or DVDs, and playing computer games. Throughout the study, participants were not permitted to consume caffeine, to smoke, to exercise, or to nap. To ensure that participants did not nap, they were not allowed to lie down or to have their eyes closed when sitting down. Participants were continuously monitored in person by a researcher to ensure that they complied with the protocol. If participants attempted any of the disallowed behaviours, they were asked to desist by a researcher.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Performance on the PalmPVT was assessed using reciprocal response time and percentage of lapses. Data were analysed using repeated measures ANOVA to test all main and interaction effects associated with three within-subjects factors: feedback (with, without), inter-stimulus interval (long, short), and test session (14 test sessions over 28 h). Post-hoc means comparisons were conducted to further examine significant interaction effects. For all analyses, p values were determined using Greenhouse-Geisser corrected degrees of freedom to reduce the likelihood of Type I errors due to potential violations of the assumption of sphericity. Four participants’ data for version B of the PalmPVT (long inter-stimulus intervals without feedback) were lost due to technical failure. Given that a repeated-measures design was employed, all data from these participants were excluded from the analyses. Prior to conducting the analyses, four missing values, from a total of 672 data points, were replaced by the group mean for the relevant version of the PalmPVT and test session.

There was a main effect of test session, F(3.93,43.19) = 29.03, p < .0001, such that reciprocal response time decreased (i.e., performance declined) throughout most of the 28-h period of sustained wakefulness before increasing at the end (Fig. 2
                        ). There were no main effects of feedback, F(1,11) = 2.52, p = .141, or inter-stimulus interval, F(1,11) = 0.03, p = .867, but there was an interaction between these two independent variables, F(1,11) = 18.18, p = .001 (Fig. 3
                        ). Post-hoc means comparisons related to this interaction revealed that (i) when the inter-stimulus intervals were long, reciprocal response time was greater (i.e., performance was better) when the PalmPVT provided feedback than when it did not, F(1) = 41.29, p < .0001, and (ii) when the inter-stimulus intervals were short, whether or not the PalmPVT provided feedback did not affect reciprocal response time, F(1) = 0.16, p = .699. There were no interactions between feedback and test session, F(5.63,61.92) = 1.46, p = .210, between inter-stimulus interval and test session, F(5.03,55.34) = 0.50, p = .775, or between feedback, inter-stimulus interval and test session, F(5.88,64.64) = 0.81, p = .564.

There was a main effect of test session, F(3.29,36.18) = 24.03, p < .0001, such that percentage of lapses increased (i.e., performance declined) throughout most of the 28-h period of sustained wakefulness before decreasing at the end (Fig. 4
                        ). There were no main effects of feedback, F(1,11) = 0.78, p = .397, or inter-stimulus interval, F(1,11) = 0.00, p = .961, but there was an interaction between these two independent variables, F(1,11) = 17.89, p = .001 (Fig. 5
                        ). Post-hoc means comparisons related to this interaction revealed that (i) when the inter-stimulus intervals were long, percentage of lapses was lower (i.e., performance was better) when the PalmPVT provided feedback than when it did not, F(1) = 16.50, p = .002, and (ii) when the inter-stimulus intervals were short, whether or not the PalmPVT provided feedback did not affect percentage of lapses, F(1) = 3.68, p = .081. There were no interactions between feedback and test session, F(4.62,50.77) = 0.87, p = .501, between inter-stimulus interval and test session, F(3.26,35.89) = 0.94, p = .440, or between feedback, inter-stimulus interval and test session, F(4.20,46.19) = 1.44, p = .236.

Presentation of the four versions of the 5-min PalmPVT and one version of the 10-min standard PVT could not be perfectly counterbalanced for each test session given that there were 120 possible order combinations but only 16 participants. Consequently, mixed-model regression analyses were conducted to examine whether the order in which the PalmPVTs were presented within a test session affected the interaction between feedback and inter-stimulus interval for either dependent variable. Each model included order, feedback, inter-stimulus interval and test session as factors, and participant as a random effect. For reciprocal response time, there was a main effect of order such that responses slowed as the test session progressed, F(4,548) = 2.73, p = .029, but there was no interaction between order, feedback and inter-stimulus interval, F(4,548) = 0.44, p = .781. For percentage of lapses, there was a main effect of order such that lapsing increased as the test session progressed, F(4,548) = 3.17, p = .014, but there was no interaction between order, feedback and inter-stimulus interval, F(4,548) = 0.23, p = .924.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The main aim of this study was to examine the effects of feedback and inter-stimulus interval on cognitive function when participants were fatigued. To induce the effects of fatigue, participants remained awake for 28 h from 08:00 h on one day, until 12:00 h on the next. Numerous studies have shown that one night of sleep deprivation, such as this, substantially impairs cognitive function due to the effects of sleep loss, sustained wakefulness, and time of day (Dawson and Reid, 1997; Donnell, 1969; McCarthy and Waters, 1997; Wilkinson, 1961, 1963). Indeed, performance on the PalmPVT declined throughout the current study, which indicates that the protocol induced the effects of fatigue as planned.

Performance on the PalmPVT was not affected by whether or not participants received feedback after responding to each stimulus presentation. This was an unexpected result because feedback, or knowledge of results, has previously been shown to enhance performance when participants are sleep deprived (Steyvers and Gailliard, 1993; Wilkinson, 1961). However, the current study differed from these previous two studies in terms of the complexity and length of the task that was used to assess cognitive function. While the current study used serial simple reaction time tasks of 5-min duration, these previous two studies used serial choice reaction time tasks of 30-min duration. An additional point of difference is that individuals’ scores were published for all participants to see throughout the Wilkinson study, whereas that did not occur in the current study. Taken together, the results of these three studies indicate that feedback is most likely to enhance performance under conditions of sleep deprivation when the task being performed is relatively complex or lengthy and/or when feedback is provided in a way that may create competition between participants.

There is good evidence to suggest that the length of the inter-stimulus interval affects performance on serial reaction time tasks similar to the PalmPVT (for review, see Niemi and Näätänen, 1981). In particular, response time is related to a respondent's state of preparedness: if the inter-stimulus interval is too long or too short, then preparedness and subsequent response time tend to be sub-optimal (Los et al., 2001). In the current study, there was no difference in performance between versions of the PalmPVT with long inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., 2–10 s) and short inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., 1–5 s). This indicates that both of these ranges for inter-stimulus interval are within the optimal zone for this particular task.

Feedback and inter-stimulus interval did not independently affect performance on the PalmPVT, but performance was substantially affected by the interaction of these two factors. The interaction was such that when the inter-stimulus intervals were long, reciprocal response time and percentage of lapses were both better when feedback was provided than when it was not. In contrast, when the inter-stimulus intervals were short, feedback had no impact on either of the two performance measures. These effects can be interpreted in terms of motivation and preparedness (see Eckner et al., 2011; Los et al., 2001; Wilkinson, 1961, 1963). When the inter-stimulus interval is long, respondents have sufficient time to process feedback and prepare for the subsequent stimulus. The result is that feedback enhances performance, probably due to increased activation as a result of motivation. On the other hand, when the inter-stimulus interval is short, respondents do not have sufficient time to both process the feedback and prepare for the subsequent stimulus. Depending on the strategy employed, the potentially motivating effects of feedback are missed because the feedback is not attended to, or an optimal level of preparedness is not achieved due to distraction by the feedback, or both. In any case, the result is that feedback has no effect on performance.

The PVT provides such a well-accepted assay of fatigue that it has been recommended as a benchmark against which to validate other fatigue-detection devices (Dawson et al., 2014). In workplace settings, the PVT is commonly used as a research tool to assess the impact of non-standard work schedules on employees’ fatigue levels in industries such as long-haul transportation (e.g., Petrilli et al., 2006), natural resource extraction (e.g., Ferguson et al., 2011), and primary health care (e.g., Smith et al., 2007). The PVT also has the potential to be used as a fitness-for-duty test in safety-critical workplaces at the beginning of, and/or at particular points throughout, a work period. The basic premise of fitness-for-duty testing is that if performance on the test in question is below an established threshold, then the employee is considered unfit to start/continue work. The PVT is not currently suited to such an application because thresholds for its main metrics (i.e., response speed and frequency of lapses) have not yet been established such that safety-related outcomes (i.e., errors, incidents and accidents) can be predicted with an acceptable level of sensitivity and specificity (Dawson et al., 2014).

The 10-min standard PVT is hard-wired to provide feedback after each response, and in laboratory studies, it is typically configured to have inter-stimulus intervals of 2–10 s (Belenky et al., 2003; Zhou et al., 2012). An important question facing those wishing to use the 5-min PalmPVT in workplace settings, either as a research tool, or as a fitness-for-duty test when appropriate thresholds for its main metrics have been established, is: how should the device be configured in terms of the provision of feedback and the range of the inter-stimulus interval, given that the current data indicate that these two factors interact to affect cognitive function? The answer to this question depends on the purpose for which the 5-min PalmPVT is being used. Data from the current study indicate that if the PalmPVT is used as a fitness-for-duty test, such that maximising its sensitivity to fatigue is a primary concern, then it would be best to have long inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., 2–10 s) and not provide post-response feedback (see Figs. 3 and 5). On the other hand, if the PalmPVT is used as a research tool, such that maximising comparability with results from laboratory-based studies that use the 10-min standard PVT is a primary concern, then it would be best to have long inter-stimulus intervals (i.e., 2–10 s) and provide post-response feedback.

The 5-min PalmPVT has been developed primarily for use in workplace settings. However, all of the PalmPVT validation studies, including this one, have been conducted in well-controlled laboratory settings (Lamond et al., 2005, 2008; Thorne et al., 2005). In all of these studies, participants were closely supervised and they performed the PalmPVT in a room with minimal aural and visual distractions. In contrast, when the PalmPVT is performed in the field, participants are generally not supervised and potential distractions are less well controlled. It seems likely that the level of distraction associated with the test environment may interact with the effects of feedback and inter-stimulus interval to affect performance on the PalmPVT. To examine this issue, future validation studies could better approximate field-based environments by including a distraction condition.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support for this project provided by the Australian Research Council.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

