@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#New technical design of food packaging makes the opening process easier for patients with hand disorders

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           It is possible for manufacturers today to produce easy-to-open food packaging.


                        
                        
                           
                           Opening of easy-to-open food packages increases the consumer satisfaction.


                        
                        
                           
                           Food packages of the future are a benefit for the entire population.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Food packaging

Activities of daily living

Consumer satisfaction

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Opening packaged food is a complex daily activity carried out worldwide. Peelable packaging, as used for cheese or meat, causes real problems for many consumers, especially elderly people and those with hand disorders.
                  Our aim was to investigate the possibility of producing meat packaging that is easier for patients with hand disorders to open. One hundred patients with hand osteoarthritis were asked to open a meat package currently available in supermarkets (Type A) and a modified, newly designed version (Type B), and rate their experiences with a consumer satisfaction index (CSI).
                  The mean CSI of the Type B packs was 68.9%, compared with 41.9% for Type A (p < 0.0001). These results show that manufacturers today can produce easy-to-open food packages that afford greater consumer satisfaction. Such future packaging would benefit not only people with hand disorders but also the population as a whole.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Opening food packaging is a daily activity carried out worldwide. It is a complex task with many interacting parameters. The process is often associated with difficulties or even an inability to open the packaging. Opening peelable packaging, such as is used for cheese or meat, causes real problems for many consumers, especially elderly people and those with hand disorders (Heiniö et al., 2008; Rowson and Yoxall, 2011). Previous studies have demonstrated that 40% of people aged between 62 and 82 years, and up to 78% of patients with hand disorders, have difficulties opening peelable packaging or are simply unable to do so (Dittrich and Spanner-Ulmer, 2010; Marks et al., 2012). In Switzerland, about 15% of the population suffers from hand or upper limb complaints, conditions which increase with age (Krieger and Graf, 2011). In the coming years, demographic aging will increase in both Switzerland and other western countries. The number of hand conditions and difficulties opening packaging will rise accordingly and aspects of strength and dexterity will become increasingly important. Packaging of the future should therefore be developed according to the needs of the consumers (Duizer et al., 2009; Yoxall et al., 2013).

The main reasons for the problems are the high forces required to open packaging, tear tabs that are too small, and the poor visibility of the opening mechanisms (Dittrich and Spanner-Ulmer, 2010). Werle et al. (2009) evaluated grip strength and showed that it decreased with age even in the healthy population. Marks et al. (2012) quantified the problems that patients with hand disorders experience when opening food containers. Patients found glass jars to be the most difficult containers to open, followed by peelable packaging such as is used for meat or cheese. The authors also measured the forces that patients were able to apply on various tear tabs of the type attached to standard meat packaging in Europe. The main findings showed that 1) the longer the tab, the more force patients could apply, and 2) patients were able to apply no more than 53% of the force exerted by healthy people. Based on these results and the findings of the Fraunhofer Application Center for Processing Machinery and Packaging Technology (Dresden, Germany; Fraunhofer AVV) (Schreib and Liebmann, 2011), Bell AG (Switzerland) modified and redesigned its meat packaging with a view to improving the parameters causing problems. Although the modified meat packages are continually tested and checked technically, it is not yet known whether patients can actually open them easily.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the possibility of producing easy-to-open meat packaging that affords high consumer satisfaction in patients with osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis affecting the hands. We also evaluated whether patients were significantly more satisfied with the modified peelable packaging (Type B) than with the packages currently available in supermarkets (Type A).

A peelable package is defined as a packaging system that consumers are able to open themselves without assistive devices. The opening process consists of holding the packaging firmly in one hand whilst using the other to pull on a tear tab in order to peel off the foil lid along the sealed seam. The design of an easy-to-open, consumer-friendly package must take into account not only packaging-related parameters but also consumer-related factors that affect the handling of peelable packaging. First, the principle behind opening the package must be recognized and understood. This depends partly on the visibility of the opening mechanism but also on the consumer's knowledge and capability. The process itself should be easy. The opening force therefore plays a very important role: it is influenced by the size and material of the tear tab, by the sealing parameters, and by the tear contour. Furthermore, the consumer's physical abilities, such as hand strength and grip, determine whether the package can be opened (Berns, 1981; Schreib and Liebmann, 2011). Two finger-tip sized notches, placed laterally in the bottom plastic foil, simplify the opening process by providing more space for the fingers and allowing consumers to use the key grip. With notches placed on both sides of the packaging, the key grip can be used by both right- and left-handers. Guidelines for the development of consumer-friendly packaging recommend that 95% of the healthy consumer population and 80% of people with hand disorders should be able to open the packaging (Berns, 1981; Marks et al., 2012; Schreib and Liebmann, 2011; Yoxall et al., 2006). For healthy female consumers between 61 and 80 years this threshold is 11N for a 14 mm long tear tab (Schreib and Liebmann, 2011). For patients with hand disorders an opening force not higher than 8N is recommended for this specific tab (Marks et al., 2012).

The Type A packages tested were characterized by the fact that a great deal of force was needed to open them, because they had been sealed so strongly. The space provided to hold the tear tab was too small, so that it was not possible to apply the key grip, and the plastic cover often ruptured during opening (Fig. 1
                        ).

In order to simplify the opening of their meat packaging, Bell AG modified their production process in cooperation with the Fraunhofer AVV. The adaptations, explained below, were based on the guidelines of Schreib and Liebmann (2011) and Marks et al. (2012), as well as on the technical know-how of Fraunhofer AVV. The main objective was to reduce the opening force required. The opening force depends on various criteria that must be considered for optimization. First, Bell AG replaced their sealing tools to give a sealing contour with a constant peel–line profile. This profile ensures an optimal distribution of force during opening and minimizes the risk of the plastic cover rupturing. Secondly, the force required to open a peelable package had to be within a defined range, as determined in a series of technical tests and based on the findings of the two consumer tests with healthy people and people with hand disorders, performed by Schreib and Liebmann (2011) and Marks et al. (2012), respectively. Bell AG obtained this optimal range by adjusting the parameters of temperature, pressure, and dwell time of the sealing process for each packaging machine, in such a way that the packages were easier to open while still ensuring that the contents remained safely wrapped. The sealing seam and its tear contour were also changed in order to provide an optimal and jerk-free force distribution during the opening process. A forward tear contour has a favorable effect on the peel–line profile. Thirdly, the size of the tear tab exceeded the threshold of 10 mm in length, providing as large a contact surface between the fingers and tab material as possible and allowing the use of the key grip to exert greater force (Fig. 2
                        ). Quality management procedures have been introduced to ensure that daily production complies with the new specifications. For example, the force required to open the packaging is tested periodically using a specifically designed device.

In a pilot study, we tested three types of the modified peelable meat packages produced using different sets of sealing parameters. Ten patients (six women, four men) with hand disorders and a mean age of 63 years were asked to open these packages. All the test packages looked exactly the same: size, content, cover, and laterally placed notch. The only differences were in the above-mentioned sealing parameters. The patients opened all packages in their usual way and without aids. The opening process was filmed with a video camera so that any difficulties with the packaging could be evaluated objectively. Each time they opened a package, the patients completed a questionnaire about their subjective difficulties in opening it, including the seal, tear tab size, tear tab palpability, visibility of the opening mechanism, force required, pain during the opening process, and problems with the fine motor skills. The patients also evaluated the laterally placed notch. Based on the results, we adapted the packaging and decided what technical configurations would be the best for the patients, bearing in mind that the contents always have to be packed safely.

In the next step, reported in the present paper, we carried out a larger study to determine whether patients were more satisfied with this technically modified packaging (Type B) than with the packages that were available in supermarkets at that time (Type A).

@&#METHODS@&#

Between October 2012 and January 2013, we enrolled consecutive patients with osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis of the hands, associated with pain or restrictions in daily living. Patients were excluded from the study if they had undergone surgery on the hands or fingers within the previous six weeks. All patients gave written informed consent.

One by one, the individual patients opened the packs after their medical consultations. Type A packages measured 240 × 200 mm with a depth of between 8 mm and 25 mm. Type B measured 230 × 200 mm and the depth varied between 8 mm and 40 mm. Before the test started, patients were informed that they should open the two meat packages in the usual way, although they would not be allowed to use assistive devices. Patients were not told that one package had been technically modified nor what the differences were. The order in which patients opened the packs was determined by a randomized sequence. At this stage, the words easy to open were not printed on the Type B packaging (Fig. 2), so patients were unable to distinguish the two packages from the presence of this logo. The same person conducted all the tests.

After opening the first package, patients completed a questionnaire. They filled out a similar questionnaire after opening the second package. The questionnaire included a consumer satisfaction index to measure satisfaction with the food containers. This index was adapted from a method applied in finance (Suchanek et al., 2010). It consists of two parts, including eleven questions answered on a six-point Likert scale. Part one determines patients' general expectations of a food container; in part two, patients rate their general satisfaction with the test product and satisfaction with individual product characteristics. The results give a satisfaction index between 0% and 100%. Higher values represent greater satisfaction. Subjective difficulties perceived during the opening process, such as the force required, tear tab size and palpability, were also recorded and graded on a scale of one (worst) to six (best value).

We measured key pinch strength with a pinch gauge (Allenspach Medical AG, Balsthal, Switzerland) in a standardized sitting position (Fess and Moran, 1981). To record any symptoms or dysfunction of the upper limb, patients completed the quick Disability of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (quickDASH) questionnaire, consisting of 11 items (Gummesson et al., 2006; Offenbacher et al., 2003). Its total score ranges from 0 to 100, with lower values indicating better function.

Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests and Q–Q plots confirmed the normal distribution of our data. Descriptive statistics with mean and standard deviation, as well as median and range, were used for analysis of the continuous variables. Using a t-test for dependent groups, we calculated the difference between the Type A and Type B packaging measured by the consumer satisfaction index and the various opening parameters. These results were also presented with 95% confidence intervals. For evaluating correlations between the consumer satisfaction index and opening parameters, as well as clinical outcomes, we applied Pearson's correlation coefficient. The relationship between hand strength and the ability to open a packaging was calculated using a logistic regression model. All analyses were done with SPSS 18.0. The level of significance was set at p ≤ 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

One hundred patients with functional limitations due to osteoarthritis/rheumatoid arthritis in the hands or fingers tried to open a total of 199 meat packages (Table 1
                     ). One patient opened only the Type B packaging, because of delivery issues with the Type A package. Patients were able to open 96% of the Type B packages and 81% of the Type A. Seventy-nine per cent preferred the Type B packaging, 12% the Type A, and 9% had no firm opinion (Table 2
                     ).

In our study, 93% of the patients rated the ease of opening packaging as important or very important. Only one patient thought it to be unimportant. In addition, 87% of the patients expected that packaging could be opened without aids and only a little force. Patients were significantly more satisfied with the technically modified Type B packaging than with the Type A (p < 0.0001). The mean consumer satisfaction index of the Type B packages was 68.9% (95% confidence interval (CI) 64.5–73.3) compared with 41.9% for the Type A (CI 36.5 to 47.3, Fig. 3
                        ). Regarding tear tab size and palpability, there were highly significant differences in favor of the Type B packages (p < 0.0001 for both, Fig. 4
                        ). Patients also said that they needed significantly less force to open Type B packaging (p < 0.0001), as expressed by higher ratings on the six-point Likert scale (Fig. 4).

We found a strong correlation between the consumer satisfaction index and the question “How easy was it to open the packaging – in general?” (rA = 0.88, pA < 0.0001; rB = 0.88, pB < 0.0001; Table 3
                        ). In addition, satisfaction with the tear tab size correlated well with the subjective force required (rA = 0.61, pA < 0.0001; rB = 0.58, pB < 0.0001).

The patients all had functional limitations, as shown by a median quickDASH score of 40.9 (range 4.5–81.8). There was a moderate correlation between the quickDASH total score and pain within the previous week (quickDASH question 9; r = 0.53, p < 0.0001), as well as between total score and difficulties in opening a tightly sealed jar (quickDASH question 1; r = 0.59, p < 0.0001). In the quickDASH questionnaire, our patients had the most difficulties with the activity “to open a tight or new jar” (quickDASH question 1).

In a logistic regression model, we found that the key pinch of the affected hand was a significant factor in determining whether the technically modified Type B packaging could be opened or not (R2 = 0.24, p = 0.047).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study showed that peelable meat packaging can be optimized and it is possible to produce easy-to-open food packages. Packages can be made easier for patients with functional limitations of the hand to open, as shown by the greater consumer satisfaction with the technically modified Type B packages.

The ease of opening peelable food containers is increasingly important, not only to consumers but also to producers wanting to satisfy their clients' needs and achieve high brand loyalty (Schreib and Liebmann, 2011). In the early 1980s, Berns (1981) identified opening food containers as an issue for healthy as well as for disabled people. He elaborated design criteria for easy-to-use packaging and made recommendations for the development of packaging according to consumer requirements. Our results confirm that the focus of packaging development must shift towards consumer needs and usability (Dittrich and Spanner-Ulmer, 2010; Duizer et al., 2009). Nevertheless, being easy-to-open is not equally important to all users, as can be seen from our results showing that 12% of the patients favored the package currently available in supermarkets. This result might be explained by the different designs and contents of the two packages, which are also important aspects in rating packaging (Duizer et al., 2009). Guidelines for packaging manufacturers recommend that 95% of the healthy consumer population should be able to handle the products effectively, and 80% of patients with hand disorders should be able to open the containers (Berns, 1981; Marks et al., 2012; Schreib and Liebmann, 2011; Yoxall et al., 2006). In the present study, more than 95% of the patients were able to open the technically modified Type B packages, which is considerably higher than the guidelines recommend. Type A packaging could also be opened by more than three-quarters of the patients, although subjectively it was rated worse than the Type B pack. One explanation for this high percentage may be that the patients tried to open the package for much longer under test conditions, when most of them would already have resorted to a knife or scissors at home. On the basis of these results, however, we can say that the adaptations in peelable meat packaging have been implemented successfully.

The main reasons for problems in opening packages are the large forces required, tear tabs that are too small, and the poor visibility of the opening mechanisms (Dittrich and Spanner-Ulmer, 2010; Marks et al., 2012). In our study, too, the factors listed above (force required, too small a tear tab) and, in addition, the poor palpability of the tear tab (i.e. poor separation of the upper and lower tab), reflect the difficulties experienced in the opening process and the decisive differences between the two packages tested. All these parameters show better results for the Type B packaging than for Type A packages. One reason for this is the laterally placed notch, which provides more space for the fingers and thus allows a better grip on the packaging. Patients can therefore use the key grip: greater surface contact between the fingers and the packaging material allows more force to be applied (Marks et al., 2012; Schreib and Liebmann, 2011). This notch also facilitates the separation of the lower and upper tab, which is especially helpful for patients with finger deformities and impaired sensation. The tear tab is larger, and the design of the improved tear contour allows better force distribution (Marks et al., 2012; Schreib and Liebmann, 2011). Furthermore, the correlation between tear tab size and subjective force required highlights the patients' perception of applying less force to a long tab than to a short one. This finding agrees with the results of previous studies (Dittrich and Spanner-Ulmer, 2010; Marks et al., 2012; Schreib and Liebmann, 2011). Our results emphasize that the technical optimization process has been successful.

For patients with carpometacarpal joint osteoarthritis, Rosengren and Brodin (2013) determined a median quickDASH score of 37.0, which is similar to our value. Problems with opening glass jars have been described in previous studies (Marks et al., 2012). Kozak et al. (2003) included glass jars in their analysis. The 155 Japanese people surveyed were very critical of this type of packaging, not least because of the strength they needed to open it.

In their study, Winder et al. (2002) found that more than 20% of healthy people were not strong enough to open flexible packaging. From our results, we can confirm that patients with stronger hands are more likely to be able to open peelable packaging.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The present study has a few limitations. First, our packaging supplier produced the test packages in the normal daily production runs, i.e. the meat was packed on different machines in different production batches, in order to reflect real-life conditions. As we were therefore unable to eliminate minor technical differences, the content and weight, as well as the depth of the package, could have varied slightly. Another shortcoming was that the covers of the two packages had slightly different designs. As the cover makes the first impression, it might have influenced the patients' overall evaluation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study is an example where ergonomics could be successfully included in the designing process of a product, making it more user-friendly. Our results provide evidence that patients with hand osteoarthritis are significantly more satisfied with the technically modified Type B meat packaging than with the type A package. Based on our results, Type B packaging has been introduced on the market, labeled with a special easy to open logo (Fig. 2). We have shown that it is possible for manufacturers today to produce easy-to-open food packages that afford greater consumer satisfaction. Such future packaging would benefit not only people with hand disorders but also the population as a whole.

All the authors received support from Coop, Switzerland, and Bell AG, Switzerland, for the submitted work. The source of funding did not influence the data analysis and interpretation.

The study was sponsored by Coop, Switzerland. Bell AG, Switzerland provided the packaging under investigation. The sponsors had no role in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data or in the process of publication.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

The authors thank Dr. Jörg Goldhahn and Dr. Beat Simmen for their scientific input, Andrea Liebmann, Ina Schreib and Roland Kiese from the Fraunhofer AVV, Dresden, Germany, in cooperation with Bell AG, Switzerland, for the technical implementation, and Dr. Meryl Clarke for assistance in preparing the manuscript. We are also grateful to Dr. Stephan Schindele, Dr. Sebastian Kluge, Dr. Lisa Reissner, and Dr. Silvia Kündig for their efforts in patient recruitment.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

