@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Development of a two-step touch method for website navigation on smartphones

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A two-step touch method for website navigation on smartphones has been developed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The new touch method was superior to the current touch method in error rate and satisfaction score.


                        
                        
                           
                           Superior method in touch time was subjected to change depending on the occurrence of touch error.


                        
                        
                           
                           The new touch method is recommended when hyperlinks are smaller than the size of finger contact area.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Mobile website navigation

Press and flick

Smartphone interaction

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The touch method for hyperlink selection in smartphones can often create usability problems because a hyperlink is universally smaller than a finger contact area as well as visually occluded by a finger while pressing. In this study, we developed a two-step touch method (called Press and Flick method) and comprehensively examined its effectiveness using the goals, operators, methods, and selection rules (GOMS) model and user testing. The two-step touch method consisted of finger press and flick motions; a target hyperlink was selected by a finger press motion, and a finger flick method was subsequently conducted for error correction if the initial interaction (press) failed. We compared the two-step touch method with the current touch method through the GOMS model and user testing. As a result, the two-step touch method was significantly superior to the current touch method in terms of error rate and subjective satisfaction score; however, its superiority in terms of number of interactions and touch time was vulnerably affected by error rate. The two-step touch method developed in this study can improve the usability and user experience of website navigation using smartphones.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Use of the internet through smartphones has become more common in modern times. The proportion of smartphone users has approximately reached 50% of total mobile phone users; it continues to increase even now (Wikipedia, 2013a; Korea Communications Commission, 2013). Also, 77% of smartphone users access the internet every day, and 51% prefer to use the internet through a smartphone instead of a personal computer (Korea Internet and Security Agency, 2011). Thus, using the internet through mobile phones may be considered a part of daily life among smartphone users (Ericsson, 2011).

Three interaction methods using a finger are commonly employed for website navigation through smartphones (Wikipedia, 2013b; Negulescu et al., 2012). The Touch method uses a finger to press a hyperlink displayed on a touch-screen. The Swipe method moves a website along with the trace of a finger swiping motion. Lastly, in the Pinch method, the thumb and index fingers are typically used in order to zoom in (pinch open) or out (pinch closed) on a website. Thus, these three interaction methods are strongly tied up with advance of usability and user experience design for smartphones (Jung and Jang, 2013).

However, many researchers argue that the touch method may likely impede a smartphone's usability for website navigation, due to the small size of a hyperlink and lack of an immediate error correction process. On average, the hyperlinks are too small to touch, so they are easily occluded by a finger (Vogel and Baudisch, 2007). Also, the finger contact location is not informed specifically before pressing the touch-screen (Albinsson and Zhai, 2003; Benko et al., 2006). Thus, after touch errors, a user must return to the original website without any given intervention for error correction and perform the touch motions repetitively in order to select the intended hyperlink. In order to avoid these inconveniences, a user must pay more attention to perform the precise interaction, which may result in mental stress.

To improve the usability of the touch method, many researchers have introduced new interaction methods employing a cursor. Bubble Cursor (Grossman and Balakrishnan, 2005) formed a circle encompassing a finger contact point and helped a user choose one target close to the centroid of the circle. Take-off Cursor (Potter et al., 1988) provided a crosshair cursor above a finger contact point and allowed a user to select a target by moving the cursor. Lastly, Shift Cursor (Vogel and Baudisch, 2007) placed a copied image of the screen occluded by a finger above a finger contact point and allowed a user to select a target by moving a cursor on the copied image.

The abovementioned interaction methods have pros and cons in terms of touch accuracy and time. Bubble Cursor improves touch speed by reducing a user's mental load from a precise interaction; however, it may unintentionally activate the object near the target. Take-off Cursor and Shift Cursor greatly improve touch accuracy; however, the touch time increases dramatically because they require a subsequent task to locate a cursor to a target (Vogel and Baudisch, 2007).

The GOMS model and user testing can be applied simultaneously for the comprehensive evaluation of a mobile interaction method. The GOMS model can qualitatively analyze the characteristics (e.g., action sequence) of user interaction as well as quantitatively predict the execution time for each operator (Rose and Bearman, 2014; Kim and Myung, 2013; Hamilton and Clarke, 2005; Chi et al., 2000; Chi and Chung, 1996). Despite its strengths, learning effect, error rate, or subjective response cannot be analyzed through the GOMS model (Hochstein, 2002; Olson and Olson, 1990). On the other hand, user testing is popularly used to measure task completion time, error rate, and subjective responses by an experiment (Jung, 2014; Wu et al., 2014; Bergstrom et al., 2013). However, user testing cannot determine the analytical characteristics or execution time for a unit interaction (e.g., mental act) which are helpful for understanding the nature of interaction. Therefore, a combination of the GOMS model and user testing can create synergy, and be useful for evaluating comprehensive aspects of an interaction method.

In this study, we developed a two-step touch method for smartphone website navigation, and examined its performance based on the combination of GOMS model and user testing. The new touch method was developed by analyzing users' website navigation behaviors while using smartphones. The new touch method consisted of two sequential interactions of Press and Flick: 1) a target hyperlink was selected by a finger press motion, and 2) a finger flick motion was subsequently conducted for error correction if necessary. We comprehensively examined the effectiveness of the new touch method through the GOMS model and user testing, and compared it with the current touch method.

A two-step touch method was developed according to the following three steps: 1) observation of user behaviors, 2) characteristic analysis of user behaviors, and 3) design of a new touch method. In the first step, we observed user behaviors while navigating mobile websites for 10 min with their own smartphones. Ten college students (female: 5 and male: 5) participated in this step, and their mean age was 23 years (SD: 2).

In the second step, three characteristics of the current touch method were determined based on the visual observation in the first step. First, the number of touch errors increased as the size of a target hyperlink shrank. Secondly, a touch time elongated as the size of a target hyperlink shrank, since a small hyperlink required more precise interactions. Thirdly, most of the touch errors occurred due to touching a neighboring hyperlink of the target.

In the third step, we designed a press and flick method (hereafter, PF) in order to reduce 1) the touch error and 2) the mental load resulted from a small hyperlink. The PF consisted of the two interactions, press and flick (Fig. 1
                     ). In the initial interaction, a user pressed a target hyperlink with a finger. If the user accurately selected the target, then they would release his/her finger; otherwise, the user flicked his/her finger toward the target to reselect. Therefore, the subsequent interaction (flick) can provide an effective restoration when a user mistakenly presses a neighboring hyperlink of the target.

We used three categories of the GOMS operators (physical operator, mental operator, and system operator) in order to analyze both the current and new touch methods (Table 1
                        ). The physical operators included finger movement (F) and keystroke (K) which were related to finger interactions. The mental operators included attention shift (A) and mental act (M). Lastly, the system operator included smartphone response (R) which was a user's idle time while waiting for a response from his/her device.

An execution time for each operator was determined based on existing studies (Card et al., 1983; Chi and Chung, 1996; Kieras, 1999; Holleis et al., 2007; Oyewole and Haight, 2011), except for smartphone response; since a smartphone's response time depends on its performance (Kieras, 1999), we measured a transition time between websites on a smartphone (model: Vega Racer, Pantech, South Korea) using a stopwatch and determined the response time as 1 s which was a rough average of the measured values.

The GOMS model for the current touch method (hereafter, CT) included two goals: 1) click and 2) undo (Table 2
                        a). The first goal (click) consisted of three operators (F-K-K) which were related to a touch interaction. The second goal (undo) was made up of six operators (R-A-M-K-K-A) which were associated with a returning action to an original website for error correction; the undo task was conducted when a target hyperlink was not successfully pressed at the first goal.

The GOMS model for the PF included two goals: 1) press and 2) flick (Table 2b). The first goal (press) consisted of four operators (F–K-M-K) which were related to a touch interaction. The second goal (flick) contained two operators (M and K) which were associated with a flick interaction to locate a target hyperlink. The flick task was only conducted when a target hyperlink was not pressed successfully (touch error) at the first goal; in this case, the last operator (K) in the first goal should be disregarded to avoid redundancy with the last operator (K) in the second goal.

We examined performances of the CT and PF in two separate cases: 1) no error and 2) one error. Completion time (unit: sec) of the CT with no error was only 0.43 (Table 3
                        ); however, completion time of the CT with one error increased significantly to 2.57 (0.43 for click + 1.71 for undo + 0.43 for re-click). In addition, the number of total interactions for the CT increased drastically from three (no error) to nine (one error) when one touch error occurred.

Completion times of the PF were 0.81 with no error and 1.19 with one error (0.81 for press − 0.1 for redundant operator (K) + 0.48 for flick); they were similar to one another (difference = 0.38). Also, the number of total interactions for the PF was similar for the two cases (interaction number: 4 with no error, 5 with one error).

Completion time of the PF with no error (0.81) was delayed 0.38 in comparison to the CT with no error (0.43); the main reason for this delay was because the PF required a mental judgment to determine whether the subsequent interaction, flick, was needed or not. However, completion time of the PF with one error (1.19) was 1.38 shorter than the CT with one error (2.57). The main reason for this was that the PF could rapidly correct a touch error using the flick motion; but the CT could not.

Twenty college students (female: 10 and male: 10) who were right-handed participated voluntarily in the experiment. Their age ranged from 20 to 26 years (mean: 22.8, SD: 1.8). The average hand length and width were 168 cm and 70 cm for females and 186 cm and 84 cm for males. No participants had pain or discomfort on their upper limbs in the day of the experiment.

We employed a small touch-screen device (MiMo UM-720S, Nano Vision, South Korea) in the experiment. The size of the touch-screen was 18 cm × 14 cm (15 inch), and its resolution was 1024 × 768 pixels. To display a website (designed for the experiment) on the touch-screen, the device was connected to a desktop computer (OptiPlex 980, Dell, South Korea).

An experimental software (Fig. 2
                           ) coded by Visual Basic 6.0 (Microsoft, US) was developed for this study. Its screen was divided into two sections: 1) smartphone section and 2) result section. The smartphone section was used for the experiment. Its size was 12 cm × 6 cm, which was designed based on the average (12.4 cm × 6.4 cm) of 12 smartphones' screen sizes in the current market. The result section was developed for the presentation of the experiment results during the practice trials in order to provide real-time feedback to the participants.

The experimental screen included three types of objects: 1) an instruction label, 2) a start button, and 3) hyperlink labels. First, the instruction label provided participants with information about the target hyperlink. Secondly, the start button was built to initiate the experiment and activate the experimental software to record all information (e.g., touch position and time) in regard to interactions performed by a participant. Thirdly, the hyperlink labels denoted five internet links, and their size (2 mm) and space (4 mm) were designed based on an average of hyperlinks' size and space on three mobile websites (amazon.com, naver.com and daum.net).

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

One-factor within-subject design was employed in the experiment. One independent variable (interaction method) with two levels (CT and PF) and three dependent variables (touch time, error rate, and satisfaction score) were used in the study. Touch time (unit: sec) was measured from the initiation of the experiment to the successful selection of a target hyperlink. The touch time was separately recorded for two cases (with no error and with one error). Error rate (unit: %) was calculated by dividing the number of errors by the total number of trials. Lastly, satisfaction scores for the CT and PF were measured using a bipolar scale (range: −3 ∼ 3), as shown in Fig. 3
                           .

Each participant was seated on an office chair whose seat height can be adjusted for his/her body size (adjustment range in height: 40–53 cm). The participant held a given touch-screen device in front of the body with the left hand whose elbow was placed on a table (height: 70 cm). The distance between the touch-screen and the participant's eyes was controlled to approximately 40 cm. Each participant was allowed to use the right index finger for all interactions.

The experiment was conducted in four steps: 1) introduction, 2) practice, 3) main experiment, and 4) debriefing. First, each participant was informed of the experimental purpose and procedure, and completed informed consent forms. Secondly, participants had a practice session in order to become familiar with the experiment. Thirdly, each participant conducted 50 trials through two sessions in the main experiment. We completely randomized the order of the experimental conditions, and also provided breaks (about 2 min) between sessions to minimize fatigue effects. Lastly, we debriefed participants on the experimental results.

We conducted a statistical analysis for the three dependent variables using Minitab v16.0 (Minitab Inc., USA) with a 0.05 significance level. One-factor within-subject analysis of variance (ANOVA) was employed for each dependent variable. However, touch time, one of the three dependent variables, was analyzed separately for the two cases (with no error and with one error).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The best interaction method showing the shortest touch time changed depending on the presence of error (Fig. 4
                        ). Touch time of the CT with no error (mean ± SD; 0.36 ± 0.12) was significantly shorter than that of the PF with no error (0.67 ± 0.10; F(1, 19) = 124.9, p < 0.001). However, touch time of the PF with one error (0.76 ± 0.36) was significantly shorter than that of the CT with one error (2.76 ± 0.64; F(1, 19) = 67.0, p < 0.001).

As shown in Fig. 5
                        , error rate of the PF (0.4 ± 0.5) was significantly lower than that of the CT (11.2 ± 3.0; F(1, 19) = 19.6, p < 0.001). At the first interaction (press), error rate of the PF was 10.0, and this was similar to that of the CT, 11.2; however, after the subsequent interaction (flick), error rate of the PF significantly declined to 0.4.

As shown in Fig. 6
                        , participants preferred the PF to the CT (F(1, 19) = 32.7, p < 0.001). They were satisfied with the PF (1.6 ± 0.55), but remained neutral for the CT (0.2 ± 0.84); all the participants showed equal to or more than a zero score (neutral) for the PF and 60% of them reported a high satisfaction score (more than 2) for the PF.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, we developed a new touch method for the selection of a hyperlink on smartphones. The PF developed in this study consisted of a two-step interaction: press and flick. The press motion selected a target hyperlink; if failed, the flick motion was subsequently conducted in order to reselect the target. The subsequent interaction (flick) effectively restores a touch error when a user mistakenly presses a neighboring hyperlink of a target during the initial interaction (press). The PF can enhance the usability and user experience for website navigation through smartphones.

The PF can reduce both touch errors and mental burdens caused by a precise interaction. The PF effectively minimized error rate because the subsequent interaction (flick) can correct the error made in the initial interaction (press). The experiment results indicated that error rate of the PF (0.4%) was about 4% of the CT (11.2%). In addition, the PF may relieve the mental stress resulting from a precise interaction because it provides an immediate error correction method.

The existing studies of the GOMS model have used individually different durations for the mental act. Oyewole and Haight (2011) and Dunlop and Crossan (2000) applied the original value of 1.35 s for the mental act; however, Mori et al. (2003) and Myung (2004) used 0.38 s and 0.57 s, respectively. The reason for these differences may be the result of the differences in usage context (Holleis et al., 2007). We used 0.38 s for the mental act, which was the smallest duration of the existing studies, because the mental act in this study required a simple judgment to determine if a touch error existed after the initial interaction of press.

We predicted average touch time of the CT and PF for various error rates in the initial interaction, based on the results of the GOMS model and user testing (Fig. 7
                     ). For example, average touch time of the CT was estimated as 0.36 s on 0% error rate and 0.48 s (0.36 × 0.95 + 2.76 × 0.05) for 5% error rate. In contrast, average touch time of the PF was predicted as 0.67 s on 0% error rate and 0.68 s (0.67 × 0.95 + 0.76 × 0.05) for 5% error rate. The CT had an advantage when error rate was less than 12.5%; however, the PF had a benefit when error rate was more than 12.5% in the initial interaction. Therefore, the PF is strongly recommended when a user is prone to making touch errors due to small hyperlinks on his/her smartphone.

The GOMS model has properly predicted task completion times required for simple user interactions. Christou et al. (2012) predicted completion time for direct manipulation and tangible user interactions through the GOMS model; Kaber et al. (2011) successfully applied the GOMS model to a usability evaluation of human–machine interaction. The results of our study corresponded to the existing studies; the touch times estimated by the GOMS model were close to the touch times measured in the user-involved experiment (Table 4
                     ). The absolute differences between the touch times of the GOMS model and the user experiment ranged from 0.07 s to 0.43 s.

The touch time of the PF with no error was significantly longer than that of the CT with no error. The GOMS models explained the reason for this delay; the PF included a mental judgment operator, which was not required in the CT. In contrast, the touch time of the CT with one error increased dramatically, in comparison with the PF with one error. The GOMS model found the reason for the delay, too; the CT required a significantly larger amount of time (2.24 s = 1.71 s for undo + 0.43 s for re-click) for error correction than the PF (0.48 s for flick).

The GOMS model and user testing are complementary to each other. These two methods can quantify touch times of interactions. However, the GOMS model investigates analytical characteristics for interactions, which cannot be analyzed by user testing; in contrast, user testing can evaluate error rates and subjective responses, which cannot be analyzed with the GOMS model. By using both evaluation methods at the same time, we can comprehensively elaborate the usability of a new interaction method.

A couple of the participants suggested a new idea (called Press and Drag method) for better touch interaction in the debriefing section. Similar to the PF, the new idea also consisted of two step interactions such as press and drag. A user pressed a target hyperlink in the initial step; if failed to select the target, the user dragged his/her finger to the target in the subsequent step. The subsequent interaction (drag) can also effectively correct a touch error by adjusting the touch location.

A comparative study among touch methods such as PF, Bubble Cursor, Take-off Cursor, and Shift Cursor is necessary. We developed the PF to reduce touch errors and the mental load resulted from a small hyperlink, and compared its performance with that of the current touch method. However, we did not compare it with the other existing interaction methods. As a future study, the performances of various touch methods need to be comprehensively evaluated in terms of qualitative and quantitative measures.

Further investigations regarding the effects of hyperlink size and space are needed in order to generalize the results obtained in this study. Hyperlink size and space affect the interaction performance of the CT and PF. Hwangbo et al. (2013) identified that target size and space significantly affected touch performance; Motti et al. (2013) found, by a comprehensive literature review, that user performances were influenced by target size and space between buttons. However, this study controlled these factors to a certain degree (target size: 2 mm, space: 4 mm).

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Research Fund of the University of Ulsan.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

