@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effect of police cruiser restraint cage configuration on shoulder discomfort, muscular demands, upper limb postures, and task performance during simulated police patrol

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We compare current and modified police cruiser restraint cage configurations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Bilateral shoulder discomfort was reduced while typing directly in front of the body.


                        
                        
                           
                           Location of the laptop in front of the user allows more neutral shoulder postures.


                        
                        
                           
                           Reduced discomfort is likely driven by postures, not muscle demands.


                        
                        
                           
                           Reduced discomfort results may have implications for future police car designs.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Police

Mobile data terminal

Upper extremity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Advances in police-specific technology have led to changes in work layout and physical occupational demands of mobile police officers. This study investigated the influence of police cruiser compartment configuration on perceived discomfort, muscle activation, shoulder kinematics, and typing performance during simulated police patrol. Participants completed a one-hour session including simulated driving and 2-min typing trials in a standard compartment configuration with a fixed mobile data terminal (MDT) location (ST), and in a modified compartment configuration with an MDT in front of the user and a rearward translated seat (MOD). The MOD configuration resulted in reductions of 55–65% in perceived shoulder discomfort, up to 3.4% MVC in shoulder muscle demands, and more neutral humeral orientations (shoulder elevation reduced by 13–25°). These improvements associated with the MOD configuration may have ergonomic implications for future police car designs, particularly as new technology is introduced in the mobile environment and advanced solutions are sought.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Mobile police officers incur not only acute stressors during emergency response situations, but also cumulative physical demands for many of their daily driving and computer-based tasks. These cumulative demands require a combination of static and twisted postures (McKinnon et al., 2011; Brown et al., 2003) and exposure to long-term whole body vibration, a risk factor for back and neck pain (Magnusson et al., 1996). Consequently, mobile police officers have a higher incidence of work absenteeism compared to their colleagues in other departments (Gyi and Porter, 1998; Ovall, 1995). The prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders in law enforcement may be partly attributable to increases in the amount of occupational driving, the rise in administrative tasks completed in the police cruiser, and the non-neutral static postures associated with these tasks (Gyi and Porter, 1998; McKinnon et al., 2011). Since the introduction of in-vehicle laptop computer systems, also called mobile data terminals (MDTs), in police vehicles, many officers have been encouraged to complete nearly all their daily tasks within the cab of the police vehicle in an effort to increase the visual presence of law enforcement in the community. As currently configured, the equipment within this mobile police work environment has minimal adjustability, and officers may require prolonged upper limb and low back loading to perform clerical tasks (McKinnon et al., 2012).

Although advances in mobile police technology have improved capabilities and efficiency of in-vehicle data acquisition tasks (Agrawal et al., 2003; Hampton and Langham, 2005), the physical risks of injury associated with this modern technology, particularly the mobile data terminal, have not been extensively quantified or explored (Agrawal et al., 2003; McKinnon et al., 2011). The physical outcomes associated with the increased work time and tasks performed in a mobile police environment have been probed (Brown et al., 2003; Agrawal et al., 2003), but the mechanisms for these outcomes require further investigation. Recent and current investigations have just begun to outline the potential issues with modern in-vehicle technology, and have identified MDT use as potential cause of musculoskeletal pain (Brown et al., 2003; Gyi and Porter, 1998; McKinnon et al., 2011; Gruevski et al., 2013) and as a prominent candidate for ergonomic intervention (McKinnon et al., 2011; Gruevski et al., 2013). Data entry tasks have been noted to account for nearly 35% of in-vehicle activity time, and discomfort surveys (police officers) have indicated a definite need to quantify physical and psychophysical concerns with MDT use in both the current configuration and with modification to the MDT location and/or adjustability (McKinnon et al., 2011).

The primary risks of injury from MDT use are to the shoulder and back. MDT tasks require prolonged reaching and twisting (McKinnon et al., 2011), and such prolonged non-neutral upper extremity postures are indicated as musculoskeletal disorder risk factors (Sommerich et al., 1993). These injury risks are tied directly to the location of the MDT within the police vehicle, and could potentially be reduced with an alternative MDT location.

Conventional computing and ergonomics guidelines have placed the keyboard directly in front of the user to maintain neutral shoulder, elbow, and wrist postures. While placing the MDT directly in front of the user would expectedly produce similar positive outcomes and limit the noted non-neutral postures, MDT location under the current cruiser design paradigm is severely inhibited by environmental constraints such as the center console, steering wheel, and, most notably the factor examined in the current study, the presence of a rear restraint cage.

Removing the restraint cage directly behind the driver is a potential layout solution that would have three primary benefits: 1) it would permit greater seat fore-aft and tilt adjustability, which is essential to achieve the ideal 100° seat back angle and ability for any given driver to reach the pedals (Harrison et al., 2000), 2) it would eliminate the position constraints of the MDT in relation to the steering wheel, and 3) it would eliminate reach and trunk rotation required for MDT use by allowing seat and MDT alignment. The latter benefit is of particular interest in the current study, as more neutral whole body postures associated with seat and MDT alignment could potentially reduce risk of low back and shoulder injury to the mobile police officers.

This restraint cage design change may be achieved through a single prisoner transport system. Such systems include a single seat in the rear of the vehicle, and an open compartment directly behind the driver seat. These systems are employed in some fleets and are a commercially available option that also has the benefits of greater prisoner restraint and additional storage capacity for police equipment behind the officer. The Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor is the most common North American police vehicle platform, representing over 75% of the market (Anonymous, 2008). Thus, this study focuses on layout and design solutions specific to this vehicle.

The purpose of this investigation was to quantify the influence of a police cruiser compartment configuration for a Crown Victoria police vehicle, specifically investigating the influence a combination of increased posterior seat translation and an MDT location in front of the user have on upper extremity posture, user discomfort and muscle activation while typing compared to the currently used seat position and lateral MDT location.

@&#METHODS@&#

Participants completed a single, one-hour simulated police patrol session that included segments of MDT typing trials in two vehicle configurations: 1) a standard police cruiser MDT configuration (ST), and 2) a modified configuration highlighted by a half-cage design with a rearward translated seat and an MDT location directly in front of the participant (MOD). Typing trial segments were separated by a simulated driving task to simulate a police patrol task set. All tasks were performed using a custom driving simulator. Outcome variables included 10 channels of normalized bilateral surface electromyography, upper limb 3D motion tracking (humeral orientation characteristics), ratings of perceived shoulder discomfort, typing speed, and typing accuracy.

Ten (10) males between the ages of 21–27 (23 ± 2.5 years) participated in the study. Participants were excluded based on pre-existing self-reported shoulder or back injuries. All participants completed written informed consent and were able to withdraw from the study at any time. Both right and left hand dominant participants were included in this study. Participants were selected from a student population and did not have prior law enforcement or in-vehicle computer experience. Participant characteristics in the current study (Table 1
                        ) were similar to the anthropometry of an active police population derived from Callaghan et al. (2009). Over 85% percent of this sample population was male officers, and an increased rearward movement of the driver seat was typically only desired by larger males. The modified configuration evaluated in the current study was intended to accommodate these larger males, and did not compromise the forward seat adjustment that would be desired by shorter officers.

Participants were seated in a simulated vehicle setup based on the internal configuration and dimensions of a standard Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor (CVPI). The simulated vehicle consisted of a driver seat, a steering wheel, a brake and gas pedal complex, a representative MDT, and road course display (Fig. 1
                        ). A driving course was programmed with STISIM Drive (Systems Technology Inc., Hawthorne, CA, USA) simulation software and displayed from an LCD data projector. A representative MDT was mounted to a Motoman NX100 robotic arm (Motoman, West Carrollton, OH, USA) which permitted 6-DOF positioning (tri-axial rotation and translation) to a keyboard center location derived from active duty police vehicles (McKinnon et al., 2012). The representative MDT layout and features closely matched those typically used in a police patrol vehicle. Keyboard width, keyboard depth, and screen distance measurements for the representative MDT matched within 5% of the dimensions of the range of models used in the field. A CVPI driver seat was mounted to a fixed track with two distinct seat base locations: 1) a standard CVPI seat base mounting location, and 2) a 35 cm rearward translated seat base location to emulate the removal of the rear restraint cage on the driver side of the vehicle and allow additional posterior translation. At each seat base location, fore-aft seat position on the seat rails was controlled by an electric motor. Two distinct experimental typing conditions were used for the experimental sessions: (1) a standard configuration (ST)—standard CVPI driver seat mounting location and standard keyboard center location—and (2) a modified configuration (MOD)—rearward translated seat location and self-selected keyboard center location directly in front of the participant (Fig. 2
                        ). Because driver seat position is adjustable, the standard keyboard center location aligned relative to the front right driver seat mounting bolt (a fixed location): 1.5 cm posterior, 46.0 cm superior, and 24.4 cm rightward from the front right driver seat mounting bolt.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants performed a one-hour simulated police patrol session which consisted of three segments of 10-min simulated highway driving that were each followed by a set of four 2-min MDT typing tasks, performed in either the standard ST or MOD driver seat and MDT configuration (Fig. 3
                        ). During the sessions, participants were equipped with a personal protective vest and police duty belt. Duty belt had all holsters filled with weight- and size-matched surrogate items to simulate a real police duty belt. Participants were allowed forward-backward seat adjustment corresponding to constraints of a typical police patrol vehicle. Once chosen, the seat position was held constant for the entire session. Lumbar support and back angle (15° from vertical) were held constant for all trials.

The typing segments consisted of four separate 2-min typing trials. For each typing segment, two trials were performed in the ST configuration (standardized keyboard location) and two were performed in the MOD configuration (self-selected keyboard location in front of the participant). The order of the four typing locations was randomized within each typing segment. The MOD configuration keyboard location was chosen prior to the simulated police patrol session to represent the preferred individual typing posture. Participants were instructed to freely move the MDT to achieve the “most comfortable typing posture”. Participants were given as much time as they required to practice typing and choose the MDT location. Once chosen, the MDT position was held constant for the entire session. Trials consisted of transcribing a supplied paragraph (from the upper portion of the computer screen) for two minutes. The participants were given the option to type with one or two hands. Typing speed (words per minute) and typing accuracy (percent accuracy) were recorded for each typing trial. The typing tasks were completed in the TypingMaster program (TypingMaster Finland Inc. Helsinki, Finland). The typing tasks were designed to emulate commonly performed message responses and system inquiries (Hampton and Langham, 2005) and to match the frequency and duration of MDT use during report entry tasks (McKinnon et al., 2011). The typing tasks required touchpad use to navigate the typing software.

Participants were instructed to maintain control of the vehicle in a custom driving simulator for each 10-min simulated driving task. The driving course consisted of mainly straight roads with minor bends and traffic. The purpose of the driving simulation was to allow breaks between the typing trials, in an attempt to better emulate the daily task set of a mobile officer.

Ratings of perceived discomfort (RPD) were recorded for the right and left shoulder following each typing trial by marking a vertical line on a 100 mm visual-analog scale (VAS) ranging from “no discomfort” to “extreme discomfort”. Participants were not able to view their previous typing task ratings of perceived discomfort when indicating current perceived discomfort scores.

Fixed distance (2 cm) fixed pair EMG surface electrodes (Noraxon USA, Inc., Ag/AgCl; USA) were placed bi-laterally on ten muscles surrounding the shoulders: m. infraspinatus, m. supraspinatus, m. anterior deltoid, m. middle deltoid, m. upper trapezius (Fig. 4
                           ). The reference electrode was attached on the right clavicle. The skin was prepared using a disposable razor and an isopropyl alcohol wipe. Participants performed a set of two maximal voluntary contractions (MVC) for each muscle prior to experimental collection using a standardized protocol with a test contraction posture for each muscle shown to elicit maximal muscle activity (Cram and Kasman, 1998). Each ramped MVC was recorded for 5 s and the peak EMG amplitude was used to normalize the typing trial data. Signals were collected at 1500 Hz and amplified using a 16-channel Noraxon Telemyo 2400T G2 Telemetry electromyography system (Noraxon U.S.A. Inc., Scottsdale, AZ) with a common-mode rejection ratio of >100 dB.

A Vicon MX motion capture system (Vicon Motion Systems Ltd., Los Angeles, CA) was used to record upper limb and thorax kinematic data synchronously with surface electromyography. Nine reflective markers were affixed to the skin over bony landmarks of the thorax and upper extremity (Table 2
                           ) and four reflective markers were attached to the lateral keyboard surface at the corners of the MDT. The xyphoid process marker was fixed to the rigid front surface of the duty vest at the height of the palpated xyphoid process. Also for some participants, the duty vest overlapped the acromion processes, and so the left and right acromion markers were affixed to the duty vest at the approximate acromion position for data collection. A standing T-pose was used as a reference posture. Raw marker coordinate data was then analyzed using the Shoulder Loading Analysis Modules (SLAM) model (Dickerson et al., 2007) to generate thoracohumeral orientation angles of plane of elevation, elevation, and axial rotation using the conventions defined by the International Society of Biomechanics (Wu et al., 2005). For elevation angle 0° corresponds to a vertical humeral angle, and 90° corresponds to a horizontal humeral angle. Plane of elevation refers to the rotation about the vertical thorax axis at which elevation occurs, where 0° is in front of the thorax and 180° is behind the thorax.

All raw surface EMG signals were linear enveloped (full-wave rectified and low pass filtered with a single-pass, 2nd order Butterworth filter) with a cut-off frequency of 2 Hz (Dark et al., 2007). The average of two resting trials was used to remove the resting bias from the typing trials to conduct between participant analyses. Trials EMG recordings were normalized to individual muscle MVC values for comparison.

All data were analyzed using JMP statistical software (SAS, Cary, NC). A two-way repeated measures analysis of variance (typing configuration, time) was conducted for 7 outcome measure types (perceived discomfort, muscle activity, humeral elevation angle, humeral plane of elevation, humeral axial rotation, typing speed, and typing accuracy) and tested for significant main and interaction effects. Independent tests were conducted on left and right arm perceived discomfort, left and right humeral orientation measures, and activity for each of the ten recorded muscles. Mean values across each trial were used for muscle activity, humeral orientation, typing speed, and typing accuracy measures. Statistical significance was set at α = 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

All participants performed the typing tasks with two hands. Results measures are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. No significant typing configuration-by-time effects were observed for any of the outcome measures (p = 0.06–0.79). Time (main effect) also did not influence any of the outcome measures (p = 0.06–0.99). A summary of measures showing statistical significance between typing configurations is presented in Table 3
                     .

RPD for the right shoulder (while typing) were 123% greater in the ST configuration (15.6 ± 15.8 mm) than in the MOD configuration (7.0 ± 12.4 mm). RPD for the left shoulder were 189% greater in the ST configuration (26.6 ± 20.9 mm) than in the MOD configuration (9.2 ± 16.1 mm).

Differences also existed between MOD and ST cruiser configurations for muscular activity across several muscles around the left and right shoulders. Left anterior and middle deltoid muscle activities were significantly lower in the MOD configuration compared to the ST configuration. Similarly, right middle deltoid, right infraspinatus, and right supraspinatus muscle activities were significantly lower in the MOD configuration compared to the ST configuration. Right anterior deltoid, left infraspinatus, left supraspinatus, and left and right upper trapezius showed no significant difference between configurations (p = 0.08–0.87) (Fig. 5
                        ).

Differences were found in three measures of humeral orientation between the MOD and ST configurations while typing. For the left arm, there was nearly a 25° decrease in humeral elevation angle from typing in the ST configuration (67.9 ± 8.7°) to typing in the MOD configuration (43.1 ± 8.7°). Right arm humeral elevation angle significantly decreased from the ST configuration (53.7 ± 8.7°) to the MOD configuration (41.0 ± 6.2°). Significant differences between typing configurations were also found for the humeral plane of elevation for the left and right upper extremities. The left arm showed a 9° more anterior humeral plane of elevation (closer to the front of the thorax) while typing in the MOD configuration (37.5 ± 10.1°) compared to the ST configuration (46.3 ± 11.1°). The right arm showed a 16° more posterior humeral plane of elevation while typing in the MOD configuration (142.3 ± 10.5°) compared to the ST configuration (126.5 ± 9.1°). Typing configuration also elicited a significant difference in humeral axial rotation for the left side, decreasing from 84.1 (±5.4)° of rotation in the ST configuration to 60.0 (±13.0)° in the MOD configuration. For the right arm, axial rotation showed no difference (DF = 1, F = 2.83, p = 0.13) between configurations.

There were not significant differences for either typing speed (DF = 1, F = 0.49, p = 0.51) or accuracy (DF = 1, F = 3.85, p = 0.17) between the MOD and ST typing configurations. While typing in the MOD configuration, participants averaged 49.7 ± 15.0 words per minute and 91.7 ± 4.7% accuracy. Similar results were seen while typing in the ST configuration with 48.1 ± 14.9 words per minute and 91.5 ± 5.2% accuracy.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

A modified police vehicle equipped with a half cage design provides a means to place the keyboard directly in front of the user and to improve upper limb posture while lowering both bilateral shoulder muscular demands and bilateral perceived shoulder discomfort during simulated police patrol. Significant improvements from the current, standard vehicle configuration to this modified configuration were noted for all outcome measures, while typing speed and accuracy remained similar between configurations. Most notably, simulated police cruiser configuration elicited a significant (55–65%) decrease in both left and right shoulder perceived discomfort, showing that moving the MDT in front of a user may potentially reduce the prevalence of musculoskeletal pain in a mobile police population. A reduction in discomfort is certainly beneficial. Since targeting injury risk among this population through improved design is a specific goal of the current study, perceived discomfort may also be the most relevant and practical outcome measure, as both measures have been shown to increase with exposure to long duration, static postures and vibration (Wilder et al., 1982; Magnusson et al., 1996).

When placing the MDT directly in front of user and allowing self-selected tilt position, all participants adopted a more neutral shoulder posture. A relationship may be present between the upper limb postures and the perceived discomfort scores associated with this configuration change. The MOD configuration elicited less left shoulder elevation (24° decrease), and was associated with a 65% reduction in left shoulder perceived discomfort. This relationship is supported by an established link between shoulder abduction and discomfort for computer-based tasks (McKinnon et al., 2012; Straker et al., 1997; Hagberg and Sundelin, 1986). To a lesser extent, the same response was seen in the right shoulder, as 13° less elevation corresponded to a 55% reduction in perceived discomfort. Similarly, the plane of elevation was closer for both the left and right arms. Considering flexion in front of the thorax to be preferred over abduction, the current results coincide with previous findings that the perception of discomfort increases as postures deviate from neutral (Kee and Karwowski, 2001). A bilateral reduction in humeral axial rotation should also be noted; however, it is not clear if this is beneficial, as the implications of axial rotation with respect to injury are not well understood (Chang et al., 2005).

While these side specific comparisons isolate changes in outcomes measures at both the left and right upper limbs, the tendency for participants to achieve symmetry and the interaction between the left and right sides is important to discuss. While there was a 15° difference between left and right shoulder elevation in the ST configuration, the MOD configuration allowed a more symmetrical posture between the left and right shoulders, and showed only a 2° elevation difference. Considering discomfort was reduced in the MOD configuration, this tendency to choose a symmetrical, neutral shoulder posture in the MOD configuration supports previous evidence of a correlation between self-selected user postures and a reduction in musculoskeletal discomfort (Babski-Reeves et al., 2005; Helander and Zhang, 1997). While it is difficult to make assumptions about the link between discomfort and injury risk, these findings indicate that an adjustable MDT placement directly in front of the user, as was available in the MOD configuration, as opposed to a fixed unit to the right of the user could reduce musculoskeletal discomfort among the mobile police population.

Mirroring the perceived discomfort responses to the configuration changes, muscle activity was influenced by typing configuration in five of the ten recorded muscles. Considering the documented relationship between increased shoulder elevation and increased shoulder muscle activity (Antony and Keir, 2010; Giroux and Lamontagne, 1992; Kronberg et al., 1990), the trend similarities between muscle activity and perceived discomfort were expected. As shoulder elevation decreased in the MOD configuration, so did discomfort and muscle activity activation (bilateral anterior deltoid, left middle deltoid, right infraspinatus, and right supraspinatus). Explanation of the slight increase in activity for the left upper trapezius in the MOD configuration (the only muscle to show a trend in this direction) is more difficult. While low back kinematics were not recorded for this study, the investigators observed that participants tended adopt a more slouched posture during the typing trials in the MOD configuration compared to the ST configuration. Higher upper trapezius activation has been shown for computer typing tasks when using a slouched posture (Kleine et al., 1999); however, further investigation into spinal posture is required to justify this as a possible mechanism for the increased activation.

While there were significant differences between typing configurations, the magnitude of these values deserves commentary. All muscle activities in either typing configuration are relatively low (less than 7% MVC). Considering the nature and duration of police typing tasks, these values fall well below the accepted threshold of 12–14% MVC for moderate duration tasks (Jonsson, 1978; Mathiassen and Winkel, 1991). Accordingly, the reduction in discomfort in the MOD configuration is not driven by muscular demand, but rather by upper limb and thorax postures.

This investigation showed that there are significant postural and psychophysical improvements when adapting a forward-facing, neutral typing posture. While the setup may not be entirely practical due to additional constraints related to safety and financial concerns, the findings of this study do help guide the future investigations into improved police vehicle interior design. Having a forward-facing, neutral posture significantly improves bilateral perceived discomfort, muscular demand, and upper limb posture, and a future design that integrates the properties of the modified cruiser configuration are recommended.

Three potential factors may affect the generalizability of these findings to all police vehicles, and to other vehicles equipped with mobile data terminals for use in a driving posture. First, the laboratory setup was a simplified version of a Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor. The laboratory setup lacked interaction of the driver with various physical elements of the vehicle including the driver door, front dash, and additional pieces of communication equipment that are typically mounted in the center console. The typing and driving postures when interacting with these hard structures may differ from those presented in this study. Second, participants did not have any law enforcement or mobile computing experience. While measures were taken to control all factors intrinsic to this experiment, the postures used by the participants may not necessarily be representative of an active mobile police population. Third, participants were exposed to typing configurations for two minutes at a time. There is no evidence available showing that performing a task for this duration is sufficient for onset of discomfort.

In addition, because participants wore a police duty vest equipment setup, some markers (xyphoid process, and left and right acromion) the markers mounted on the duty vest. The duty vest was fitted to each participant, and the movement of these markers closely reflected the movement of the thorax; however, these markers may have caused minimal errors in thoracohumeral orientation calculations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A police cruiser compartment configuration that allowed for a self-selected mobile data terminal location directly in front of the user influenced discomfort, muscular effort and upper limb postures. The physical constraints in the current mobile police environment do not permit positioning of the MDT directly in from of the user. A modified police cruiser configuration (half cage design) is one solution that would achieve such an MDT location by translating the driver seat posteriorly. The largest change in all outcome measures was for the left upper extremity, which is attributed to the reduced across-thorax adduction required to type. Although the muscular activation levels suggest modest risk to the officers while typing in the standard location, providing more adjustability and symmetrical posture for the user is beneficial. A more neutral posture to type, as in the modified cruiser configuration, will make administrative tasks done in the police vehicle less physically demanding than in the currently used configuration, and may further reduce exposure to discomfort and musculoskeletal risk factors. These modifications are particularly important in future designs, as more administrative tasks are performed in the mobile environment. Therefore, the results of this study should be considered when law enforcement agencies are implementing MDTs in future police vehicles or considering redesigns of the cruiser interior.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

