@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Interpretation of way-finding healthcare symbols by a multicultural population: Navigation signage design for global health

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Comprehension of healthcare symbols increases with literacy and decreases with age.


                        
                        
                           
                           Symbols for abstract referents (such as oncology and diabetes education) are more difficult to interpret correctly.


                        
                        
                           
                           Healthcare symbol design should consider cultural factors as may they may influence comprehension.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Symbols

Way-finding

Culture

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The interpretation of way-finding symbols for healthcare facilities in a multicultural community was assessed in a cross-sectional study. One hundred participants recruited from Al Ain city in the United Arab Emirates were asked to interpret 28 healthcare symbols developed at Hablamos Juntos (such as vaccinations and laboratory) as well as 18 general-purpose symbols (such as elevators and restrooms). The mean age was 27.6 years (16–55 years) of whom 84 (84%) were females. Healthcare symbols were more difficult to comprehend than general-purpose signs. Symbols referring to abstract concepts were the most misinterpreted including oncology, diabetes education, outpatient clinic, interpretive services, pharmacy, internal medicine, registration, social services, obstetrics and gynecology, pediatrics and infectious diseases. Interpretation rates varied across cultural backgrounds and increased with higher education and younger age. Signage within healthcare facilities should be tested among older persons, those with limited literacy and across a wide range of cultures.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The ease of way-finding or navigating to a specific part of a hospital or clinic is a quality issue to be safeguarded in the design of healthcare systems (MacKenzie and Krusberg, 1996). Along with noise control, privacy, safety and general ambience, way-finding in health facilities can profoundly affect patient and family well-being (Frasca-Beaulieu, 1999). Visitors to a health facility rely on signs with text and symbols to navigate to specific destinations such as a laboratory or an imaging room. Signs with visual symbols are suited for rapid communication with the ability to cross age and language boundaries (Foster, 2001). Way-finding signs help greatly in faster escape during emergencies (Tang et al., 2009). Apart from being rapidly interpretable, symbols are compact and yet more prominent and noticeable than textual signs (Foster, 2001; Shieh and Huang, 2003). Symbols are easier to follow and more likely to be understood and retained than multilingual text signs by patients from diverse language backgrounds. In compliance with statutory requirements for improving access to persons with disabilities, signs should be designed for recognition by older patients and those with disabilities (Scialfa et al., 2008).

A set of healthcare symbols has been developed after testing in the US (Hablamos Juntos, 2004), and several hospitals have incorporated them in way-finding signage with positive results (Cooper, 2010). Unfortunately, these ‘universal healthcare symbols’ have not been extensively tested in an international multicultural context to assess their application for global use. As more patients from diverse backgrounds seek care across regional borders, universally recognized healthcare symbols are imperative. Our setting, the city of Al Ain in the rapidly developing United Arab Emirates (UAE), is a highly multicultural mix with its native Arabic community as well as a large (69 percent) expatriate population (Statistics Center Abu Dhabi, 2012) from North America, Europe, Africa and South Asia. Local hospitals tend to utilize monolingual (English only) and bilingual (English and Arabic) text-based signs with general-purpose symbols such as for exit and no smoking. Thus, visitors to healthcare facilities from certain demographic groups may experience barriers to access and way finding.

We conducted this study to find out whether persons from different cultures, age groups and literacy levels interpret standard healthcare symbols correctly. These user factors are important in the design, testing and placement of symbols in healthcare facilities worldwide. As these symbols refer to frequently utilized medical services such as radiology, laboratory and emergency, their interpretation is of paramount importance.

@&#METHODS@&#

Ethics approval was granted by UAE University Office of the Vice Provost for Research and Graduate Studies to conduct a crosssectional study to assess to comprehension of healthcare symbols (Ref. No. VPRGS/131).

We recruited participants using convenience (non-random) sampling in community non-healthcare settings within the city of Al Ain, UAE in June 2010. Eligibility criteria included age equal to or greater than 16 years and no apparent visual or mental impairment. To ensure a broadly representative sample, we purposefully attempted to recruit participants across a range of age, gender, race and educational backgrounds. A trained interviewer (MSA) explained the study procedures and obtained written informed consent assuring confidentiality and voluntary participation prior to participation. Personally identifiable data such as name, address and exact date of birth were not collected.

We studied the healthcare symbols (Fig. 1
                        ) developed at Hablamos Juntos, a project funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and administered by University of California San Francisco School of Medicine (Hablamos Juntos, 2008). This set of 28 healthcare symbols was developed in 2003 after testing on over 300 subjects. Symbols that scored more than 87% on the comprehension test were assessed to be the “most meaningful” among the population studied. This was followed by further refinement, testing and placement in four healthcare facilities across the US (Cooper, 2010).

In order to obtain a reference for comparison (controls), we included 18 general-purpose symbols (Fig. 2
                        ) that are commonly used internationally for navigation in healthcare as well as non-healthcare facilities (“Department of Transportation (DOT) Symbols,” n.d.). These universally recognizable signs included the ubiquitous symbols for ‘no smoking’ and ‘restrooms’. We compared the comprehension scores for healthcare and general purpose symbols with the latter as a reference baseline.

After replacing the descriptive labels next to the symbols with serial numbers using Adobe Acrobat software, each set was printed on A4 paper using a monochrome laser printer [Kyocera taskALFA 520i]. The printed size of each graphic was 2 × 2 cm2 for healthcare symbols and 3.75 × 3.75 cm2 for general symbols.

We developed a structured data collection form, which included fields for recording demographic data including age, gender, cultural background and educational attainment [Appendix/Supplementary materials]. The instrument was pilot tested for any unforeseen problems. The study was interviewer administered and thus the participants were not asked to write down their responses. This allowed us to include persons with limited literacy.

The study included a question during the interview: “Do you need help in filling out medical forms?” in order to assess health literacy of the study participant. This is a validated (Chew et al., 2008) screening question and achieves accuracy comparable to more elaborate health literacy screening tools such as TOFHLA (Parker et al., 1995) and REALM (Davis et al., 1991). Although years of educational attainment correlates with health literacy, the relationship is not always reliable (Sørensen et al., 2012).

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

We followed the ISO, 1984:2001 procedure for testing graphical symbols with adaptations as noted below (Foster, 2001). In the ‘comprehension test’ of this protocol, subjects are shown a graphical symbol (in case of new symbol development, one specific variant of the prototypes) and informed about the context in which the symbol could be used (such as a hospital). The interviewer then asks the subject what each symbol means (and if relevant, what action response would be expected) and records the answer. We adapted the procedure in two ways. Only one interviewer assessed the responses as opposed to three independent judges. Secondly, the seven response categories ranging from “Correct understanding is certain” to “No response is given” were collapsed to binary outcomes with categories 1–3 coded as ‘correctly interpreted’ and categories 4–7 recorded as ‘misinterpreted’. The ISO protocol requires a minimum of 50 subjects. The additional ‘judgment test’, which asks respondents to assess different variants of a symbol under development, was not pertinent to our study. The two sets of symbols, healthcare and general-purpose, were sequentially shown in ambient lighting conditions with participants wearing prescription lenses/glasses for personal vision correction as needed. Participants were informed that the healthcare symbols were for use in the hospital setting.

A minimum sample size of 96 subjects was calculated prior to the start of the study based on a (worst case) estimate of 0.5 (50%) correct interpretation of a symbol having a margin of error of 0.1 (10%), with a confidence level at 0.95 (Lenth, 2009). Gender and cultural background were recorded as categorical variables while age and years of education as continuous. Each symbol interpretation was coded as ‘1’ for correctly understood and ‘0’ for misinterpreted and the mean of all symbol interpretations per participant was calculated as their respective ‘interpretation score’. After numeric coding on paper forms, data was entered in Microsoft Excel, followed by crosschecks for data entry errors and missing values. Descriptive and analytical (paired t-test, correlation coefficients) statistics were obtained for each variable using SPSS version 19 (IBM SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, 2011). We built a linear regression model to find out which subject factors influenced healthcare symbol interpretation after controlling for other variables. The SPSS general linear model procedure was applied with gender, education and culture as fixed factors and general-purpose symbols score and age as covariates. Cultures were coded as simple contrast variables (‘dummy variables’) for the model. Statistical tests for post-hoc comparisons were not performed. Additional statistical testing should be viewed as exploratory and interpreted with caution. The paired t-test was applied to compare each participant's score on healthcare and general-purpose symbols. The significance level for all tests was 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The 100 participants tested represent a modest range of age groups, cultures and literacy levels with under representation of some subgroups such as males and those with low literacy (Table 1
                     ). The mean score (number of symbols correctly interpreted from all of the 45 symbols tested) was 69% (standard deviation, SD 12%). The mean score for general symbols was higher than that for healthcare signs (75% [SD 10%] vs. 65% [SD 16%], paired t-test, t = 8.1, df = 99, p < 0.0001). The most easily understood symbols were those indicating restaurant (100 percent correct interpretation), coffee shop (99), no smoking (94), fire extinguisher (98), ambulance (97), obstetrics (97), handicapped/disabled access (96) and stairs (96) (Fig. 3
                     ). However, the signs for oncology (2 percent correct interpretation), diabetes education (5), outpatient clinic (16), interpretive services (23), pharmacy (38), internal medicine (48), registration (57), social services (59), obstetrics and gynecology (64), pediatrics (66) and infectious diseases (62) were found to be the most difficult to comprehend (Table 2
                     ).

Education, age and culture were predictive of the healthcare symbol interpretation score on multivariate modeling (adjusted R-squared = 0.638; age F = 27.0, p < 0.001; culture F = 5.8, p = 0.001; education F = 3.8, p = 0.013; gender F = 2.7, p = 0.11; interactions between these variables were not significant). The statistically significant regression equation for healthcare symbol interpretation score was: observed score = 0.104 × education in years + 0.243 × age in years + 0.156 × cultural background + 0.131. This model should be applied with caution as it needs validation independent studies. Figs. 4 and 5
                        
                         illustrate the effects of education and age for visual post hoc comparisons.

Participants who were able to identify general symbols were also likely to interpret healthcare symbols correctly (r = 0.57, p < 0.001). Younger participants were able to interpret symbols correctly more often (r = −0.43, p < 0.001) although this was only for healthcare signs (r = −0.49, p < 0.001) and not for general symbols (r = −0.15, p = 0.131). Although half of the participants admitted yes to the health literacy screening question (‘Do you need help in filling out medical forms?), this did not discriminate for healthcare symbol comprehension rates (independent samples t-test, t = 0.008, df = 82, p = 0.993).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Our study on comprehension of healthcare symbols in a multicultural community uncovers two key findings: healthcare symbols are more difficult to interpret than general-purpose symbols, and that comprehension varies by age, culture and literacy. Research on symbol design exploring prototyping and user factors provides a perspective to our findings.

It is disheartening to note that in our population the mean interpretation score for the 28 healthcare symbols was 64% which is less than both the ISO standard (1984) of 67% as well as the ANSI standard (1991) of 85%. This is remarkable given that 82 percent of the participants had high school education or more. The fact that healthcare symbols remain difficult to interpret correctly in spite of being carefully designed and extensively tested, may be a reflection of the more esoteric nature of the referents such as ‘mammography’ and ‘oncology’. These specialized symbols are not in everyday use and the lack of familiarity with the appearance and the specific healthcare service itself, may have led to lower rates of comprehension. Designing symbols for messages that are infrequent and sporadic is challenging (Foster, 2001). Even repeated exposure to a symbol may not be sufficient and the intended meaning may have to be taught explicitly. For instance, in a virtual reality escape simulation, construction workers and fire safety personnel did not perform better than others indicating that prior experience with symbols may not be effective in emergency scenarios (Tang et al., 2009). Furthermore, intuitive, self-explanatory symbols may be impossible to design for abstract concepts (Davies et al., 1998) like ‘infectious diseases’ and ‘diabetes education’ when compared to the more tangible referents such as ‘stairs’ and ‘no smoking’. Results from preceding studies (Davies et al., 1998; Rousek and Hallbeck, 2011; Tang et al., 2008) underscore the need for more realistic pictograms depicting human shapes clearly indicating the meaning of the referent as opposed to poorly understood abstract symbols. The study by Rousek and Hallbeck (2011) involving 50 US university students (ages 18–30 years; ethnicity not reported) interpreting selected healthcare symbols is noteworthy as it evaluates symbol comprehension under multiple experimental settings. Comprehension rates for healthcare symbols (estimated from a bar graph [Fig. 2 in the cited article]) were: infectious disease 47% correct vs. 64% in our study; intensive care unit (ICU) 66% vs. 81%; cardiology 82% vs. 85%; pediatrics 84% vs. 64%; and surgery 92% vs. 79% in our participants, respectively. The differences may arise from cultural factors (as noted below), educational background of participants as well as methodological issues. Verbal responses (in our study) are more likely coded as ‘correct’ than written answers in which the respondent is unable to read cues from the interviewer. This may explain higher comprehension rates for the ‘infectious diseases’ and ‘ICU’ symbols we observed. Rousek and Hallbeck caution that “different cultural norms … would provide different study results if geographically local participants were used.” While this is true in a fundamental sense, as discussed next, based on the evidence, we feel that healthcare symbols need substantial revision to achieve comprehension accuracy comparable to general-purpose symbols at ISO and ANSI standards. These revisions should incorporate design that is more comprehensible across wider cultural backgrounds and age groups.

A more disconcerting finding of our study is the lack of universal recognition of healthcare symbols across a diversity of age, culture and educational levels. As anticipated, participants with higher education interpreted the symbols more accurately. This may be because graphic designers are more likely to test prototypes with educated volunteers than with persons of limited literacy. Additionally, symbols accompanied by text labels allow literate individuals to learn the referent message with repeated exposure.

On the other hand, we do not have a clear explanation why younger people are more adept at interpreting specialized symbols especially as it conflicts with the previous work on symbol comprehension across age groups (Lesch, 2008). Possibly, newer conventions and icons may have guided graphic design. Older patients may be less familiar with newer services, a finding observed in reference to the transport signs (Liu and Ho, 2012). Cognitive differences and familiarity with symbols may play a role in the observed findings. In an innovative study from Hong Kong, Ng et al. (2012) asked 31 older adults (mean age 71 years) to draw symbols for 28 referents including two healthcare signs: hospital and pharmacy. Remarkably, common stereotypes emerged from the drawings of these elderly laypersons despite several difficult to visualize referent concepts. Unfortunately, healthcare symbols had the lowest stereotype strengths; in particular, a cross, a pharmacy interior and a glass bottle were suggested for a pharmacy. Although the researchers advise that such difficult referents should be carefully evaluated in the design phase, however they do not offer an explanation or more detailed guidance. It is reasonable to assume that older people process images differently based on their prior experience. The operational significance of our observations logically implies the need of user testing with several age groups.

Even after controlling for education and age, culture was a predictor of symbol comprehension. We therefore infer that the interpretation of images, including graphical symbols, is culturally bound. For example, the use of a ‘teddy bear’ to depict pediatrics is perhaps not appropriate outside of North America. Certain symbols have religious connotations. The ‘cross’ symbol while having widespread usage was not recognized as ‘emergency’ (despite the word “Emergency” printed within the symbol) in a culture where the crescent is more commonly used for the purpose. That the ‘red cross’ is a copyrighted commercial trademark with litigation record on usage requires consideration (Saul, 2007). In our study, perhaps due to lack of familiarity with church architecture, many participants did not understand the chapel silhouette symbol for prayer area. Cultural issues may also limit the use of explicit graphics for certain healthcare services such as ‘gynecology’ and ‘mammography’. Incorporating lettering such as ‘Emergency’, ‘Rx’ and the dollar sign ‘$’ were not helpful in our study population with most likely limited English proficiency. We agree with the recommendation by other researchers (Rousek and Hallbeck, 2011; Young et al., 2012) that symbol designers should limit monolingual text in attempts at developing universal signage. Ng et al. (2013) comment, based on their work in Hong Kong, that ‘culturally generalized symbol designs’ need more cross-cultural research as designers and users backgrounds can influence conceptualization of referents. On the other hand, certain color and symbol configurations especially for hazard warnings show cross-cultural consistency (Lesch et al., 2009). Recognition of this phenomenon raises the possibility of universally recognized symbols eventually.

Earlier research on traffic sign symbols in a cross-cultural context has shown that familiarity and international standardization improves comprehension (Shinar et al., 2003). Cultural factors can also affect perceived risk, for example, persons from minorities may see greater risk when interpreting the same information (Smith-Jackson et al., 2010). McDougall and Curry (2004) provide a useful theoretical framework on icon interpretation that incorporates factors such as task complexity, workload, the nature of the display as well as user skills and preferences. Research-based frameworks can provide guidelines for symbols design in healthcare settings (Wogalter et al., 2002). For example, by applying a theoretical model to select symbol prototypes, followed by in-lab user testing and later validation in the field, Burt et al. (1999) were able to refine a sign for correct lifting posture. In the healthcare setting, complexities involved in human cognition of symbolic images need to be viewed in the context of dynamic interaction in the unfamiliar and stressful context. Some practical inferences may be drawn from experimental behavioral research on way-finding behavior across age groups (Jansen-Osmann and Fuchs, 2006), information encoding in symbols based on gaze patterns (Hamid et al., 2010), the influence of color (Braun et al., 1995) and gender differences in navigation strategies (Andersen et al., 2012). Finally, factors other than explanatory symbols, such as the perception of the context may be more influential as users rely on cues other than the symbol design for decision-making (Davies et al., 1998).

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Limitations of our study include having a single interviewer assessing all participants (which can introduce observer bias based on participant characteristics), not inquiring whether the participants had seen the sign before, and not assessing actual way-finding outcomes (such as time taken to reach destination). Visual acuity especially of older participants was not measured. Our study sample over-represented Arabic culture and younger women with higher education possibly due to sampling bias by our interviewer whose profile matches these characteristics. If the remaining participants (non-Arab, men, elderly) were grossly non-representative of their groups, it is possible that the null hypothesis (all groups interpret symbols equally well) is true and the observed results are erroneous. While such a possibility exists, it is unlikely that the interpretation rates by these subgroups are the same. The results of this study should not be used make inferences about these specific subgroups, though the primary finding is likely to be replicable and generalizable to other regions. Despite these limitations, the sample size was sufficient to show a difference between sub-groups and yield results with practical implications.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

As the comprehension of symbols is variable, signs in healthcare facilities should be specifically tested among persons with limited literacy and the elderly. Design of symbols should underscore social values from a wide range of cultures. Whether such a synthesis is possible remains to be elucidated. A universal symbol for healthcare is still lacking. While the ‘cross’ and the ‘crescent’ could be juxtaposed on a single graphic, a secular healthcare icon will have universal appeal. In an era of global health, massive international travel and highly multicultural communities, there remains a pressing need for easily recognizable, universal way-finding signs for healthcare facilities.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to thank all the participants in our study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

