@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Integrating user centered design, universal design and goal, operation, method and selection rules to improve the usability of DAISY player for persons with visual impairments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study integrated and synergized the UCD process, UD rules, and GOMS method as a new product development process.


                        
                        
                           
                           Redesigned DAISY player has better usability according to subjective and objective performance of participants.


                        
                        
                           
                           The proposed methodology can design user friendly products for both visual impaired and normal individuals.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

User centered design

Universal design

GOMS

DAISY player

Visually impaired

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The Digital Accessible Information SYstem (DAISY) player is an assistive reading tool developed for use by persons with visual impairments. Certain problems have persisted in the operating procedure and interface of DAISY players, especially for their Chinese users. Therefore, the aim of this study was to redesign the DAISY player with increased usability features for use by native Chinese speakers. First, a User Centered Design (UCD) process was employed to analyze the development of the prototype. Next, operation procedures were reorganized according to GOMS (Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules) methodology. Then the user interface was redesigned according to specific Universal Design (UD) principles. Following these revisions, an experiment involving four scenarios was conducted to compare the new prototype to other players, and it was tested by twelve visually impaired participants. Results indicate the prototype had the quickest operating times, the fewest number of operating errors, and the lowest mental workloads of all the compared players, significantly enhancing the prototype's usability. These findings have allowed us to generate suggestions for developing the next generation of DAISY players for people, especially for Chinese audience.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

While technology has accelerated the development of new products, only a small number of these are being designed for use by persons with visual impairments. In 1996, the DAISY (Digital Accessible Information SYstem) Consortium was formed by individuals and organizations throughout Europe, North America, and Asia with the aim of helping persons who have visual disabilities to read and publish, with a primary goal of converting analog data into Digital Talking Books (DTBs). One of the Consortium's objectives was to develop and apply DAISY tenets as a set of standards for DTBs; another was to help maintain DAISY libraries for use by persons with visual impairments. The Consortium is committed to developing equitable access to information for people who exhibit any sort of print interpretation disability (DAISY Consortium, 2014), regardless of their native language.

According to a Department of Statistics report issued by the Ministry of the Interior, Taiwan (Statistical Yearbook of Republic of China Interior (2014)), there were 56,817 persons with visual impairments in Taiwan as of January 2014. The actual number of impairments may be higher, as the calculation discounted visually impaired persons with multiple disabilities. The report noted that approximately 1500 Taiwanese become permanently visually impaired every year and observed in particular that there is a significant difference among people with adventitious blindness, congenital blindness, and those with normal vision.

In response to these conditions, the government has pledged to help the Taiwan Digital Talking Books Association (TDTB) build a DAISY e-book platform capable of converting 3000 standard print books to DAISY books in three years. To read these DAISY books and to use other DAISY resources, a portable mobile device known as the DAISY player is essential. The DAISY player is a portable device, facilely enabling visually impaired persons (and even those without visual impairments) to use it as a learning tool. However, the present challenge is that all existent DAISY players are programmed to use English language. In addition, the layout, dimension, size and weight of the existing players have been designed for the anthropometric dimensions of Caucasian users rather than for those of Chinese heritage. Based on interviews with visually impaired Taiwanese persons, these factors are significant drawbacks to the operating procedures and interfaces of the existing DAISY players. This study integrates and summarizes the limitations of the four existing DAISY players, as shown in Table 1
                     .

The goal of this study is to develop a DAISY player prototype designed to ameliorate the limitations identified above by incorporating the supportive element of Chinese pronunciation for visually impaired Taiwanese. In order to involve the customers, users, and users requirements into the design process, this study utilized and UCD process that integrate the UD principles and GOMS method to develop the DAISY player prototype. UCD develops a framework which expands scope from customers to users. UD provides seven principles to enhance the usability but causes reiterations in design process. GOMS can improve the efficiency of tasks on each product function. Integration of UCD, UD and GOMS could maximize the strengths of these three techniques while minimizing their weaknesses. In addition, the prototype was designed according to American National Standards Institute/National Information Standards Organization (ANSI/NISO) Z39.86-2005 (2012) specifications based on the digital talking books specifications and UD principles. Following its development, a usability test was conducted on the new prototype.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

To ensure the technical requirements meeting the needs of the visually impaired participants were fulfilled, this study integrated the existing DAISY player models, User Centered Design (UCD), specifications for the Digital Talking Books (DTBs), Universal Design (UD) elements, a GOMS model, and usability testing method during both the design stage and the assessment stage. The performance of new DAISY player prototype was evaluated in terms of usability. Here we address these elements of the research.

DAISY, a Digital Accessible Information SYstem, is an open standard for the storage of audio books, allowing non-sequential access to a book's contents that might be usable for text books or information leaflets (McGookin et al., 2008). The DAISY standard for the representation of books or other printed material is designed to engage technologies that foster easy navigation and synchronized multimodal elements for people with print reading-related disabilities (Leas et al., 2008). Only a few devices for playing DAISY books have been developed. The first prototype DAISY player was built in 1994 and presented at that year's International Conference on Computers Helping People with Special Needs (Crombie et al., 2004). Since then it has been recognized that DAISY players could offer extensive varied functionality such as image display, text magnification, and synchronization of text and audio. Persons with limited vision and learning disabilities might find such features helpful (Fruchterman, 2008).

In order to build, develop and maintain a set of DTB standards for DAISY players, the DAISY Consortium was selected by the National Information Standards Organization (NISO) to serve as the official agency for determining and overseeing the DAISY/NISO standards. The core standards for DTBs were approved in April 2012 by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI); the standard governing specifications for the framework of the DTBs themselves is ANSI/NISO Z39.86-2005 (2012). NISO specifies the standard as one that “defines the format and content of the electronic file set that comprises a DTB and establishes a limited set of requirements for DTBs playback devices” and “uses established and new specifications to delineate the structure of DTBs whose content can range from Extensible Markup Language (XML) text only, to text with corresponding spoken audio, to audio with little or no text.”

UCD process is a useful approach to achieve system usability (Preece et al., 1994), and it also helps people to obtain a better understanding of customers, users, and task requirements (Nelson et al., 2013). Because of the UCD process, the usability of web sites, systems, and many other products is improved as well (Vredenburg et al., 2002). UCD also represents a general philosophy toward design that brings the users or consumers into the design process (Veryzer and Borja de Mozota, 2005). Jung et al. (2014) applied user centered design variables to reflect a unique characteristic of products. However, the UCD process could not analyze the user requirements and product function in detail, require the involvement of additional usability experts into the design process and could produce the universal products (Abras et al., 2004).

Universal Design (UD) was coined by Ron Mace (Clarkson and Coleman, 2015). The purpose of the method is to improve the lives of persons with disabilities by providing guidelines for product designers and developers (Afacan and Erbug, 2009). In addition, UD is a concept intending to promote the development of products and environments equally usable by all the users, and benefits of which are well established (Story, 1998). Therefore, the Center for Universal Design followed the spirit of universality to develop the seven principles of UD (Center for Universal Design, 1997; Fletcher et al., 2015). Park et al. (2014) examined the potential of UD in the field of apparel product and Sangelkar et al. (2012) developed early stage applicable design guidelines for designing universal products. Raviselvam et al. (2014) investigated the lead users, specifically the elderly, as a source of ideas on UD and proposed a combination of product function and human activity for those with disability. However, UD could not provide a process and cause reiterations in product design and analyze operation tasks and user requirements in detail.

GOMS model was first proposed by Card et al. (1980a, 1980b) for predicting human behaviors. GOMS is an acronym for “Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules,” for any given task, a particular GOMS structure could be analyzed the characteristics of user interaction (e.g., action sequence), constructed and used to predict the time required to complete the task and human behaviors (Rose and Bearman, 2012; Jung and Jang, 2015). It consists of four components: (1) a set of Goals, (2) a set of Operators which are actions to achieve the goals, (3) a set of Methods which are procedures for achieving the goals, and (4) a set of Selection principles for choosing from among the competing methods. The model consists of descriptions of the methods needed to accomplish specified goals, presenting a narrative of the knowledge that a user must have in order to carry out tasks on a device or system (Kieras, 1999). For any given task, a particular GOMS model could be used to predict the required time to complete the task, the effects of errors related to task performance (Kieras, 2002), and the effects of errors on task performance (Diaper and Stanton, 2003). Therefore, GOMS model has been adopted for modeling different tasks in a variety of domains such as a wide range of computer tasks (Olson and Olson, 1990), system interface designs (Kieras, 1985; Oray et al., 1993), and user interface analysis (John and Kieras, 1996). Jung and Jang (2015) employed the GOMS to comprehensively examine the method effectiveness that proposed in their study. However, the GOMS could not provide a systematic viewpoint while developing a new product (Rogers et al., 2011). GOMS is efficient oriented such that concept of UD and UCD might not be achieved and without considering the user interaction behavior, and disabled users (Tonn-Eichstädt, 2006; Schrepp, 2006).

In summary, to attest the benefits of the proposed method, we firstly compared the strengths and weaknesses of UCD, UD and GOMS individually in Table 2
                        . UCD develops a framework which expands scope from customers to users. UD provides seven principles to enhance the usability but causes reiterations in design process. As for GOMS, our goal is to maximize the strengths of these three techniques while minimizing their weaknesses. As a result, a synergy that contains both macro and micro aspects is generated.

According to Lewis (2006), usability testing is among the most important and widely used methods to evaluate product designs. The ISO 9241-11: Guidance on Usability (1998) addressed the extent to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use. Sonderegger and Sauer (2010) posited that effectiveness refers to the extent to which a task goal is successfully achieved, such as measurement of the proportion of users able to complete a given task. Nielson (1993) and Shneiderman (1998) identified usability as a suitable design element for computer interfaces and electronic products, observing that usability could be measured by elements such as low error rate and meeting the user subjective satisfaction. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration-Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) developed in the 1980s is one of the most widely used tools for assessing subjective workload. It has been tested and used in human performance research by multitudes of studies (Noyes and Bruneau, 2007). The NASA-TLX uses six dimensions to assess mental workload: (1) mental demand, (2) physical demand, (3) temporal demand, (4) performance, (5) effort, and (6) frustration (Hart and Staveland, 1988). Given this robust background as a basis, this study conducted an experiment to evaluate our prototype performance based on usability testing.

This study addressed the DAISY player prototype's operation procedures and its hardware interface. The methodology presented in this section covers both the design and the implementation of the prototype, and presents the experiment that was designed specifically to verify the prototype's performance.

This study entailed a four-stage UCD process (ISO 13407, 2010) to develop our prototype. Stage 1 was to understand the development context of the DAISY player prototype; this was achieved by analyzing the ANSI/NISO Z39.86-2005 specifications. Stage 2 entailed conducting interviews with two material experts (specifically, two blind persons who had regularly use existing DAISY player models, Plextalk® and Victor Reader Stream®, for more than ten years) to assist define and refine its functions and operation procedures. Stage 3 involved applying UD principles to improve the product design solution. Finally, Stage 4 involved applying an adapted form of usability testing to evaluate the performance of the DAISY player prototype. In Fig. 1
                     , the blue elements indicate the four stages of the UCD process, while the rose-colored elements reflect the four stages of our prototype process development.

As noted earlier, the DAISY Consortium developed ANSI/NISO Z39.86-2005 specification standards for DTBs. These defined the essential format and content of digital files for DTBs and established DTBs playback device guidelines. This study adhered to those specifications while designing the DAISY player prototype. Relevant data is given in Appendix A.

Expanding beyond prior development of these devices, this study referenced specific Taiwanese anthropometric data, collected and integrated by the Institute of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health (ILOSH), Ministry of Labor, Taiwan (Institute of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health, Ministry of Labor (2014)), in order to customize the prototype for Taiwanese users. According to the ILOSH data, the average hand length from the fingertips to the bottom of the palm of an 18-to-65-year-old Taiwanese person is 176.52 mm, and the average hand width is 95.13 mm. This study utilized this statistical data to assess the most suitable size of the prototype.

The DAISY player prototype operation tasks and operation procedures were determined according to the results of the experts and user's interviews depicted in Fig. 2
                        . Then, a GOMS model was used to evaluate the operation steps and operation times for each operation task performed by the four existent DAISY players identified in Table 3
                        . The benchmark results of that evaluation are also illustrated in Table 3. The results show that Booksense® has the fewest operation steps and the shortest operation time in the two tasks, Voice Setup and Play DAISY Book. Milestone® is most advantageous with respect to the Bookmark and Upload/Download tasks, while the Victor Stream Reader® shows superiority in the tasks Set Sleep Timer and Record.

After significant analysis, the prototype's hardware layout was designed according to the operation process shown in Fig. 3
                         with a numeric keyboard and simulation software.

This study incorporated UD principles in the design plan for the DAISY player interface prototype. Excellent overviews of UD were found in Handbook of Human Factors for the Older Adult (Fisk and Rogers, 1997), Handbook of Human Factors (Salvendy, 1997), and The Universal Design Handbook (Preiser and Ostroff, 2001). This study adopted the following principles for use in developing the prototype: Equitable Use, Flexibility in Use, Simple and Intuitive, Size and Space for Approach, Perceptible Information, Tolerance for Error, and Low Physical Effort (Lin and Wu, 2015).

Therefore, this study invited two experts to evaluate new DAISY player prototype with Product Performance Program (PPP) developed by Nakagawa (2006) The purpose of PPP is to access the adherence of a new design to UD principles with five-point Likert scale (Likert, 1932; Bentley et al., 2014). The results showed the DAISY player prototype accomplish UD principles in Table 4, 5
                        
                         and Fig. 4
                        .

Prior to the experiment, this study executed a pre-test to ensure this study were on the right track. Since the physical equipment for the Milestone® player and the prototype were not yet testable at the time of this research, this study used an external numeric keypad to simulate them—hence the pre-test. The pre-test tasks were designed with the assistance of two experts, both blind and experienced DAISY player users. Five persons with visual impairments participated in the pre-test. All five used all five DAISY players to execute a series of four tasks. The operating times for all five participants were recorded during the pre-test. Table 6
                         shows the rankings for the pre-test results, based on the average times for each player to complete each task. Results indicate that the prototype exhibited the best performance overall, and that Plextalk® (with the longest average times) had the lowest performance ranking. As a result of these findings, Plextalk® was excluded from the final lineup, and this study used the remaining three extant DAISY players plus the prototype to conduct the experiment.

Following the pre-test, an experiment was conducted to assess the operation time and the operation error rate in each of the four remaining DAISY players across a series of four tasks. Twelve persons with visual impairments were recruited for the experiment. Of these, seven had severe impairments, four had moderate impairments, and one was slightly visually impaired. Eleven were regular Plextalk® users and one of them used the Victor Reader Stream®. Table 7
                         shows the interface and feature of the experimental equipment.

The four experimental scenarios and task operation processes (Read DAISY books, Bookmark, Record, and Upload/Download files) were selected and designed in consultation with the two experts. Table 8
                         describes the experimental scenarios. Next, the experimental procedures are shown sequentially in Fig. 5
                        .

The use of a Latin square was applied to design the experimental sequence in this study because it is a within-subject design. Given four scenarios, relations with the four DAISY players could be applied to the sequence of the Latin square efficiently. The twelve participants were easily integrated into the design sequence (Table 9
                        ).

This study recorded the operation time and operation errors during the experiment to evaluate user performance. The participants completed NASA-TLX evaluation sheets immediately after completing the experiment to generate subjective responses. The independent variables for our purposes are the four DAISY players themselves. The dependent variables are operation errors, operation times, and NASA-TLX scores.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results of usability testing are analyzed and discussed in this section. This study applied the descriptive statistics and Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) to analyze the experiment results by Statistical Product and Service Solutions (SPSS) 15.0®.

The NASA-TLX scores were applied to analyze the results of subjective evaluation, in which, lower scores indicate lower mental workload. Based on the Analysis of the Variance (ANOVA) results, the levels of mental workload for all four types of DAISY players are significantly different (p = 0.002 < 0.05). This indicates that the four scenarios present a comparable mental workload among all four types of the DAISY players.

The descriptive statistic results that are reported as mean ± standard deviation of NASA-TLX for the four DAISY players are illustrated in Fig. 6
                        , showing the average perceived workload value for each player and its ranking. The NASA-TLX score of Milestone (2nd rank) is 28% higher than that of the proposal prototype. These results indicate that the prototype performance is significantly different from those of the other DAISY players.

The data for operation times and operation errors were analyzed after the experiment was completed, as part of the user performance evaluation. The lengths of operation times are significant across all the DAISY players (p = 0.020 < 0.05). Of interest, the average time for the prototype was the lowest among all four players.

The descriptive statistic results that are reported as mean ± standard deviation of operation times for all four players are illustrated in Fig. 7
                        . It indicated that the length of operation time for the prototype developed specifically for this study is lower than the operation times for the other three players. The actual difference between prototype and the 2nd rank DAISY player (Milestone) in the operation time is 39%.

The data for operation errors in each scenario are all significant (p < 0.05). The descriptive statistic results (mean ± standard deviation) about the average error for each DAISY player are illustrated in Fig. 8
                        . The actual difference between prototype and the 2nd rank DAISY player (Milestone) in the operation error is approximately 50% less. Notably, the prototype exhibits the lowest assessment of operation errors.

Finally, the experimental participants' answers in the open ended questionnaire after the experiment, and the results showed that the design of the DAISY player prototype would comply with the seven UD principles. The results of the open ended questionnaire show in Table 10
                        .

The DAISY player prototype interface layout and functions of all buttons are shown in Figs. 9 and 10
                        
                         and specified in Table 11
                        . The enhanced prototype interface possesses the tactile symbols, suitable size, and proper space for use. Moreover, the prototype has the appropriate suitable buttons, dimensions and operation functions of a DAISY player, meeting the established standards. The function of each button is unique. Experiment participants had significant opportunity to test drive and examine the device during the experiment. The results of the experiment indicate the operation processes and functions are significantly better with the prototype than with any of the existing DAISY players.

In consideration of actually building a model based on our prototype, we consulted a manufacturing concern. If constructed according to the model shown in Fig. 8, the manufacturer could produce a physical prototype as shown in Fig. 9. Based on a preliminary estimate, the manufacturer estimates the mass production price for this new DAISY player, including the prototype material, module, template and subsidiary costs, at US$100—about one-quarter the cost of the existent DAISY players.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The intent of this investigation was to determine the potential for redesigning a DAISY player that would be appropriate for use by Taiwanese persons with varying levels of visual impairment. It involved a comparison of four extant DAISY player devices and the generation of a prototype model directly reflecting the anthropometric requirements of Taiwanese hands. Our analysis integrated established research elements—in particular, the UCD process, a GOMS methodology, and UD principles—in an effort to analyze the critical elements of the existing DAISY players and to construct a new prototype. Statistical analysis of the experimental results shows that the subjective mental workload and the user performances across the four existing DAISY players are significant, providing motivation for our research. End-result analysis confirms that the new DAISY player prototype was successfully developed and met the ANSI/NISO Z39.86 (2012) standards as well.

Based on interviews with the participants after the experiment, the prototype was found to have advantages over the existent DAISY players. The weaknesses of the existent players (see Table 1) were all improved upon in the new prototype.

The pre-test provided useful insight into this specific product development. Usability testing also successfully evaluated the prototype user performance. Moreover, during the experiment, NASA-TLX analysis was applied to evaluate a mental workload assessment among the visually impaired for the first time. Future research can and will apply the proposed method to assist with the design and enhancement of other new products, especially for use by persons with disabilities.

Furthermore, this study successfully combined the theory with practice. From an academic perspective, it integrated and synergized the UCD process, UD principles, and GOMS modeling to develop a new user-friendly product for an expanding handicapped segment of the general population.

This study redesigned and extended the practicality of the use of DAISY players among the visually impaired, with a specific focus on the product user population in Taiwan. The proposed improved player could assist the visually impaired in reading, learning, and living. Looking forward, the DAISY player could eventually be integrated with the mobile smart phone to provide even more services.

A quiet room was used during this study's experiment stage. However, a visually impaired person might wish to operate a DAISY player on the street or in a shuttle bus, in an environment that is much noisier and provides more distractions. The proposed prototype player might help someone navigate more easily in such an environment. Future study could also explore possible ways to avoid DAISY player failure under certain environmental conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study incorporated the use of established research tenets to remodel an existing reading tool for use by persons with visual impairments: specifically, to develop a DAISY player prototype for use among members of the Chinese population who are visually impaired.

This study presented the superior performance of a redesigned DAISY player prototype that has the potential for development as the next generation DAISY player. According to experiment results, the prototype exhibited lower NASA-TLX scores (p = 0.002 < 0.05) and the best user performance among all the players. Data indicates users will expend a lower mental workload to operate the prototype. The actual difference between prototype and the 2nd rank DAISY player in NASA-TLX scores is 28%, in the operation time is 39%, and the operation error is approximately 50% less.

Data indicates users will expend a lower mental workload to operate the prototype. Furthermore, this study successfully integrated the use of UD principles, GOMS analysis and UCD, suggesting this development process could be used to design and develop other user-friendly products for the visually impaired or disabled.

Future research could take user experience into consideration to continue enhancing the functions of the DAISY player, especially with regard to its physical size, its programmable features and its network functions. Other new technologies such as GPS and RFIDs could also be incorporated into future research tangents, leading toward a seamless guidance system that could improve performance of the DAISY player and assist the visually impaired in their daily lives.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

The authors would like to express our gratitude to reviewers for their valuable comments. We also thank Professor Emeritus Sheue-Ling Hwang and Dr. Jan Li Wang for their suggestions at the initiative stage of this research. This research was supported by Ministry of Science and Technology of the Republic of China, Taiwan, under contract number MOST 103-2221-E-007-051-MY3.


                     
                        
                           •
                           Device is relatively compact, with the sum of height, width, and length not exceeding 50.8 cm.

Device weights must less than 1.59 kg.

The user can expect the player to operate on a fully-charged battery at normal speed and 60 db SPL measured at 1 m for 6 h.

It seen as an “ultra-portable” which requires the use of headphones.

Moving Between the Navigation Control File and the Actual Book.

This device would also be portable.

Output connectors: headphone jack (for headphones and amplified speakers), line-out jacks.

Device has a built-in speaker.

Device is easy to maintain. (Have the button of reset.)

The user can adjust the volume to meet hearing and listening conditions.

The user can adjust the pitch.

Device operates off of AC and battery power.

Controls are physically differentiable by touch.

The user interface allows control by all users.

No need to use visual display to operate device.

Single button control (one button at a time).

Cancel/Undo features.

The machine/output can be started/stopped easily.

Navigation Control Center (Information Key).

Setting and Labeling Bookmarks.

Fast forward and fast reverse.

Help Functions.

Confirmation messages.

Audible error feedback.

Help functions.

Need the Location Information.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

