@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Neck, shoulder and low back pain in secondary schoolchildren in relation to schoolbag carriage: Should the recommended weight limits be gender-specific?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Musculoskeletal complaints were common among schoolchildren, with girls being more likely to report symptoms than boys.


                        
                        
                           
                           The relative schoolbag weight (% body weight) was associated with neck and shoulder complaints.


                        
                        
                           
                           The type of schoolbag was associated with low back complaints.


                        
                        
                           
                           Adolescents with neck pain carried their schoolbags for a longer period of time each day.


                        
                        
                           
                           Gender differences may need to be considered when setting weight limits for schoolchildren.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Musculoskeletal pain

Adolescents

Backpack

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The occurrence of neck, shoulder and low back complaints in relation to schoolbag carriage and other potential risk factors were investigated in a cross-sectional study of 586 Iranian schoolchildren aged 12–14 years. The average load carried by schoolchildren was 2.8 kg. Neck, shoulder and low back complaints during the preceding month were reported by 35.3%, 26.1% and 33% of the students, respectively. Gender was an independent factor predicting musculoskeletal symptoms in schoolchildren. Girls were more likely than boys to suffer from neck, shoulder and low back complaints, although there was no significant difference between genders in terms of schoolbag carriage variables. The findings suggest that the recommended weight limit for schoolbag carriage may need to differ between boys and girls. The associations between schoolbag variables and reported symptoms are also discussed. The results provide evidence that the current weight limit should consider a broader combination of factors that influence the use of schoolbags.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Evidence suggests that back pain is frequent among children and adolescents (Harreby et al., 1999; Hakala et al., 2002; Watson et al., 2002; Jones et al., 2003; Murphy et al., 2007). According to the literature, the occurrence of back pain in children and adolescents has varied between 7% and 74% (Balagué et al., 1995; Jeffries et al., 2007). Similarly, neck or shoulder complaints are also fairly common among schoolchildren (Ehrmann-Feldman et al., 2002; Hakala et al., 2002; Auvinen et al., 2009). There is evidence that musculoskeletal pain in childhood and adolescence is a significant risk factor for experiencing such symptoms in adulthood (Hakala et al., 2002; Siivola et al., 2004; Hestbaek et al., 2006). Therefore, to prevent musculoskeletal pain, we need to improve our understanding of the risk factors associated with such complaints among children and adolescents (Trevelyan and Legg, 2006).

Loads carried by schoolchildren and their role in the development of musculoskeletal pain among this age group has been the subject of recent attention (Grimmer and Williams, 2000; Negrini and Carabalona, 2002; Sheir-Neiss et al., 2003; Mackie et al., 2005; Murphy et al., 2007; Javadivala et al., 2012). There is evidence that schoolbags may be a factor contributing to musculoskeletal complaints in schoolchildren. Several studies have reported an association between carrying heavily loaded schoolbags and musculoskeletal pain or discomfort (Grimmer and Williams, 2000; Negrini and Carabalona, 2002; Sheir-Neiss et al., 2003; Dianat et al., 2013). As a consequence, a weight limit of 10%–15% of body weight (BW) has been recommended recently as a maximum load for schoolchildren based on epidemiologic, physiologic, and biomechanical approaches (Brackley and Stevenson, 2004; Devroey et al., 2007; Bauer and Freivalds, 2009). However, there are still inadequacies in the recommended schoolbag weight limit due to limited research in this area. To the authors' knowledge, there are several key issues that are still unresolved, making the applicability of this generic weight limit questionable. One is that the recommendations are mostly based on studies conducted in the developed countries, and therefore giving no evidence that the results are generalizable to less developed countries. It is also not clear whether or not the limit set should be the same for both boys and girls. Furthermore, most previous research has focused on low back pain, whereas much less attention has been given to the effects of load carriage on the other body regions such as neck and shoulders, areas which might also be affected by carrying schoolbags. Thus, understanding the epidemiology of this phenomenon is a valuable tool to develop guidelines and recommendations with regard to safe load carriage for schoolchildren around the world.

This cross-sectional study was therefore conducted to investigate the occurrence of neck, shoulder and low back complaints in relation to the use of schoolbags and other potential risk factors among Iranian schoolchildren. One of the aims of the study was to evaluate whether or not the recommended weight limit for carrying schoolbags should be gender-specific. In addition, as the literature is somewhat limited and the findings are varied, this study adds more evidence to the debate and identifies broader issues (e.g. different educational philosophies, sociocultural contexts, etc.) and also widens the discussion to more countries. It is also of particular interest as it considers the effect of schoolbag carriage on several body regions.

This cross-sectional study was performed between February and June 2011, in the city of Tabriz (population about 1.58 million), the fourth largest city in Iran and the capital of East Azerbaijan province in Northwest Iran. A sample of 586 students aged 12–14 years (who were in grades six through eight) participated in the study. A three stage sampling procedure was used to obtain a representative sample of schoolchildren in the study area. In the first stage, five educational districts were chosen (as strata), and then in the second stage, a total of 20 schools were selected randomly from the districts (including two boy's schools and two girl's schools from each district). Finally, the study participants were chosen randomly from each school. Permission to approach schools in the study area was obtained from the Tabriz Department of Education and the school authorities involved. The study protocol was approved by the ethical review committee of Tabriz University of Medical Sciences. The students were given a letter asking for parental consent for them to take part in the study. The data were collected by two trained investigators (authors of this paper).

The weights (body weight and schoolbag weight including any additional items carried separately) and standing height were measured using a digital electronic scale (accurate to 0.01 kg) and portable stadiometer, respectively. The data were collected on an unannounced day so that children could not alter their schoolbag weight. The scale was calibrated over a range of known weights prior to data collection. Body mass index (BMI as weight/height2) was derived from measurements of height and weight.

The questionnaire used in the study was developed based on data in the literature. The first item on the questionnaire was to record demographic details (including age, gender and grade level) of each student. The occurrence of neck, shoulder and low back complaints during the preceding month was recorded according to a modification of the standardised Nordic Musculoskeletal Disorders Questionnaire (Kuorinka et al., 1987). The validity and reliability of the Nordic questionnaire have been established previously (Kuorinka et al., 1987; Dickinson et al., 1992). The English version of Nordic questionnaire has already been translated and revised into Persian language (Ghaffari et al., 2006). The questions about neck, shoulder and low back pain were as follows: “Have you, at any time during the past month, had trouble (such as ache, pain, discomfort or numbness) in the following areas of your body?” 1) Neck, 2) shoulders, and 3) low back area. The location of these anatomic areas was demonstrated by a drawing in the questionnaire. The response alternatives were “no” and “yes”. The questions regarding the use of schoolbags were based on the relevant literature (Grimmer and Williams, 2000; Goodgold et al., 2002; Negrini and Carabalona, 2002; van Gent et al., 2003; Dianat et al., 2013) and included information about the type of schoolbag, time spent carrying a schoolbag to and from school each day, preferred method of carrying a schoolbag and mode of transportation to and from the school. The amount of time spent on sport and physical activities, watching television and using a computer was also recorded. The questionnaire was evaluated in a pilot study on a sample of 50 school students and minor revisions related to clarity and wording were made based on the pilot testing feedback. Also, the test-retest reliability (stability) of the items of the questionnaire was acceptable (phi coefficients ranged from 0.72 to 0.91). The whole questionnaire, administered by interviewing the children, took approximately 10 min to complete.

Statistical analysis of the data was performed with SPSS software version 11.5 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Statistical analyses were performed for the whole sample and for the subgroups of students (e.g. by gender and educational grade level). Two-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used for evaluation of the main effects of gender and grade level on the schoolbag weight (both absolute weight and % BW) and time spent carrying a schoolbag. This analysis was followed by Tukey's post hoc tests for pairwise comparisons. Similarly, multinomial logistic regression was applied to evaluate the effects of gender and grade level on the method of carrying and type of schoolbag as well as the mode of transportation to and from the school. The relationship between prevalence rates and study variables was assessed using binary logistic regression analysis. In addition, multiple logistic regression analysis was carried out using backward stepwise procedure to estimate the association between independent variables and self-reported neck, shoulder and low back pain in the multivariate context. The odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated from the relevant multiple logistic regression models. The assumptions of the model (including the presence of outliers and collinearity) were checked and were not in violation. There was no sign of collinearity (e.g. the confidence intervals were not wide). The fit of the logistic regression models was confirmed by the Hosmer–Lemeshow goodness-of-fit test. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The questionnaire was completed by all 586 schoolchildren (257 boys and 329 girls; age, 12.8 ± 1.27 years; weight, 50.7 ± 14.3 kg; height, 155.6 ± 8.93 cm; body mass index, 20.7 ± 4.6 kg/m2). The mean schoolbag weight (absolute weight) for all of the children was 2.8 ± 0.94 kg (range, 0.86–6.5 kg), and the percent this represented of student body weight (% BW) for the whole sample was 7.1 ± 2.81% BW (range, 1.6–18.4% BW). The ANOVA revealed significant differences in the amounts of loads carried by the children (in terms of both absolute mean schoolbag weight and % BW) by grade level, but not by gender. Post hoc tests showed that Grade 8 students carried significantly heavier schoolbags (2.9 ± 0.94 kg, p < 0.01) than Grade 6 (2.5 ± 0.91 kg) students. In contrast, Grade 6 students (7.2 ± 2.47% BW, p < 0.01) carried a significantly greater proportion of body weight than Grade 8 (6.1 ± 1.73% BW) students (Table 1
                     ).

The majority of children used a backpack to transport items to and from school (72.6% overall, 68.3% boys, 75.1% girls). The remainder of children carried a brief case (13.9%) or satchel (13.5%). The most popular method of carrying a schoolbag was on both shoulders (46.1% overall, 49.7% boys, 43.4% girls), followed by on one shoulder (39.3%) and by hands (14.6%). The mean carrying time was 21.5 ± 18.7 min/day (range, 5–120 min). The results of multinomial logistic regression showed no statistically significant differences between boys and girls and between different grade levels in terms of the method of carrying or type of schoolbag. Twice as many children walked to or from school (50.8%) as were driven by car (25.6%) or bus (23.1%). There was also no statistically significant difference in the time spent carrying a schoolbag and mode of transportation to and from the school by gender or grade level. Approximately 97% of children participated in sport activities, with an average of 3.2 h per week. About 58% of children reported that they used a computer for an average of 4.1 h per week. None of the children had access to school lockers.

A total of 59.6% of the children reported neck, shoulder or low back complaints during the preceding month. About 55% of the children who reported complaints indicated one location of pain; the remainder (45%) reported more than one location of pain. Neck and shoulder complaints were reported by 35.3% and 26.1% of the students, respectively. Approximately 33% of children reported low back complaints.

The occurrence of neck, shoulder and low back complaints during the preceding month is presented in Table 2
                     . Girls experienced neck (OR = 1.94, 95% CI = 1.29–2.91, p < 0.001), shoulder (OR = 1.53, 95% CI = 1.08–2.38, p < 0.05) and low back (OR = 2.16, 95% CI = 1.42–3.29, p < 0.001) complaints more frequently than boys (Table 2). Other demographic factors including age and BMI were not associated with reported complaints. Time spent on sport activities, watching television or using a computer were also not associated with the occurrence of complaints.


                     Table 3
                      shows the associations between schoolbag carriage variables and the occurrence of complaints in the univariate analyses. The schoolbag weight (expressed as % BW) was associated with the occurrence of neck (OR = 2.10, 95% CI = 1.39–5.30, p < 0.01) and shoulder complaints (OR = 1.69, 95% CI = 1.23–3.41, p < 0.05). Neck complaints were also associated with the time spent carrying a schoolbag each day and method of travelling to or from school (p < 0.05) (Table 2). The type of schoolbag was found to be associated with the occurrence of low back complaints (e.g. children using brief case/satchel had a lower prevalence of back complaints than those wearing a backpack) (OR = 0.68, 95% CI = 0.42–0.89, p < 0.05). No other significant differences were found between schoolbag variables and reported complaints.

The results of multiple logistic regression analyses are shown in Table 4
                      in the multivariate context. Gender was found to be a significant demographic factor for neck, shoulder and low back complaints. The schoolbag weight expressed as % BW was significantly associated with the occurrence of neck and shoulder complaints. Significant association was also found between the time spent carrying a schoolbag each day and neck complaints. The type of schoolbag was the only significant schoolbag variable associated with low back complaints in the multiple regression models.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Most available data on the occurrence and characteristics of neck, shoulder or back pain in schoolchildren is related to developed and industrialised countries (Jeffries et al., 2007), while there is little information about these issues in developing and low-income countries. The results of the present study add to the understanding of the use of schoolbags and musculoskeletal pain in schoolchildren. The main finding of the study was that the occurrence of low back, neck and shoulder complaints was relatively high in the study population, with girls being more likely to complaint from symptoms in the neck, shoulders and low back than boys. The schoolbag carriage variables including the mean schoolbag weight expressed as % BW, type of schoolbag, method of carrying a schoolbag and time spent carrying a schoolbag each day were also found to be associated with the occurrence of complaints.

It is interesting to note that the mean schoolbag weight in the present study was 2.8 kg that is much lower than weights reported in earlier studies (e.g. ranging from 3.4 kg to 9.4 kg) (Grimmer and Williams, 2000; Negrini and Carabalona, 2002; Jones et al., 2003; Sheir-Neiss et al., 2003; van Gent et al., 2003; Korovessis et al., 2005; Whittfield et al., 2005; Murphy et al., 2007; Skoffer, 2007). This possibly can be explained by the differences in school curriculum, type of books required, school provision of storage, or behavioural and cultural differences between countries. As a consequence, the weight of schoolbags in this study represented 7.1% of the student's body weight, which is also lower than those reported in above mentioned studies (range, 10–22% BW).

The results of the current study indicated that gender was an independent factor predicting musculoskeletal symptoms in schoolchildren. Among demographic factors, gender was found to be a significant factor for neck, shoulder and low back complaints, so that girls experienced such complaints more frequently than boys. This is similar to the findings reported by most previous studies which have shown a higher prevalence in girls than in boys (Hakala et al., 2002; van Gent et al., 2003; Siivola et al., 2004; Diepenmaat et al., 2006; Auvinen et al., 2009). The higher prevalence rate in girls has been attributed to earlier female puberty and its accompanying hormonal changes (Leboeuf-Yde and Kyvik, 1998; Wedderkopp et al., 2005). On the other hand, boys may tend to underreport (Balagué et al., 1995) or worry less about their symptoms (Salminen et al., 1992). In contrast, we found no association between neck, shoulder or low back complaints and other demographic factors such as age and BMI. Several studies have shown that the prevalence of neck or shoulder complaints (Hakala et al., 2002; Siivola et al., 2004) and back pain increases with age (Watson et al., 2002; Sato et al., 2008). However, data from the literature on the effect of BMI on neck or shoulder complaints in children and adolescents are limited, and there is some controversy regarding the correlation between back pain and BMI. Some investigators have shown a positive correlation between BMI and back pain (Harreby et al., 1999; Sheir-Neiss et al., 2003; Korovessis et al., 2005), while others have found no association between BMI and back complaints (Grimmer and Williams, 2000; Jones et al., 2003; Masiero et al., 2008).

As noted earlier, it is not yet clear from the recommended weight limit for carrying schoolbags (e.g. 10%–15% of body weight) whether or not the limit should be set the same for both boys and girls. In this study, there was no significant difference in the amount of loads carried between boys and girls, nor was there a clear difference between genders for the other schoolbag carriage variables. However, the findings of the present study indicated that girls experienced more neck, shoulder and low back complaints than boys. Taken together, these findings could mean that the recommended weight limit for schoolbag carriage may need to differ between boys and girls. In other words, a single weight limit may not be appropriate for both genders and it may need to be lower for girls than for boys. An alternative approach to developing gender-specific guidelines is to consider a more traditional ergonomics approach of accommodating a high percentage of the population. For instance, it may be advisable to recommend weight limits based on the lower percentile of the population for the entire population. However, it has been acknowledged that a ‘safe limit’ for load carriage could not be determined without consideration of individual differences (e.g. variability in body dimensions, physical capabilities, etc.) as well as handling methods (Kroemer, 1997). Moreover, the heterogeneity of the population (in terms of gender) is an important issue that needs to be addressed when using percentiles. Based on the findings of the present study, it seems therefore more appropriate to develop gender-specific guidelines for carrying schoolbags, rather than using a single weight limit.

It is also of interest to note that the mean schoolbag weight (expressed as % BW) included in the multiple logistic regression models was found to be associated with the occurrence of neck and shoulder complaints (e.g. those children carried loads greater than 10% of their body weight reported more complaints). This result differs from the findings reported by van Gent et al. (2003) who found no association between neck/shoulder complaints and the weight of schoolbags. However, the lack of association between low back pain and schoolbag weight in the present study is in accordance with most previous studies (Negrini and Carabalona, 2002; van Gent et al., 2003; Korovessis et al., 2005 
                     Skoffer, 2007). Nevertheless, some studies have reported an association between back pain and the weight of schoolbags (Grimmer and Williams, 2000; Sheir-Neiss et al., 2003).

The findings from the current study indicated that longer periods of time spent carrying a schoolbag each day contributed to a greater number of reports of neck complaints. Although some previous studies have shown a positive relationship between time spent carrying schoolbags and reported low back pain (Grimmer and Williams, 2000; Negrini and Carabalona, 2002), we did not find such an association. The method of carrying a schoolbag did not contribute to an increased risk for neck, shoulder or low back complaints. However, it seems that carrying a backpack on both shoulders is the optimum method of carrying a schoolbag, as it has been shown that carrying a backpack on one shoulder is likely to be associated with increased risk of back pain (Korovessis et al., 2005; Skoffer, 2007), increased lateral spinal bending and shoulder elevation (Pascoe et al. 1997) and increased electromyographic (EMG) activity of the back muscles (Motmans et al. 2006). Moreover, carrying a schoolbag in one hand may be a less efficient method in terms of energy expenditure as compared with carrying it on both shoulders (Malhotra and Sen Gupta, 1965). Additionally, the type of schoolbag was a significant factor for low back complaints (e.g. backpacks were associated with more complaints). Given the limited literature in this area, these findings provide additional evidence that the relative load (expressed as % BW) may not alone adequately represent the demands on the musculoskeletal systems of schoolchildren, and therefore other schoolbag variables should also be taken into account in developing guidelines for load carriage by schoolchildren.

This study has an advantage that the observer error was controlled by using two trained interviewers in comparison with studies in which there were separate observer for each case (e.g. self-reported or parental-assisted reporting). However, this study was cross-sectional in design, which prevented an evaluation of the relationship between cause and effect, and therefore further longitudinal studies are recommended. In addition, more complex models taking into account other variables (e.g. physical and psychological factors) are recommended for the future.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In conclusion, the main finding of this study was that neck, shoulder and low back pain are frequent in schoolchildren, which is in line with findings from developed countries. It was shown that gender was an independent factor of musculoskeletal symptoms in schoolchildren. Girls were more likely than boys to suffer from such complaints. The schoolbag weight (expressed as % BW) was found to be associated with the occurrence of neck and shoulder complaints. Also, adolescents with neck pain were more likely to carry their schoolbags for a longer period of time each day. The only schoolbag carriage variable associated with low back complaints was the type of schoolbag. These findings provide further evidence that the mean schoolbag weight expressed as % BW may not be the only determinant of musculoskeletal pain in schoolchildren and recommendations regarding a weight limit for schoolbag carriage should take into account other factors related to the use of schoolbags. The results also suggest that gender differences need to be considered when setting weight limits for schoolchildren.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors are grateful to all the principals, teachers and students who collaborated in this study. The authors also would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive and helpful comments.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

