@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Response to thermal and physical strain during flashover training in Croatian firefighters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Flashover training (FOT) induced a mild physiological cardiovascular response.


                        
                        
                           
                           More than 25% FOT attendees were obese.


                        
                        
                           
                           Elevated basal blood pressure was found in >50% FOT attendees.


                        
                        
                           
                           Croatian firefighters need to improve their physical fitness.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cardiac strain

Arterial blood pressure

Body mass index

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Flashover training (FOT) for firefighters is a simulation of the flashover phenomenon under controlled conditions. This study assessed arterial blood pressure (BP) and its response to thermal and physical strain during FOT in 48 professional and 18 volunteer firefighters.
                  A high prevalence of obesity (27%), basal hypertensive (53%) and prehypertensive (33%) BP values was found. FOT induced mild hyperthermia and physical strain (average increase of 1.1 °C in tympanic temperature and 61% of the maximal heart beat predicted for age). Compared to professional firefighters, FOT in the volunteers induced a higher increase in pulse (P = 0.050) and tympanic temperature (P = 0.025). Systolic BP did not vary significantly, and diastolic BP slightly decreased in both groups.
                  Results confirm that FOT induced only physiological cardiovascular responses to thermal and physical strain in firefighters. High prevalence of obesity and elevated BP values indicate the need for better physical fitness and BP control among firefighters.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

While performing their duties, professional and volunteer firefighters are exposed to a specific work environment, which requires a significant level of physical and psychological fitness (Bilzon et al., 2001) and heavy specific protective equipment. Besides protective clothing and boots, firefighters are also equipped with heavy self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBAs), which contains either steel or carbon cylinders. It is known that exposure to high environmental temperatures during heavy physical activity represents an additional burden to the cardiovascular system, as it causes an increase in the core body temperature, blood pressure (BP), heart beat frequency and respiration rate. Protective clothing that prevents burns during firefighting operations also diminishes the dissipation of thermal energy that is produced during extreme physical strain (Barr et al., 2010). Shift work, including night shifts and often overtime work, is related to disturbances in the circadian rhythm of firefighters, which leads to increased prevalence of obesity and hypertension. Published data pointed out a sudden cardiac event as the number one cause of death in firefighters, suggesting that 45% of all deaths reported during firefighting tasks are due to the cardiovascular disease (Kales et al., 2009), with myocardial infarction being the leading one (Kales et al., 2003; Calvert et al., 1999). Furthermore, according to the recently published review article by Kales et al. (2009), BP was elevated in approximately 75% of workers employed in different emergency services in the USA including firefighters and police officers.

Legislation that regulates physical and cardiovascular fitness differs across countries around the world (Kales et al., 2009). In Croatia, there are no obligatory tests that would assess the cardiovascular response to physical and thermal strain or precisely define the mandatory weight limits or the body composition. Also, data on the prevalence of hypertension, excess weight and obesity, as well as the cardiovascular response to thermal and physical strain in Croatian firefighters are considerably scarce. Our recent study (Ljubičić-Ćalušić et al., 2012) tested the thermal and physical strain level in firefighters attending flashover training (FOT). FOT was recently introduced in Croatia as a simulation of the flashover phenomenon under controlled conditions. The flashover phenomenon occurs when surfaces exposed to thermal radiation reach the ignition temperature, and the fire rapidly spreads across the enclosed area. FOT aim is to train firefighters to recognize, understand and prevent this phenomenon. In order to train firefighters to recognise this threat in real life and work, but to avoid any unnecessary threats, these trainings are conducted by highly experienced instructors, the FOT containers are built according legally proscribed EU norms EN 14097-3, and all attendees had detailed instruction regarding the rules that they must abide by during the drill. All firefighters are advised to drink at least 0.5 L of water before each training session. An Emergency medical service is present during the entire course of the training. The flashover phenomenon that occurs during training is induced in controlled condition and the risk of the unpredicted fire eruption is significantly diminished. The results of our previous study (Ljubičić Ćalušić et al., 2012) suggested that FOT induced mild hyperthermia and consequently, physiological respiratory responses developed during the exercises.

The study aimed to assess and compare the arterial BP and heart rate in professional and volunteer Croatian firefighters and its response to thermal and physical strain during FOT.

Sixty-six firefighters (48 professional and 18 volunteer) attending FOT, were involved in the study. The response rate was 98% for professional and 95% for volunteer firefighters. All of the subjects were male. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institute for Medical Research and Occupational Health, Zagreb. Potential participants were informed about the study aim, procedures that would be undertaken, research methodology and the obtained results' implications. Firefighters willing to participate signed an informed consent form prior to their inclusion in the study.

FOT procedure was described in detail previously (Ljubičić-Ćalušić et al., 2012). Briefly, flashover simulator consists of two 14-gauge steel walled chambers: the burn module and the observation module. At the point of auto-ignition of smoke layer, the temperature rises to above 1000 °C in the burn module and to 200 °C in lower parts of the observation module. Three instructors and no more than 12 attendees were simultaneously present in the simulator, either sitting on low benches or kneeling in the observation module. Attendees were instructed to change their positions by moving closer to the burning module. Average temperature was measured at the attendees' protective clothing surface: 136.2 ± 18.9 °C (range 115–160 °C) was measured on the clothes of those closest to the burning module and 79.0 ± 7.9 °C (range 72–85 °C) on the clothes of those farthest away. During the FOT course, attendees were exposed to extreme conditions in the flashover simulator four times during one day: for 20 min during the 1st, 2nd and 3rd exercise and for 30 min during the 4th exercise. The attendees and instructors were equipped with SCBAs containing either steel or carbon cylinders. The total weight of the protective equipment was approximately 30 kg. All of the included subjects had to respond to a medical questionnaire, undergo measurements of tympanic temperature, pulse and systolic and diastolic BP before FOT and after each of the four exercises.

@&#METHODS@&#

A questionnaire on medical and working history was completed by a physician after interviewing each subject. Smoking habit was expressed regarding current and past smoking status (never smokers, ex smokers and current smokers) and as smoking index for current smokers (number of cigarettes smoked per day multiplied by number of smoking years). In the statistical analysis, the smoking habit was expressed as a dichotomous variable (smokers and non-smokers) in which subjects who never smoked and ex-smokers that stopped smoking at least four weeks before enrolment in this study were designated as non-smokers. Seniority was expressed as years of experience in firefighting activities. According to the occupational history, firefighters were divided in two groups for the purpose of this study. One group comprised professional firefighters and the other group comprised volunteer firefighters.


                        Tympanic temperature, pulse, BMI and brachial artery BP measurement.

Infrared tympanic temperature (ThermoScan ear thermometer, Braun, Germany) and manual pulse measurement on radial artery was performed in all of the subjects before the beginning of the training and after each exposure to high ambient temperatures in the flashover container. Attached lens filter on ear thermometer was changed after each measurement. All of the measurements were performed by the same person within five to ten minutes time frame after leaving the FOT container (Hansen et al., 1996).

Systolic and diastolic brachial artery BP was measured in the supine position using a mechanical (Hg) oscillometric cuff. All of the BP measurements were made in duplicate and the average of the two values was recorded and used for subsequent analysis. Pre-hypertensive BP values were defined as systolic BP values between 120 and 139 mmHg and/or diastolic BP values between 80 and 89 mmHg. Hypertensive BP values were defined as values ≥140 mmHg of systolic and/or ≥90 mmHg of diastolic BP. The cut off value for hypertensive post-exercise reaction was defined as systolic blood pressure ≥200 mmHg (Leiba et al., 2013).

Body mass index (BMI) was calculated according to the formula: weight [kg]/height [m]2. Weight and height were self-reported during the medical interview.

General characteristics and baseline spirometry, pulse, tympanic temperature and BP values in professional and volunteer firefighters were compared by Student's t-test or Mann–Whitney U test. The smoking status and incidence of obesity and respiratory symptoms were compared between groups by Pearson's χ
                        2 test or Fisher's exact test. The effect of FOT exercises on pulse, tympanic temperature, systolic and diastolic BP, i.e. change from baseline, pre-exercise values, was analysed by Student's t-test for paired data, separately for professional and volunteer firefighters.

Mixed-effects regression models were used to test the variation of pulse, tympanic temperature and systolic and diastolic BP after four FOT exercises, with pulse, tympanic temperature and systolic and diastolic BP as dependent variables. In all models predictors included study subjects as a random effect, and FOT exercise, workplace (volunteer versus professional firefighters), age, smoking status (smokers vs. non-smoker), BMI as fixed effects. In the models with pulse and tympanic temperature, systolic or diastolic BP was also included as a fixed effect. In the models with pulse and tympanic temperature as dependent variables, the effect of FOT was modelled as a square function. FOT in other models, as well as all other predictors, were modelled as linear function. To evaluate the potential effect of the workplace (volunteer versus professional firefighters), age, smoking status and BMI on change in dependent variables during FOT course, interaction terms FOT × workplace, FOT × age, FOT × smoking status, FOT × BMI and FOT × systolic BP or FOT × diastolic BP were tested as fixed effects in the regression models.

Statistical analysis was performed using Stata/SE 11.1 for Windows (StataCorp LP, USA).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The general characteristics of the study subjects are presented in Table 1
                     . Professional firefighters were on average 13 years older than volunteer firefighters, and had higher seniority. As for smoking status, no difference was observed in the prevalence of smokers and ex-smokers, while the smoking index in current smokers was significantly higher in professional firefighters than in volunteer firefighters due to higher age and consequently higher number of smoking years in this group. No difference in height, weight, BMI and basal values of tympanic temperature, pulse and BP was observed among two study groups, including the prevalence of attendees with prehypertensive and hypertensive BP values.

Pulse rate and tympanic temperature followed a similar pattern of increase during FOT in both study groups (Fig. 1
                     a and b). However, compared to professional firefighters FOT induced higher increase in both parameters in the volunteers. Pulse rates after 3rd and 4th FOT exercise were by 5 beats/minute higher in volunteer than in professional firefighters. After 2nd, 3rd and 4th FOT exercise, the increase in tympanic temperature was on average 0.33 °C higher in volunteer compared to professional firefighters. Difference in response of pulse rate and tympanic temperature in volunteer compared to professional firefighters was confirmed by mixed-effects regression analyses controlled for age, smoking status, BMI, systolic and diastolic BP, in which marginally significant or significant interaction term “workplace × FOT” was found, indicating the influence of workplace on magnitude of pulse and tympanic temperature change during FOT (regression model for pulse: Wald chi-square = 282.8, P
                     model<0.001, coefficentworkplace × FOT 0.67, 95% CI 0.0003-1.34, P = 0.050; regression model for tympanic temperature: Wald chi-square = 419.1, P
                     model<0.001, coefficientworkplace × FOT 0.022, 95% CI 0.003-0.041, P = 0.025). Age, smoking status and BMI did not affect pulse or tympanic temperature change during FOT.

Systolic BP did not considerably vary during FOT (Fig. 2
                     a). Only in professional firefighters after 1st FOT exercise it increased significantly, for approximately 5 mm Hg. Systolic BP change during FOT was not affected by the workplace (volunteer versus professional firefighters), age and smoking status. It was positively related to BMI (mixed-effects regression model: Wald chi-square = 20.4, P
                     model = 0.001, coefficientBMI = 1.54, 95% CI 0.67-2.41, P = 0.001), pulse rate (coefficientsystolic 0.26, 95% CI 0.11-0.41, P = 0.001) and tympanic temperature (coefficientsystolic 0.01, 95% CI 0.005-0.014, P < 0.001). These variables, however, did not affect systolic BP behaviour during FOT.

Diastolic BP had a trend of a slight decrease during FOT course (mixed-effects regression model: Wald chi-square = 32.7, P
                     model<0.001, coefficientFOT −0.70, 95% CI -1.26 to −0.13, P = 0.015), although pairwise comparisons between each FOT exercise and baseline values (obtained by Student's t-test for paired data) were not statistically significant (Fig. 2b). The pattern of change during FOT was similar in both groups, and was not affected by age. Similarly to systolic BP, diastolic BP was positively correlated with BMI (coefficientBMI 0.78, 95% CI 0.22-1.34, P = 0.006).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study examined BP response to FOT in 48 professional and 18 volunteer Croatian firefighters, as well as the prevalence of obesity and hypertensive BP values. This study is the first to report this data for Croatian professional and volunteer firefighters.

FOT was related to mild hyperthermia and physical strain with an average increase in tympanic temperature by 1.1 °C and an average pulse increase of 61% of the maximal heart beat predicted for age. Systolic BP did not vary significantly and diastolic BP slightly decreased during FOT in both study groups (Fig. 2a and b). These results, as well as the results of our recently published study (Ljubičić-Ćalušić et al., 2012), indicate that FOT induced mostly physiological respiratory and cardiovascular responses to thermal and physical strain. This applies both to professional and volunteer firefighters, although difference in certain measured responses to FOT conditions were observed between the two firefighter groups. In volunteer firefighters FOT induced higher increase in tympanic temperature and pulse than in professional firefighters, suggesting a better adaptation to thermal, physical and psychological strain in professionals. This observation is in accordance with the acclimatization studies that showed better physical performance and heat stress endurance after a ten-day period of exercising to the level of volunteer exhaustion and heat stress that increases the core body temperature up to 40 °C (Nybo, 2008; Nielsen et al., 1997, 1993). Namely, professional firefighters are regularly exposed to mixed thermal, physical and psychological strain which is not the case for volunteer firefighters. The main difference between professional and volunteer firefighters in Croatia is based on the different number and different type of interventions. Professionals are the first line of fire defence and volunteer firefighters usually help only when there is an insufficient manpower. Consequently, volunteer firefighters have a significantly lower number of interventions than professionals. Additionally, volunteer firefighters are expected to participate only in firefighting operations. Technical interventions involving car accidents with heavily injured persons, who are more physically and psychologically demanding, are usually performed by professional firefighters. Professional firefighters work in 12-h shifts with an off-duty period of 24 h, followed by another 12-h shift and a 48-h off-duty period. This kind of shift work implies night and day shifts. During the day shift, professional firefighters perform training exercises with simulations of real firefighting situations, while during night shifts their work involves preparedness for potential interventions. Volunteer firefighters perform firefighting duties according to the demands, and usually they do their regular work outside the firefighting department.

The results of the present study also showed that more than 50% of firefighters had hypertensive BP values at baseline (before FOT), with similar prevalence in both groups. In addition, one third of FOT attendees, both among professional and volunteer firefighters, had prehypertensive baseline values (Table 1). In this context it is worth noticing that no hypertensive reaction was observed among FOT attendees. However, a 200 mm Hg cut-off value of systolic blood pressure was found to be less sensitive in defining hypertensive reactions in comparison with the method that calculate blood pressure responses falling in the upper tertile of blood pressure change from rest to exertion, divided by the maximal workload achieved (Leiba et al., 2013). The work load was not measurable in our study, but could be estimated as a mild to medium physical activity according to average achieved heart beat rate of the 61% of maximum predicted for an age. The lack of hypertensive reaction in our subjects, in spite of the recorded elevated basal blood pressure values, is probably due to the only mild physical activity achieved during FOT. Mild physical activity was shown to have beneficial impact on blood pressure. Published data showed that 30 min of cycling activities at 40%–70% maximum of VO2 in mild hypertensive men could be related to small but significant decrease of systolic and average blood pressure that lasted for approximately 12 h (Pescatello et al., 1991). Nevertheless, the prevalence of higher than normal BP values in pre-exercise firefighters sum to above 80% and this data imply significant cardiovascular risk for members of this occupation.

Approximately one fourth of the professional firefighters and more than one third of the volunteer firefighters were obese (BMI>30) (Table 1). BMI was highly positively correlated with both systolic and diastolic BP. The prevalence of hypertensive BP values in the evaluated group was higher than expected considering the results of the Croatian Adult Health Survey (CAHS) (Kolčić et al., 2009). The prevalence of hypertension was 22% in the CAHS and 52% in the present study for the age group 18–34 years, and 40% in the CAHS and 53% in the present study for the age group 35–49 years. According to the data from the CroHort Study (Milanović et al., 2012; Mihel and Musić-Milanović, 2012), the prevalence of obesity among the adult male Croatian population is 25% with an observed increasing incidence between 2003 and 2008. The studied professional firefighters corresponded to this data (23%), while the prevalence of obese volunteer firefighters was higher (39%) than in the general male population of Croatia. It should be stressed that although the obesity prevalence in the professional firefighters is comparable to that in general population, it is still too high for this type of profession. Croatia is not an isolated case regarding the high proportion of obese and hypertensive firefighters. For example, one USA study found that 33.5% of professional and 43.2% of volunteer firefighters were obese. The prevalence of overweight and obese firefighters was similar (80%) in both groups and exceeded that of the US general population (Poston et al., 2011). A number of studies have shown that the prevalence of both hypertension and prehypertension is similar to the prevalence of overweight and obese firefighters and is approximately 75% (Kales et al., 1999, 2002; Soteriades et al., 2003; Soteriades et al. 2005). Such a high frequency of increased body weight and BP in firefighters is considered to be related to stressful working conditions that include shift and night work and disturbance of circadian rhythm, irregular diet, exposure to high environmental temperature, sudden physical and psychological burden, and noise (Radanović and Salaj, 2002; van Kempen et al., 2002; IAFC, 2007; Bakotić et al., 2007; Huang et al., 2010; Schmid et al, 2011; Webb et al., 2011). However, it should be stressed that response to stressful and physically demanding situation depends on the level of physical fitness (Acevedo et al., 2006). Excessive weight and obesity are considered to be associated with increased all-cause mortality and are well-known risk factors for developing hypertension, with the optimal BMI falling between 22.5 and 25.0 (Kales et al., 1999; Soteriades et al., 2005; Adams et al., 2006; Whitlock et al., 2009; Berrington de Gonzalez et al., 2010). In firefighters, increased BMI and percentage of fat tissue is negatively correlated to cardiovascular tolerance of physical and thermal strain during firefighting duties (Barr et al., 2010; Lyons et al., 2005; Williford et al., 1999). Namely, fat tissue represents additional burden to musculoskeletal system and prevents body heat dissipation.

It should be noted that BMI is not always a reliable parameter of excess weight and obesity. Considering the fact that BMI represents the ratio between body mass and height, which is not controlled for body composition regarding the fat tissue, the frequency of overweight and obese persons could be overrated in cases of increased muscular tissue proportion (Going and Davis, 2001; Reilly and Sutton, 2008). Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry used to assess body composition confirmed this hypothesis (Barr et al., 2008). In the mentioned study on 30 firefighters with an average age of 41 years, the average BMI value was 28 kg/m2, which should be categorised as excessive weight (BMI >25 kg/m2). However, their fat tissue percentage measured by X-ray absorptiometry showed an average value of 20%, which is within the range of expected values for healthy men at that age. Nevertheless, the significant positive correlation between BMI and BP in the present study suggests that increased BMI was related to the excessive body fat in majority of subjects.

Although the problem of a elevated BP is recognised problem for the firefighting occupation and periodical medical checkups are mandatory, BP control among firefighters cannot be considered satisfying (Soteriades et al., 2003). Prospective and retrospective cohort studies of firefighters reported strong relation between hypertension, coronary heart disease and stroke (Kales et al., 2009). Furthermore, published data also suggest prehypertension as a high-risk factor for cardiovascular disease events (Lawes et al., 2008). For firefighters, international standards for hypertension control lack sensitivity in identifying individuals at risk (Kales et al., 2009). The novel approach in hypertension control for workers in emergency services includes the so-called “workplace hypertension management plan”, which suggests time-limited work clearance (mostly for 6 months) for workers with prehypertension to improve the overall BP control (Kales et al., 2009).

The small number of firefighters involved in this study should be emphasized as a limitation, particularly regarding data obtained in volunteer firefighters. Further limitation is measurement of tympanic temperature instead of rectal temperature which provides more accurate values of core body temperature. The observed tympanic temperature measurement values, according to the recently published meta-analysis could underestimate actual core body temperature (Huggins et al., 2012). However, the high prevalence of the increased BMI and BP in Croatian firefighters found in the present study indicates a need for a larger epidemiological study of the cardiovascular status in persons involved in this high-risk occupation.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The study confirmed that FOT induced only a physiological cardiovascular response in condition of thermal and physical strain in firefighters.

The study reports the prevalence of obesity and elevated BP in a group of Croatian firefighters that is similar to members of this occupation in other EU countries and in the USA. More than 25% of FOT attendees were obese, and over 50% had elevated baseline BP values. Prevention of cardiovascular disorders in this high-risk occupation includes raising awareness about the importance of physical fitness, including healthy dietary habits and better BP control. Along this line, regulation regarding the periodical health examinations of firefighters in Croatia is undergoing a process of change aimed at emphasising the importance of maintaining adequate weight (BMI below 30), physical fitness and control of cardiovascular function not only in rest but also during exercise (assessment of peak metabolic equivalent tasks (METs) achieved during maximal exercise treadmill test), which was inadequately covered by previous regulation regarding the firefighters fitness assessment.

Ministry of Science and Technology of the Republic of Croatia, Grants No. 022-0222411-2410.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

The authors would like to thank Ivanić-Grad Fire Department for technical support and help in recruiting the firefighters willing to participate in this research. We also thank Mrs. Jelena Kovačić, mag. math. for substantial help during statistical data analysis.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

