@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluating the physical demands on firefighters using track-type stair descent devices to evacuate mobility-limited occupants from high-rise buildings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Arm and back muscle forces differ across track-type stair descent devices (SDDs).


                        
                        
                           
                           Track type SDD's have egress speeds similar to pedestrian egress speeds.


                        
                        
                           
                           Smaller track-type chairs had faster egress and were perceived as easier to use.


                        
                        
                           
                           On the landings, the number of wheels affects shoulders and arm muscle use.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Firefighter/EMS

Stair descent devices

Evacuation of individuals with disabilities

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The physical demands on firefighting personnel were investigated when using different types of track-type stair descent devices designed for the emergency evacuation of high rise buildings as a function of staircase width and evacuation urgency. Twelve firefighters used five track-type stair descent devices during simulated urgent and non-urgent evacuations. The devices were evaluated under two staircase width conditions (1.12, and 1.32 m), and three devices were also evaluated under a narrower staircase condition (0.91 m). Dependent measures included electromyographic (EMG) data, spine motion, heart rates, Borg Scale ratings, task durations and descent velocities. Stair descent speeds favored the devices that had shorter fore/aft dimensions when moving through the landing. EMG results indicated that there were tradeoffs due to design features, particularly on the landings where the physical demands tended to be greater. On the landings, devices that could be rolled on four wheels reduced the deltoid and bicep activation levels.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Firefighters/paramedics and emergency medical service (EMS) providers are frequently engaged in transporting patients down flight of stairs. In fact, when asked to indentify frequently performed strenuous work activities, Conrad et al. (2000) found that several of the identified activities included transporting patients down flights of stairs using various pieces of equipment, including stair chairs. In addition to the routine transporting of patients out of residences, fire service personnel are typically among the first responders called to assist in evacuating large multi-story buildings during both emergency and non-emergency conditions, for example, extended power outages. During such evacuations, the first responders may need to transport building occupants with mobility impairments down several flights of stairs. Clearly, the transporting of people can be very physically demanding (Lavender et al., 2000; Fredericks et al., 2002) and there is epidemiological evidence that such tasks performed by EMS workers are often associated with injury development (Gershon et al., 1995; Hogya and Ellis, 1990; Karter and Molis, 2011; Maguire et al., 2005). Furber et al. (1997) in their study of 477 workers compensations claims, specifically found that stair transport within private residences was a strong factor contributing to injuries reported by ambulance officers.

Different types of equipment are available to assist first responders in transporting individuals down flights of stairs. Most common are hand-carried stair chairs. These are minimally carried by two individuals, and depending on staircase width, patient weight, and first responder availability, carried by as many as four individuals. Prior work in this field has documented stair descents with such hand-carried chairs to be a physically demanding task (Lavender et al., 2000; Fredericks et al., 2002; Lavender et al., 2013). Specifically, Lavender et al. (2013) reported Erector Spinae activations for the “follower” position during two-person stair descents that included two landings using three hand-carried devices to evacuate a 73 kg occupant. The mean values on the stairs, averaged across participants, ranged between 25 and 34 percent MVC. The 90th percentile values obtained on the landing, averaged across participants, ranged between 33 and 43 percent MVC. The heart rates measured at the completion of these stair descents ranged from 36 to 48 percent of the participant's age-adjusted maximum heart rate. Moreover, hand-carried evacuation devices, particularly those where the lead evacuator must descend the stairs walking backwards, have stair descent velocities that are slow relative to published pedestrian evacuation speeds (Peacock et al., 2012) and therefore may disrupt evacuation flow in emergency situations (Lavender et al., 2013).

Within the last decade, track-type stair chairs have become more prevalent. These pieces of evacuation equipment eliminate the need for lifting/carrying and instead have evacuators gliding or rolling the chairs down the stairs on long tracks that bridge two, possibly three stair nosings, thereby reducing the load experienced by the evacuator (Fredericks et al., 2002) and improving the evacuation speed (Adams and Galea, 2010). While several track-type devices are currently on the market for emergency evacuation of individuals with motor disabilities from high rise buildings, little empirical data exists that indicates their relative impact on the physical demands experienced by the first responders across the different track-type stair chair designs. Previously, Fredericks et al. (2002) showed that the use of track-type devices reduced the risk to back injury relative to hand-carried devices. Moreover, subtle changes in the track-type stair chair design had substantial effects on the physical demands, as evidenced by the variations they observed in their compressive and shear force estimates (Fredericks et al., 2006). However, Fredericks et al. (2006) did not obtain data as the chairs were maneuvered through a landing. Previously, Lavender et al. (2007) reported greater physical demands were experienced by the research participants while on the landing as compared to when they were on the flight of stairs. Evacuation conditions including the staircase width and the urgency of the evacuation may also impact the physical demands on the first responders, particularly if the stair descent involves landings where the direction of travel changes. Drury (1985) provided evidence that task performance measures, for example task duration or movement speed, are dependent upon the available space, at least up to the point where space no longer potentially restricts movement. Likewise, Karwowski and Hashim (1991) reported a trend toward a lower acceptable weight of lift with more restricted lifting spaces. This implies that staircase dimensions could impact performance measures and muscle recruitment levels as track-type stair chairs are maneuvered through smaller versus larger landings. As for urgency, several studies have shown increases in biomechanical loading as movement speed increases (Marras, 2008). Under urgent evacuation conditions, one could expect more rapid motions, and perhaps more co-contraction of antagonistic muscles as the body is stabilized under the increased dynamic external loads.

Therefore, the objectives of this study were to compare the physical demands experienced by seasoned fire service personnel and their usability experiences when using five existing evacuation chairs with track systems, each representing a different design approach that has been developed to transport individuals who are ill or who have ambulatory disabilities down multiple flights of stairs of varying widths. Specifically, the following hypotheses were tested:
                        
                           1.
                           There are significant differences among existing evacuation device designs with regards to the physical demands placed on firefighters as measured with objective heart rate and electromyographic measures, as well as with subjective measures of perceived exertion.

There are differences in occupant evacuation times across evacuation devices.

The physical demands on the evacuator increase with narrower staircases.

The physical demands on the evacuator increase when there is a sense of urgency.

Additionally, the study assessed usability issues with each of the evaluated devices through video analysis and a structured interview process.

@&#METHODS@&#

Twelve male professional firefighters between the ages of 24 and 61 (mean = 36 years) were recruited for this study. Mean height and weight were 1.83 m (1.75–1.96 m) and 87.7 kg (70.7 kg–111.1 kg). The fire service experience ranged from 1.5 to 23 years (mean = 9 years). All participants signed a consent document approved the The Ohio State University's Institutional Review board.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

A repeated measures randomized block experimental design was used in which participants experienced all tested combinations of the five evacuation devices (Fig. 1
                        ), the three staircase widths, and the two urgency conditions (urgent and non-urgent). Participants were asked to descend three flights of stairs and proceed through two landings under each experimental condition. As participants performed this task, dependent measures were obtained that included task performance measures, levels of muscle recruitment, spine kinematics, and physiologic demands. Task performance measures were comprised of overall task duration, stair descent velocity, and time required for strapping the occupant in the chair. Muscle recruitment was assessed using surface electromyographic (EMG) signals sampled bilaterally from the Erector Spinae, Latissimus Dorsi, Deltoid, Biceps and Triceps muscles. Three-dimensional spine postures while the participants descended the stairs and moved through the landings were assessed using a Lumbar Motion Monitor (LMM) (Chattanooga Group, Chattanooga, TN, USA). Physiological demands were obtained by sampling the heart rate and ratings of perceived exertion (Borg Scale) at the completion of each condition. Maneuverability, one aspect of usability, was assessed using a camera mounted above one of the landings requiring a 180° turn. In addition, other usability issues were assess through structured post-study interviews.

NFPA 101-2009 code specifies staircase widths based on building occupant load. Specifically, this study evaluated stair descent tasks performed under the following stair case widths: 0.91 m (building occupancy < 50), 1.12 m (building occupancy < 2000), and 1.32 m (approximates the 1.42 m required for ≥2000 occupants). Data collection in the experiment was blocked on the three staircase widths. However, two chairs, the Long-track and the Rear-facing, were not used during the 0.91 m condition on account of their overall length. Within each staircase width, the order that the chairs were used was randomized. The sequence of “urgent” versus “non-urgent” conditions with the stair descent devices was counter-balanced across participants.

The chair occupant was a training mannequin having a mass of 73 kg. The five chairs selected for this study are shown in Fig. 1. Given the occupant weight and that the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Life Safety Code indicates that when descending stairs, an evacuation device should be easily operable by one person who is trained on its use, and that above average weight or strength should not be required for proper operation (NFPA 101-2009 Annex, A.7.2.12.2.3(2) (8)(a)), that these track-type chairs were operated by a single person.

The staircase was 1.32 m wide and the corresponding landings were 1.32 m deep. The width of the staircase and the depth of the landing were narrowed using tape lines and partitions placed on the landings to simulate the 0.91 and 1.12 staircase widths. The rise and run of each step was 0.17 m and 0.28 m, respectively.

EMG data were obtained using a Delsys (Boston, MA) wireless EMG system sampled at 1000 Hz. Heart rate data were sampled using a chest-band transmitter unit that displayed data on a wristwatch (Polar Electro, Inc., Model FS1, Lake Success, NY). The participants were polled as to their perceived level of effort at the completion of each stair descent using a 10-point Borg-type rating system (Borg, 1982).

Two video cameras captured each stair descent task. One of the investigators followed the participant down the stairs and through each landing while holding a video camera. The second video camera was positioned above the first landing to obtain overhead views as the chairs were maneuvered through the landing to provide data for the usability analysis.

After signing an IRB approved informed consent document, the volunteers were prepared for the study by placing surface EMG electrodes bilaterally over the: (1) Erector Spinae muscles at the L3 level approximately 5 cm from the midline; (2) the Latissiumus Dorsi muscles at the T7 level approximately 13–15 cm from the midline; (3) the belly of the Anterior Deltoid muscles; (4) the belly of the Bicep muscles; and (5) the belly of the Tricep muscles. A baseline sample of the EMG activity during quiet standing (resting EMG) was obtained. The heart rate monitor was strapped on the chest and a resting heart rate value was obtained.

A series of maximal voluntary isometric exertions were performed to elicit maximal EMG signal amplitudes for each muscle that could be used for normalizing the data obtained during the stair descent tasks. These tasks were performed in postures that approximated the postures observed during pilot testing that occurred during the more physically demanding portions of the stair descent tasks. The maximal exertion task for the Erector Spinae muscles required participants perform an isometric back-style lift from a standing position with their knees straight and their torsos flexed approximately 30°. This was accomplished by placing the handle of the strength testing equipment just above knee level and directing the participant into the appropriate posture. The maximal exertions for each Latissimus Dorsi muscle were performed by having the participant pull backward and upward on a handle located at mid thigh level. Bicep maximal exertions were performed with the participant standing upright and the elbow flexed approximately 70°. Anterior Deltoid maximal exertions were performed by having the standing participant pull upward on the dynamometers with the shoulder flexed approximately 30° and the elbow fully extended. Last, the Tricep maximal exertions were performed with the participant standing upright and pushing down on a handle with the elbow flexed about 90°. Following the maximal exertions, the Lumbar Motion Monitor was placed on the participant's back and baseline data were obtained as the participant stood in an upright neutral posture.

After viewing each of the instructional videos provided by the manufacturers of track-type stair chairs, the participant practiced descending the stairs with the track-type chairs and the training mannequin. This allowed the participant to become familiar with the operation of each chair, the simulated evacuation task, and the data collection procedures including the Borg scale.

Data collection trials were initiated by one of the investigators who indicated whether the current trial was an “urgent” or “non-urgent” condition. The initial instructions to the firefighter participants indicated that during urgent conditions “the situation requires you leave the building as quickly as possible.” Under these conditions, a repeating recorded message played stating “this is an urgent condition” for the duration of the stair descent task. During the instructions for the non-urgent conditions the participants were told “you can take as much time as you need during this descent.”

During each trial the participant descended three flights of stairs and moved through two landings. A time marker was used to differentiate in the data stream when the participants were on the stairs versus on the landings. This same time marker was used to obtain the descent duration data. At the completion of each descent the participant's heart rate was obtained and the participant was asked to provide a rating of perceived exertion. A nearby elevator brought the participant and the chair (with occupant) back to the initial starting level. Descent tasks were separated by at least five minutes to minimize fatigue development.

Following the stair descent tasks, each participant participated in a structured interview where open-ended questions were asked that aimed at identifying usability issues with devices as well as identifying features of each device that facilitated or hindered completion of the task. These interviews typically lasted 10–15 min during which the participants were shown photographs of the devices to facilitate comments specific to each device.

For each participant, raw EMG signals were processed using a Matlab program that employed high and low pass filters of 25 and 450 Hz, respectively. Data were rectified and smoothed with a moving average window of 150 ms (Hanning filter). The processed EMG data from each muscle were normalized to their maximum values obtained during maximum isometric contractions. Timing marker data were used to extract data during flight and landing. Given that the task on the stairs is largely a static exertion by the back and the arm muscles, the normalized EMG data were averaged over the sample obtained from each flight of stairs. These averaged data from the three flights were then averaged to obtain the mean activation level while descending the stairs. These mean values were expected to give more robust estimates of the muscle recruitment levels and the resulting potential for localized muscle fatigue over the course of this part of the stair descent task than an estimate of the peak value. In addition, this mean value was multiplied by the average stair flight duration across the three flights to yield an integrated EMG value (mean activity*stair flight duration). This was done for the data from both the urgent and non-urgent conditions. During the non-urgent conditions the task was performed in a continuous manner but at a slower pace than that observed during the urgent conditions. Due to task symmetry during the flight phase, values obtained for each of these quantities were averaged across the muscle pairs for each subject.

For the landing data, the 90th percentile EMG values from each of the landing samples were obtained and then averaged across the two landing samples. The largest averaged 90th percentile landing response for each bilateral muscle pair was analyzed. The rationale for using the 90th percentile on the landing was that we anticipated there would be short peaks in the EMG activity as the participants transitioned on to or off of the landing, or as they as they made the 180° turn that would be washed out if the mean value was used.

Heart rate data were scaled relative to anticipated maximal heart rate (220 – age) and converted to a percentage (Lamb, 1984).

Two three-way analyses of variance (ANOVA), blocked on subject, were conducted for the velocity, duration, and EMG data collected from the landing. The first analysis looked at the 5 track-type stair chairs as they were operated on the 1.12 and 1.32 m wide stairs under the two levels of urgency. The second ANOVA focused on the three stair chairs that could be used with the narrower stair case widths and included the 0.91 m staircase width condition in addition to the two wider conditions as well as the two urgency conditions. The EMG data sampled while the participants were on the flights of stairs were only analyzed for the two wider staircase conditions. This was because with all of the devices, the participants were instructed to descend the stairs along the inside rail to facilitate making the turns on the landing. Thus, one would expect very little effect of the stair narrowing, but a much larger effect of the narrowing of the landing, particularly during the 0.91 m condition.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Descent speed during the urgent conditions was significantly affected by the different descent devices and staircase width (p < 0.001). On average, the descent speed was significantly faster for the 2-Wheel chair as compared to the standard and narrow chair, which were significantly faster than long-track and rear-facing chairs (Fig. 2
                           a). Descent speed is based on the distance traveled along the stairs and the distance traveled on the landings (Peacock et al., 2012). The time required to descend a flight of stairs was relatively short (range: 1.4 s–1.9 s) as compared to the time required to maneuver through the landing (range: 5.9 s–8.9 s). Thus, the descent speed was largely affected by the landing duration. Specifically, the three devices which were shorter in overall length, namely the standard, the narrow and the 2-Wheel devices, showed significantly shorter time on the landing as compared to the two longer devices (Fig. 2b). Stair case width showed no effect on the flight and landing duration data (p > 0.05), however, the overall descent speeds were significantly faster for 1.32 m wide staircase (0.72 m/s) as compared to 1.12 m (0.6 m/s) wide staircase (p < 0.05).

The effect of narrower staircase widths was also evaluated using the three track-type stair chairs that were usable on the narrowest width stairs and landing (0.91 m). Across the three devices, the narrow staircase width resulted in the slowest average descent speed (0.55 m/s), followed by the 1.12 m wide stairs (0.68 m/s), which in turn was significantly slower than 1.32 m staircase width (0.8 m/s) (p < 0.05). For 0.91 m stair width, descent speed was significantly slower (p = 0.015) for the narrow (0.51 m/s) and standard (0.54 m/s) chairs as compared to the 2-wheel chair (0.58 m/s). Fig. 2c indicates the slower descent speed with the 0.91 m staircase width was primarily due to the amount of time required to maneuver on the landing. The significant interaction in the landing duration data between the staircase width and the three descent devices that could be used on the narrowest stair indicate counter-intuitively that the increased landing duration on the narrow stairs was largest for the “narrow” chair.

Strapping of the occupant on to the device was another measure to evaluate performance. The devices with a single strap (Narrow, Rear-facing and 2-wheel) allowed the occupant to be prepared faster (prep time approximately 13 s) than the devices with three straps (standard and long-track), which took approximately 39 s.

For the 1.12 and 1.32 m stair width, the overall physiologic demands, as assessed via heart rate, were lowest when using the standard chair (Fig. 3
                           a). Perceived exertion ratings showed the firefighters participants found the standard, narrow and 2-wheel stair chairs were all “fairly easy” (p > 0.05) and were, as a group, given significantly (p < 0.05) lower perceived exertion ratings than those obtained from the rear-facing (“moderate”), which were significantly lower (p < 0.05) than the perceived exertion ratings of long-track stair chair (“somewhat hard”) (Fig. 3b). Both the heart rate and perceived exertion data increased during “urgent” conditions but were unaffected by staircase width (p < 0.05).

Including the narrowest staircase width in the analysis of the data from the three stair chairs that could be used on the 0.91 m stairs did not result any differences in the heart rates (p > 0.05), but did result in ratings of perceived exertion being significantly higher (p < 0.001) due to the staircase width. Specifically, across the three track-type stair chairs tested, descending the 0.91 m wide stairs resulted in a higher rating of perceived exertion (rating = 2.6) as compared with the 1.12 and 1.32 m widths (both ratings = 2.2).

Analysis of the integrated mean EMG activation levels while on the stairs showed that the evacuation devices significantly affected all the investigated muscle groups (Table 1
                           a). No effect of staircase width was observed on the studied muscle groups (Table 1a) (p > 0.05). All the muscle groups, except the Biceps, showed significant interaction between stair descent devices and urgency. The integrated EMG signals for the Erector Spinae were significantly larger for the 2-wheel, narrow and rear-facing chairs as compared to the standard and long-track chairs (Fig. 4
                           a). Fig. 4b shows that the narrow chair had the largest integrated EMG signals from the Latissimus Dorsi muscle as this device required the participants to hold back on the device during stair descent. On the other hand, the long-track chair, on account of its speed governor/braking mechanism, showed the lowest Latissimus Dorsi activation. However, the shoving action required to push the long-track chair off the final one or two steps of each flight led to the largest integrated EMG response of Deltoid muscles (Fig. 4c). The narrow and standard chairs showed significantly larger Tricep activation (Fig. 4d) on account of the need to push vertically downwards on the handles while performing the stair descent task so that the occupant would have a relatively smooth ride.

For the landings, the analysis focused on the muscle within each bilateral pair that had the higher 90th percentile activation level. Overall, the devices affected the recruitment of the Latissimus dorsi, Deltoid, Bicep and the Tricep muscles (Table 2
                           ). However, the Erector Spinae muscle showed a significant device by urgency interaction. This interaction resulted from the urgent conditions having greater Erector Spinae activations as compared to non urgent conditions for all the chairs except the long-track chair. As shown in Fig. 5
                           b, the Latissimus Dorsi activations on the landing were fairly consistent across the chairs except that the narrow chair had significantly larger activations than the 2-wheel, long-track or standard chairs. This increased activation with the narrow chair was associated with the participants tipping the chair back as they prepared to start the next flight of stairs. Deltoid EMG activation for the narrow and standard chairs were significantly lower than the 2-wheel chair, which were significantly lower than the long-track chair (Fig. 5c). Bicep activation was lowest for the long-track chair, which was significantly lower than the narrow and standard chairs. The 2-Wheel chair showed the highest Bicep recruitment, followed by the rear-facing chair as both of these chairs required the participant to pivot the devices on two wheels around the landing while supporting a significant proportion of the occupant's weight. Tricep activation was largest for the standard chair as the participants prepared for the next flight of stairs. The long-track requires the operator to push vertically downwards on the handle to turn and roll the chair on flat surfaces. This accounts for the elevated Tricep response relative to the chairs requiring the evacuator support part of the occupant's weight and therein increase the Bicep activation. Landing width did not show any differential across the evacuation devices as evidenced by the non-significant device by width and device by urgency by width interactions (p > 0.05).

The analysis of the three chairs used with the three staircase widths yielded effects that were similar to those reported above for the two staircase widths, with the exception of the Deltoid activation which showed a significant staircase width by chair type interaction. This effect, shown in Fig. 6
                           , highlights the additional recruitment of the deltoid when passing through the 0.91 m wide landing with the 2-wheel and narrow stair chairs. Additionally, at 1.12 m staircase width, the deltoid muscle activation was significantly higher for the 2-wheel stair chair as compared to narrow and standard stair chairs (p < 0.001).

The stair descent task was generally sagitally symmetric, therefore the trunk postural deviations were primarily in the sagittal plane. Overall, there was very little side bending (range: 4.5–11.1°) and twisting (range: 3.2–13°). On the stairs, the average degree of forward bending was significantly lower for the 2-wheel stair chair (p < 0.05) and there were only subtle differences between the remaining stair chairs (Fig. 7
                        a).

On the landings there were more pronounced differences in the forward bending across the five stair chairs (p < 0.001). The participants showed the least forward flexion when using the 2-wheel stair chair and the most forward flexion using the long-track stair chair (Fig. 7b). The long-track chair requires the operator to push down on the handle to shift the load to the rear wheels and off of the tracks, therein allowing the chair to be maneuvered on a flat surface. This pushing down was accomplished by leaning the torso forwards. The flexion associated with rear-facing stair chair occurred as the participant grasped the lower set of handles to lift the back of the chair such that the occupant's weight could be balanced on the front wheels during the turn on the landing.

A camera mounted above the first landing was used to quantify the number of contacts made by the device and/or operator with the wall panels while maneuvering through the landing. For the 1.12 m and 1.32 m stair width analysis, the number of contacts with the wall for significantly varied (p < 0.001) across the 5 devices. Across the 12 subject, 48 stair descents were conducted with each evacuation chair for these two staircase widths under both levels of urgency. The rear-facing device had the highest contact rate (0.42 contacts/descent), followed by the long-track stair chair (0.29 contacts/descent). The standard, 2-wheel, and narrow devices had 0, 0.08, and 0.13 contacts/decent, respectively. There was also a significant difference across the three devices used on the 0.91 m wide stairs (p < 0.01). The 2-wheel device had a contact rate of 0.13 contacts/descent, versus the standard and narrow devices that respectively had 0.71 and 0.88 contacts/descent.

Following the stair descent tasks the participants were interviewed and asked to identify features or characteristics of each device that they liked and disliked. The results of these interviews are summarized in Table 3
                        . In general, this group of experienced firefighters had more things they liked than disliked about the narrow, 2-wheel, and standard devices. The opposite was true for the long-track and rear-facing devices.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The comparison of five track-type evacuation devices has highlighted several different design features across these devices and their biomechanical effects on the evacuator. Overall, the standard, narrow, and 2-wheel devices allowed for quicker evacuations and were perceived as easier to use. The muscle recruitment data on the stairs are clearly less than that observed with hand-carried evacuation devices (Lavender et al., 2013). Specifically, the average Erector Spinae muscle activation on the stairs with hand-carried evacuation devices was approximately 40% MVC (Lavender et al., 2013) as compared to 14% MVC reported in this study. On the landings, the muscle activation levels were of similar magnitude to those seen with the hand-carried devices, although the track type devices were operated by a single evacuator, whereas the hand-carried devices required two operators. More relevant to the current evaluation, the collected data delineates the effects of different design features across the track-type devices.

The number of wheels used to maneuver through the landing and the location of those wheels had a large impact on the shoulder and arm muscle activation levels. The devices that are rolled on two wheels and where the wheels are located in front of the occupant's center of mass (rear-facing and 2-wheel) resulted in significantly higher deltoid and bicep activation levels. Readers that are less familiar with the devices should think of the load distribution with a standard wheel-barrow. The long-track device was also maneuvered through the landing on two wheels. The wheels on this device are located behind the occupant's center of mass and therefore required the evacuator to push vertically downwards on the handle to lift the tracks off the floor and therein permitting the device to be maneuvered through the turn. This downward pressing force accounted for the elevated Tricep activations on the landing with this device. This force can be augmented by the evacuator leaning forward and transmitting the torso weight to the handle provided the triceps are activated enough to provide a rigid link for this force transmission.

The long-track device had the most pronounced internal braking and speed limiting mechanism. While on the stairs, this resulted in the lowest activation levels of the Latissimus Dorsi muscles, and one of the two devices with the lowest Erector Spinae muscle activations. Both of these muscles are regularly recruited during pulling activities (Lavender et al., 1998). But this same braking mechanism also accounted for the highest deltoid activations on the landing as many of the evacuators had difficulty getting the device off the last two steps and onto the landing as the tracks limited the forward motion. The devices with less internal braking generally showed faster evacuation velocities. The exception to this was the rear-facing device that required extra handling on the landing.

The handle height affected how much trunk flexion was required while operating the device. Often we consider trunk flexion a low back disorder risk factor (Punnett et al., 1991; Marras et al., 1993). But these are not repetitive lifting or assembly tasks. In this context, it is more of an indicator of selected design features of the different devices. On the stairs, the curved up handle on the 2-wheel device resulted in less forward bending of the torso. The remaining four devices resulted in nearly equivalent amounts of forward bending, but for different reasons. Two devices, the standard and narrow device, resulted in higher forward bending on the stairs as there was a need to push vertically downwards on the handle to enable a smooth ride down the stairs for the occupant. Bending the torso forward and transferring some of the torso weight through the arms is a biomechanically efficient way to provide the downward vertical force on the handle of these devices. The long track and the rear facing devices had lower handles than the 2-wheel device and therefore required more flexion to reach the handles.

On the landing, the long-track resulted in the most trunk flexion, in part because of the need for downward pressure on the handle as described above and the relatively low handle. This was followed by the rear-facing device, which required the evacuator to bend further and lift the lower set of handles when shifting from the tracks to the front two-wheels. This resulted in the highest erector spinae response on the landing, albeit was not statistically different from the other devices.

The length of device clearly affected the maneuverability and the wall contact data. The two longer devices (rear-facing, long-track) had the highest wall contact rates on the 1.12 and 1.32 m wide stairs and landings. With the long track device, most frequently the wall contact occurred between the front of the device and the wall in front of the first stair flight. Most of the wall contact for the rear-facing device was between the wall and side of the device or between the wall and the back of the evacuator as the device was prepared to descend the next flight of stairs. This contact between the wall and the evacuator was also the most frequent type of contact for the standard and narrow devices. In many cases the contact was between the wall and the EMG transmitter or Lumbar Motion Monitor. While these would not be present during real evacuations, the firefighters would potentially be wearing turnout gear and breathing apparatus. It should also be noted that the length of the two longer devices precluded their use on the narrow staircase (0.91 m). This further emphasizes the need to consider this aspect of the device design when making purchase decisions.

On the other hand, the longer devices had longer tracks that could bridge 3 stair nosings. These provide a smoother ride for the occupant and reduce the need to push vertically downwards on the handle. This downward vertical push, as evidenced by the tricep response, keeps the front of the tracks from dipping below the imaginary line connecting the stair nosings and therefore smoothes the transition to the next step. Failure to provide the downward force on the handle with the standard, narrow, or 2-wheel devices results in a bumpy ride for the occupant.

All devices tested showed stair descent speeds that were consistent with the pedestrian evacuation speed data reported by Peacock et al. (2012) and Ma et al. (2012). At first look, this suggests that there would be minimal interference with a significant pedestrian flow in a mass evacuation scenario. However, unlike the work of Adams and Galea (2010), our study was conducted with no one other than the evacuator and the evacuee in the device on the landing. The landings are where the bottlenecks in the evacuation flow typically occur, especially as more individuals are merging into flow from different floors (Galea et al., 2008). Additional people on the stairs or on the landing, while perhaps providing a more realistic view of a mass evacuation scenario, would have increased the durations and not provided good indicators of potential egress velocities with the tested devices. In comparison with hand-carried devices, Lavender et al. (2013) reported stair descent speeds ranging between 0.36 m/s and 0.38 m/s for two hand-carried devices where the leader of the two-person team descends the stairs backwards. One hand-carried device tested by these same authors, where the leader of the two-person team could face forwards, descended at speeds comparable (0.68 m/s) to the faster track type devices evaluated in the current study (Lavender et al., 2013).

It should be noted that there were no overall stair width effects for either the task performance measures or the EMG results. In their study of four stairs widths (1.4 m, 1.2 m, 0.9 m, and 0.75 m) Abe et al. (2007) reported increased decent durations with an “evacuation chair” only at the 0.75 m stair width. These authors did not assess physical demands directly but noted more corrective maneuvering was required to complete the task with the narrower stair widths. Our data are consistent with Abe et al. in that the 0.91 m width accounted for slower landings, especially with the narrow chair.

There are several limitations to this analysis that should be acknowledged. First, these devices were evaluated with relatively short three-flight evacuations. This was done to manage participant fatigue levels given that each participant was being asked to perform 26 descents in addition to the 5 training descents. What has to be considered is the cumulative fatigue effect that would be encountered with longer evacuations from large high rise structures. Relatively small differences in muscle recruitment levels may still affect the fatigue rate and the ability for the evacuators to effectively control the device and maintain a pace consistent with the flow of others on the stairs. Moreover, localized fatigue in the muscles sampled alters the characteristics of the EMG signal (Basmajian and De Luca, 1985), therein confounding the interpretation of these signals. Second, female participants were not included in the sample. The research was open to female participants, however, none volunteered. There are very few female firefighters amongst the fire departments where recruiting took place. Third, the weight of the evacuee was limited to 73 kg. Consistent with the CDC's report on obesity (CDC, 2012), many of the firefighters indicated that many of the people they transport weigh considerably more. Pilot testing with a significantly heavier chair occupant (up to 136 kg) suggested that while the control of the track-type devices would be adequate, fatigue would be a significant factor and would limit the number of experimental conditions that could be tested. Fourth, as the evacuee was a rescue mannequin, we cannot provide any information as to occupant preferences and concerns with the tested devices. We have conducted a subsequent study with individuals that have mobility limitations to address this issue. Fifth, the participants in the current study were instructed to descend the stairs along the inside rail to maximize the space that would be available for making the turn on the landing. This could potentially be problematic if there was upward bound foot traffic (i.e., additional firefighters) at the same time as during the World Trade Center evacuation (Sheilds et al., 2009). Further investigation is needed to determine the degree to which these track-type evacuation devices would impede pedestrian flow during full scale building evacuations.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

All of the track-type stair descent devices tested reduce the physical demands on the operators relative to hand-carried devices and can be operated at stair descent speeds consistent with published evacuation data. There are significant differences across the existing track-type stair descent devices with regards to evacuation times and the physical demands placed on the evacuators during evacuations involving stair descents. Based on these findings we would strongly recommend the use of track type devices that are shorter in overall length as these were more easily maneuvered through the landings. However, designers of these devices should consider lengthening their tracks so that three stair nosings can be bridged on staircases found outside the home. Track type devices that easily engage four wheels on the landing reduce the demands on the arms and shoulders that could be fatiguing if people are being evacuated from tall buildings.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

