@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Complex socio-technical systems: Characterization and management guidelines

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A framework to operationalize the attribute view of complexity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Description of attributes and assessment of management guidelines.


                        
                        
                           
                           Attributes can be irreducible/manageable complexity and liabilities/assets.


                        
                        
                           
                           Relationships between attributes are discussed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The case of an emergency department illustrates the use of the framework.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Complexity

Socio-technical systems

Emergency department

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Although ergonomics has paid increasing attention to the perspective of complexity, methods for its operationalization are scarce. This study introduces a framework for the operationalization of the “attribute view” of complexity, which involves: (i) the delimitation of the socio-technical system (STS); (ii) the description of four complexity attributes, namely a large number of elements in dynamic interactions, a wide diversity of elements, unexpected variability, and resilience; (iii) the assessment of six management guidelines, namely design slack, give visibility to processes and outcomes, anticipate and monitor the impacts of small changes, monitor the gap between prescription and practice, encourage diversity of perspectives when making decisions, and create an environment that supports resilience; and (iv) the identification of leverage points for improving the STS design, based on both the analysis of relationships among the attributes and their classification as irreducible/manageable complexity, and liability/asset. The use of the framework is illustrated by the study of an emergency department of a University hospital. Data collection involved analysis of documents, observations of work at the front-line, interviews with employees, and the application of questionnaires.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

While the notion that some socio-technical systems (STSs) are complex is not new (Perrow, 1984), characteristics of contemporary organizations, such as their increasing interdependence, have made the insights from complexity theory of interest to a broader range of systems (ElMaraghy et al., 2012). Moreover, the need for using analytical frameworks and management guidelines aligned with the nature of complexity has been more evident. In ergonomics, the perspective of complexity has gained traction as it has provided insights into a variety of problems, such as in the investigation of accidents (Dekker et al., 2011) and in the design and use of innovative technologies (Dekker, 2012; Walker et al., 2009). Regardless of this importance, the term complexity is often used in a loose manner, and the methods used by practitioners and researchers of ergonomics are not always matched to the complexity of the systems they are dealing with (Walker et al., 2010). Indeed, principles for the design of STSs, such as those associated with complexity, are contingent. This means that is necessary to know under what circumstances they are likely to improve performance (Clegg, 2000).

In order to characterize the complexity of an STS, ergonomists may take advantage of a number of methods originated either in ergonomics, such as the Functional Resonance Analysis Method, FRAM (Hollnagel, 2012), or from other disciplines, such as system dynamics (Forrester, 1973). However, these methods do not account for a systematic description of a wide range of complexity attributes
                        2
                     
                     
                        2
                        The terms “attributes of CSSs” and “characteristics of CSSs” are used as synonyms in this paper.
                      – e.g. the FRAM focuses on the attribute “variability”. This is a drawback, as complexity is multidimensional, encompassing several inter-related attributes that may exist in different intensities. In fact, the attribute view of complexity is, by far, the most frequently used in ergonomics (Walker et al., 2010). Two other categories of definitions are proposed by Walker et al. (2010): (i) complexity as a quantitative measure, which conveys the notion that some systems are more complex than others; (ii) complexity as emergent phenomena. The attribute view is adopted as a basis in this paper as it accounts for several dimensions of complexity, which is useful when envisioning the use of management guidelines – i.e. as these are contingent it is useful to know which attributes of complexity they match. Furthermore, we assume that the attribute view can partially account for the other two views, while the opposite is likely to be more difficult. The attributes can be quantified, and emergent phenomena are one of the attributes often cited in literature (e.g. by Cilliers, 1998). Of course, partially must be stressed, as quantification and description of emergence are still made in reference to the attributes.

In ergonomics, earlier studies about CSSs have not emphasized the operationalization of the attribute view (the same holds for the other two views), and they also have other drawbacks. First, both the characteristics of complexity and the management guidelines are not usually described based on primary empirical data, but rather on secondary data or even on hypothesized situations (e.g. Dekker, 2012; Carayon, 2010; Sweeney, 2006; Perrow, 1984). Of course, this hinders the validation of the characteristics and guidelines claimed by researchers. Second, the relationships among the characteristics, and among the guidelines, are not usually explored. This is ironic, given that the analysis of relationships is a key issue for complexity science (Cilliers, 1998). Such analysis is especially valuable for the attribute view of complexity, which otherwise may be trapped in a reductionist approach of understanding complexity based on the isolated analysis of its sub-constructs (i.e. the attributes). Third, there is no widely accepted framework to analyze the implications of the characterization for management.

Given this background, two complementary research questions guide this study: how to operationalize the attribute view of complexity so as to contribute to filling the previously mentioned gaps? How to establish a link between the guidelines and the characterization of attributes? A study of an emergency department (ED) of a University hospital was conducted, setting an empirical basis for the investigation of the research questions. While it is beyond the scope of this paper to discuss the different philosophical views of complexity, it is important to state the view we adopted since it underlies the research questions and the research design. The adopted view is closer to a critical realist view (Archer et al., 1998), which means that it has aspects of both realism and constructivism. While critical realism assumes that there is a reality independent of our thinking (i.e. in line with realism), it also recognizes that all observation is fallible, has error and that all theory is revisable, thus also accepting a constructivist proposition (Trochim, 2006). Therefore, we assume that complexity is real and can be measured (as Hornby, 2007, and others), as well as we recognize (as Cilliers, 2005, and others) that our biases limit the objectivity of the descriptions of complexity. A bias worth mentioning is that we have undertaken research in an industrial engineering program. Thus, concerns with problem-solving and categorizations are possibly more natural than for researchers with other backgrounds. However, as suggested by critical realist philosophers (Trochim, 2006), we used triangulation of methods and data in order to obtain a better account of complexity.

The four complexity attributes identified by Saurin and Sosa (2013) are adopted in this study (Fig. 1
                     ), as they were the result of a literature review that compared the attributes cited by fifteen papers. Although those authors did not carry out a systematic literature review, they considered studies that adopted a mostly realist view of complexity (e.g. Snowden and Boone, 2007; Perrow, 1984) and others more aligned with constructivism (e.g. Stacey et al., 2000; Cilliers, 1998). Fig. 1 also conveys the interpretation adopted in this paper that emergence is an attribute associated with the characteristic unexpected variability, rather than one of the three types of definitions of complexity, as assumed by Walker et al. (2010).

In this study, the guidelines for the management of CSSs identified by Saurin et al. (2013a) are adopted (Fig. 2
                     ) and, as with the attributes, they were developed from a conventional literature review. Fourteen studies largely aligned with realism were reviewed, which makes sense as this philosophical view is relatively more concerned with management and problem-solving. The studies were of three kinds: studies that have used insights from complexity theory for designing STSs – e.g. Hollnagel et al. (2011), Hollnagel and Woods (2005), Perrow (1984); reports on experiences of using complexity theory insights to support process improvement – e.g. Stroebel et al. (2005); Kernick (2004); and theoretical discussions on the use of complexity theory to enhance dimensions of organizational design – e.g. Snowden and Boone (2007). It is worth noting that these guidelines are not intended to convey the idea that a CSS can be fully controlled, which would be in conflict with the nature of those systems. However, the impossibility of full control is not exclusive with the idea of influencing the CSS (Axelrod and Cohen, 2000).

A case study was conducted to answer the research questions, as it is adequate for understanding complex phenomena embedded in real and contemporary contexts (Yin, 2003), as well as to identify empirical relationships among variables (Flyvbjerg, 2011), such as complexity attributes. Initially, it was necessary to delimitate a relevant STS for the study. This delimitation is arbitrary, and it is up to the research team to define a system that matches the objectives of the investigation (Checkland, 1999). As a CSS is dynamic, the delimitation based on the functions that the system plays is more useful than that based on the structure of the system (Hollnagel, 2012). Thus, the STS chosen for the study was the ED of a major University hospital in Brazil, which was a relevant case since: (i) EDs have been referred to as high complexity systems according to several studies (e.g. Braithwaite et al., 2013); (ii) there has been a push for using human factors systems approaches to understand and improve the outcomes of healthcare processes (Carayon et al., 2014); and (iii) the hospital's directors were interested in management improvement initiatives. Through joint decision between researchers and representatives of the hospital, it was decided that the STS would contemplate the functions performed by physicians, nurses and nurse technicians of the hospital's adult ED. These three categories are strongly related to patient care, which is the primary function to be performed by the system. Functions performed by other agents both in the ED, and in other areas of the hospital were interpreted as part of the external environment. Other major components of the external environment were the functions performed by the public healthcare network, such as mobile emergency services which transport patients from and to the ED. Sources of data were mostly the same for the description of the four complexity attributes as well as for the assessment of the management guidelines. The sources involved interviews, questionnaires, observations of work at the front-line, and document analysis.

Interviews were conducted with 18 members of staff, totaling about 21 h of recording. The criteria used to select the interviewees consisted of: (i) representing physicians, nurses, nurse technicians, and top management of the hospital; (ii) time availability for interviews; and (iii) expertise recognized by the chief nurse at the ED, primary operational contact of the researchers. The interviews were carried out in two stages. In the first, a script with 10 questions was used, in order to obtain an overview of the work content (e.g. could you tell me about your work?). In the second, the interview followed the Critical Decisions Method (CDM), which is well-known for providing rich data on informal work practices (Crandall et al., 2006), and thus it could shed light on the complexity of the STS. All interviews were analyzed using the content analysis technique (Radnor, 2001), which allows identification of words, phrases or sentences whose meaning are related to the object under study. Thus, for each transcript, the researchers identified excerpts associated with the attributes of complexity, and the use of the management guidelines.

Two types of questionnaires were used. The first had the objective of obtaining perceptions on the intensity of the attributes. It had 23 statements: 22 related to the attributes and one that sought to capture the perceived complexity of the STS as a whole. The second questionnaire was designed to assess the perceptions about the management guidelines. It had 32 statements divided into two parts: the first contained 16 statements regarding to what extent respondents believed a particular guideline should be used; the second part had the same 16 statements re-phrased to assess how much the guidelines were used. Also, two statements at the end of this questionnaire evaluated the perceptions regarding patient safety and employees' safety, in order to analyze the correlations between perceived safety and the use of guidelines.

In both types of questionnaires, respondents should mark, on a 15 cm scale, how much they agreed with each statement. The scale had two anchors at the extremes: “strongly disagree” and “strongly agree”. Questionnaires were sent to the whole population (n = 240) and they were considered valid if (Table 1
                           ): (a) they had over 90% of questions answered; and (b) they had less than 30% of questions marked at the extremes of the scale. Cronbach's alphas were higher than 0.6 (0.84 for the characterization; 0.85 for the guidelines), which is the acceptable threshold proposed by Hair et al. (2009). Additional statistical analysis involved: (i) calculation of means and coefficients of variation (CV); (ii) calculation of the Pearson's correlation coefficient; and (iii) calculation of the difference between the means for the use and for the applicability of the guideline presented in each statement, referred to as delta (Δ) value. The questionnaires were particularly useful to identify the most salient aspects within each group of attributes, setting a focus for the overall data analysis.

Documents related to standard operating procedures (SOPs) and organizational charts, among others, were available on the intranet of the institution. The researchers had intranet access with a login, allowing them to view some of these documents, which were consulted to assist in characterizing complexity and assessing the guidelines. For example, to describe resilience, knowing the SOPs was crucial, for it allowed to check work as imagined against work as done.

Furthermore, two researchers carried out observations of work at the front-line during a period of six months, totaling about 110 h on the premises of the ED. The observations had emphasis on understanding the activities performed by staff and on the resulting social and technical interactions. The observations were recorded in a diary, arranged according to date, activities observed and insights associated with the research questions.

There were two meetings in which the data collected and their analysis were validated by representatives of the ED: one of these focused on the interviews, while the other focused on the questionnaires. Each meeting lasted about 2 h, involving researchers, members of ED staff, and the nursing director. The ED representatives indicated that the system was properly interpreted, and some aspects that represented doubts to the researchers could be clarified. In particular, clarifications were sought about statements at which the CV was very high.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The studied ED was inaugurated in the late 1970s and provides care in general practice, general surgery, gynecology and pediatrics. On average, 150 medical consultations a day are performed, totaling about 54,500 annual appointments. Fig. 3
                         presents an overview of the sub-systems of the ED.

The results of the questionnaire indicated strong presence of the attribute large number of elements in dynamic interactions (Table 2
                           ). In fact, considering only patients and staff on a given shift, more than 200 people are in the ED. Regarding the technical elements, a number of equipment, materials and medications are used for patient care – e.g. there are 1062 devices registered as belonging to the ED. Concerning the organizational elements, its high number stems from the different management routines for the areas of care that form the ED, as well as from the SOPs. The dynamic relationship between the elements is present in different forms, varying according to time of day and day of week. The turnover of patients itself, between admissions and discharges, as well as their transfer between areas of observation illustrates the dynamism of the ED.

This dynamism adds to the difficulty of verifying the actual status of patients (hospitalized or discharged), as well as to identifying their location in the ED. For example, each nurse technician is required to search for the medications, to be administered to the patients under their care, in a bag (Fig. 4
                           ) containing all medications sent to the observation unit at which they are working. However, it is common for the medication of several patients to be missing from the bag, because at the time of prescription, the patient was located in another unit. Therefore, the technician needs to go to other units and search among the medications received for the drugs to be given to their patients. Often it is also necessary to spend significant time looking for the patient, who is not in the location recorded in the computer system. This time used to search for drugs and patients increases the chances for the drugs to be administered after the prescribed time, which may have clinical implications.


                           Table 3
                            shows the results from the questionnaire for the attribute wide diversity of elements. Social diversity can be illustrated by the diversity of patients as well as by professional and demographic data related to the respondents. While physicians are on average the oldest (45 years-old), nurse technicians are on average five years more experienced (12.5 years) in comparison with physicians (7.1 years). Such experienced workforce might be an asset for resilience. With regard to education, only 3 nurses and 2 physicians attended courses with a focus on EDs – such lack of ED experts may be a lack of necessary diversity. Organizational diversity is present mainly in regard to management routines of the different units of observation, suitable to different patient's problems. Technical diversity is represented by about 500 types of medications and dozens of different types of equipment, available in different locations and quantities. The impact of this diversity of medications is twofold. On the one hand, it increases the likelihood of finding a medication that may replace another that is temporarily unavailable; physicians reported that such replacements are fairly common. On the other hand, it creates more opportunities for administering the wrong medication to the patient.

The results of the questionnaire (Table 4
                           ), as well as several situations observed or reported during the interviews, indicated the presence of unexpected variability. For example, the potentially large impact of small errors (M = 11.4) was illustrated by a report of a mistake in identifying a patient, that nearly triggered an unnecessary surgical examination. The use of indirect sources of information (M = 7.3), such as family members and colleagues, can contribute to the occurrence of such situations.

The presence of unforeseen situations (M = 10.1) was also observed and reported, such as verbal and physical aggression, suffered by nurses, especially during the risk classification process. Contributing factors to such aggressions are the long waiting time for patient care and the lack of real-time information available on the status of the ED (e.g. expected waiting time). Furthermore, some patients wait for the outcome of their treatment in unsuitable places, such as chairs, for much longer than expected. This contributes to the worsening of the condition of these patients, in unexpected ways.

An aspect reported in every interview, that is related with the influence of the external environment (M = 9.5), is overcrowding. According to the reports, causes of overcrowding arise both from the external and internal environment. Concerning the external causes, the reports indicated that: the concept of emergency care is not clear to the majority of the public, who seeks the service in unnecessary cases; the shortcomings of the public primary healthcare network, which is not trusted by patients; and the lack of inpatient beds in public hospitals in general, which promotes the need to keep patients in the ED for a longer period of time, pending availability for hospitalization. This is why the physician-in-chief of the ED refers to it as a “hospital inside another hospital”. Concerning the internal causes, inefficient processes that lead to loss of capacity can be emphasized – e.g. wasted time of professionals looking for patients and medications.

Of course, ED overcrowding is a persistent and multi causal problem in several countries, and some of the causes mentioned above are cited by other studies (e.g. Moskop et al., 2009). Overall, results suggest that overcrowding is an emergent phenomenon, as it has properties (e.g. annoyed patients, stressed staff, undesired interactions between patients) that do not exist in any of the contributing factors. These properties arise from the interactions (Fig. 5
                           ) and thus states of overcrowding may be unique. In the studied ED, a dramatic example of overcrowding recently occurred when many victims of a major fire in a nightclub (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kiss_nightclub_fire) were cared. As it is emergent, no simple and isolated measures are likely to prevent overcrowding definitely. Even when the ED is officially closed to new patients, these keep coming and many being cared; this at best reduces overcrowding temporarily. Overcrowding also illustrates the fact that emergence is not only one more attribute of a CSS, but it may be a lasting system's state.


                           Table 5
                            presents the results obtained for the resilience attribute in the questionnaire. The lowest mean (7.2) referred to the existence of alternative actions, which were assumed as a proxy measure of slack. An example of these alternatives is the possibility, in times of high demand, of convening professionals who were off to work overtime. According to the interviews, this possibility was more restricted regarding the physicians. Indeed, the results of the questionnaire indicated that nurses were the ones that realized the existence of alternative actions as more present (M nurses = 9.1; M physicians = 6.0; M nurse technicians = 6.5).

The use of prioritization strategies, and their side-effects, was identified as one of the main manifestations of autonomy (M = 9.3). For example, all interviewed technicians reported the need to occasionally alter the prescribed work sequence of checking patients' vital signs and then administering medication. This sequence is based on the premise that analyzing the vital signs can indicate changes in the patient's condition and lead to the suspension of medication. Altering the sequence may result, for instance, in the administration of hypotensive medication to a patient that is already hypotensive. Physicians also develop prioritization strategies, in order to evaluate all the patients under their care. For example, some physicians prefer to initially assess the status and tests of all the patients in the computer system before checking on them in person, and then they later return to the computer to enter prescriptions and update information on patients' condition on their charts. However, according to two interviewed physicians, the ideal would be to assess each patient and immediately access the computer to enter information on their chart. Therefore, the other healthcare professionals would have access to updated information regarding the condition of each patient. This would be an example of using the lean production principle of creating continuous flow (Liker, 2004), as it would imply working in small batches of patients and prescriptions. Nevertheless, delaying certain activities in order to prioritize others is a strategy commonly used by healthcare professionals to manage their workload (Laxmisan et al., 2007). As a drawback, such prioritizations usually mean that an activity is interrupted, which create problems for prospective memory and possible adverse events (McDaniel and Einstein, 2007).

The results for the statement about the general perception of complexity (M = 12.1; CV = 23.2), indicated it is high. Confirming the trend observed in the other statements, the general perception of complexity was greater as the hierarchical level of professionals rose from technicians (M = 11.2) to nurses (M = 12.3) and then to physicians (M = 13.6). This can be due to the different types of expertise and autonomy. For example, decisions made by technicians are mostly related to when and how to adapt, if necessary, the SOPs and decisions of physicians and nurses to local circumstances. With regard to physicians, decision-making is focused on how to diagnose and treat the patient, which ultimately includes a larger number of elements to be weighted and greater responsibility. However, the mentioned trend of greater perception of complexity as hierarchy increases changed on statements related to resilience. In this case, nurses (M = 10.2), as compared to physicians (M = 8.5) and technicians (M = 7.5), perceived complexity as higher. This may be a result of nurses acting as middle managers, who are responsible for supporting performance adjustments of both physicians and technicians.

The guideline design slack was perceived as strongly applicable (Table 6
                        ), a result that may be related to overcrowding, which stretches the use of slack to its limits. In particular, perceptions related to statement a1 indicate intense time-pressure, especially for physicians (M = 2.7), in comparison with nurses (M = 6.5) and technicians (M = 5.6). The high CV associated with a1 (70.6%) may be due to the different levels of overcrowding in the four observation areas within the ED.

Redundancies in the STS are another form of slack. An example of this is the previously mentioned possibility (Section 4.2.4) of requesting that staff work overtime on their days off in times of high demand. In regard to slack associated with equipment and medication, it was observed that these are not always available when needed. However, when patients are in a very serious condition, any missing resources are usually quickly provided by management, as well as other institutions and hospital departments. The data also indicated that the amount of time spent on activities that do not add direct value to patient care compromises resources that could be used as slack.

The results of the questionnaire for the guideline give visibility to processes and outcomes (Table 7
                        ) indicated the need for better visual management. Three examples may be cited: (i) technicians often needed information that could only be viewed on the computers by nurses because of restricted access; this meant nurses should stop what they were doing to check the computers and verbally convey the information to technicians; (ii) the difficulty in finding out where patients were located and which professionals were responsible for them on each shift; and (iii) shortcomings in the visibility of information regarding the entry and exit of patients to testing units within the ED and other hospital departments. In an illustration of the poor visual management, one of the nurses interviewed reported that information about the operational status of the ED could be “easily” obtained by contacting a certain staff member. This goes against a core visual management principle, which requires that the workplace be self-explanatory, minimizing the need for exchanging verbal information (Galsworth, 2005).

Results obtained from the questionnaire (Table 8
                        ) indicated that deltas were fairly small, in comparison with the other guidelines. Overall, the data pointed out that the opinion of physicians regarding both ED management and patient care carried greater weight than that of other professional categories. The structure of the committee that managed the ED reflected this fact, as five of the seven members were physicians.

However, good practices of considering the perspectives of different professional categories were identified, such as the use of a multidisciplinary team for patient care. According to data collected by the ED staff, the results acquired with patients under this team's supervision have been encouraging, such as a shorter length of stay as compared to other patients in the same unit. Another good practice referred to the consultation of medical specialists working in other areas of the hospital. As a drawback, some interviewees reported pressure on the part of hospital specialists for patients with certain pathologies to be admitted to the hospital, especially if they presented a study opportunity. As such, some patients spent longer than necessary in the ED, undergoing tests and waiting for a bed on the hospital.

The low perceived use of this guideline (Table 9
                        ) may be related to the process of accreditation by the JCI, which was taking place during the data collection period. As a result, several small changes were being implemented so as to comply with more than 1000 requirements established for accreditation. An example of these small changes is that of labeling all medications, with the name of the patient and their chart number. However, the first day this new routine was applied led to an increased workload for nursing staff, delaying essential tasks. This affected the credibility of the new practice and suggests there was insufficient anticipation as to how the change would impact the front line.

Situations which reflected the use of the guideline for managing small changes were also observed. One such initiative was known as “right patient in the right place”, which aimed to refer less serious patients to other public care facilities. A similar situation was that of the already mentioned multidisciplinary care team. Both projects, initially implemented on a small scale, required planning and staff training as well as monitoring of their results, enabling the impact of these changes to be assessed before putting them into practice on a large scale. Overall, the analysis of this guideline indicated the lack of criteria to determine the most suitable planning and monitoring tools for each type of change. In this respect, the use of methods for modeling the dynamics of CSSs, such as the FRAM, could be useful to anticipate, to a possible extent, the impacts of changes.

The low mean recorded for the existence of monitoring between prescribed and actual work (Table 10
                        ) contrasts with the researchers' observations of frequent adjustments made by employees to deal with variability, such as those discussed in Section 4.2.4 (Resilience). Also in relation to this guideline, employees did not receive formal training and organizational support to determine how to adjust SOPs to local circumstances. In addition, lack of knowledge on the main adjustments made generally did not lead to improvement of SOPs, although they had an expiration date, after which they should be reviewed. An alternative to obtain information of adjustments from staff was the system for reporting adverse events, although this resource was rarely used and the events went unreported.

There was strong agreement among respondents regarding the applicability of this guideline, associated with its perceived insufficient use (Table 11
                        ). The need for meetings aimed at learning and reflecting on practices was strongly recognized by all professional categories (statement k2). However, when asked about the existence of such meetings, there was a very low agreement among physicians (M = 4.2; M nurses = 10.0; M technicians = 9.4), which may be related to their perceived lack of time to carry out their tasks (see Section 5.1). Physicians had only a monthly meeting to define the work schedule, with no time to address matters related to every day work activities. It was also remarkable that no occasions were identified where all the professional categories came together. The need for induction training on the specific characteristics of the ED was perceived as strongly applicable (statement l2). This would be particularly important as staff selection occurred through examinations where assessment criteria did not require specific knowledge on EDs. This drawback compromises the dimension of this guideline related to using knowledge to diminish the possibility of unexpected interactions.

The statements regarding changes to work organization in times of need (n1 and n2) refer to the ability to change work arrangements in normal, high demand and emergency situations (Weick and Sutcliffe, 2001). Given the lack of indicators, particularly in real time, it was difficult to differentiate between operational situations. Limits as to when the ED changed from one status to another were highly dependent on the staff involved in determining, for example, when the admission of new patients should be restricted. Nevertheless, we identified examples of resources redistribution among the ED areas in times of increased demand. Medical staff frequently experienced this type of situation since failures in the work schedule of physicians was a common occurrence.

Both staff (M = 5.1) and patient safety (M = 5.6) were perceived as low, and they had a strong correlation (0.77). This result is consistent with previous studies in the same hospital where the ED is located (Magalhães et al., 2013) as well as with studies elsewhere (Trinkoff et al., 2011), which have indicated significant associations between nursing workload and patient safety. The highest correlation between the statements on patient safety and other statements was 0.38 (for patient safety and statement c1, which is about visual management; p-values < 0.05). Thus, it seems that the perceived lack of safety, while associated with the low use of the guidelines, is also dependent on other factors that they do not capture.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#


                        Fig. 6
                         presents the relations among the attributes, their correlations (p-values < 0.05) and the overall means (M) of the statements. The two attributes mostly related to structural complexity (number of elements and diversity) are more correlated with unexpected variability than with resilience. This result should be a concern, as it indicates that the interactions among the elements that form the ED have been mostly a source of potential problems. From another perspective, the potential of the structural characteristics, which have fairly high intensities, as levers for resilience, has not been fully explored. Other data indicating this under exploration of resilience are the low correlation between resilience and unexpected variability (0.27) and the fact that the identified manifestations of resilience occurred mostly at the individual and team levels (e.g. strategies for prioritizing tasks), without adequate organizational support.

Concerning the relationships among the two aforementioned structural attributes, there was evidence that the large number of interacting elements enables a wider diversity of such elements (correlation = 0.67), such as by the different degrees of expertise and performance levels - e.g. while there are physicians engaged only with patient care, there are others additionally engaged with management and academic assignments. Moreover, overcrowding contributes to an increased diversity of patients. Conversely, there was evidence that diversity contributes to the dynamic interactions. For instance, there were reports that the unique condition of a patient may demand medications which are not readily available in the ED. This may trigger the need to request supplies from other areas of the hospital, and maybe from other hospitals.

Furthermore, the study indicated that the origin of the interacting elements and the nature of their diversity impacts on the unexpected variability. For example, elements from external origin, such as patients, coupled with their diversity of symptoms, ultimately cause greater variability. By contrast, when a greater number and diversity of elements have an internal origin, this might be an asset for resilience. Thus, it seems that unexpected variability is a concern mostly when the complexity brought from the external environment finds no compatible resources for its management within the internal environment. Such need for compatibility should not lead to oversimplified interpretations that the ED should be as complex as its external environment. The compatibility could be achieved, in some cases, by simplifying ED processes, which in this way could free up resources to deal with the demand. In other cases, the compatibility could be achieved by leveraging on complexity, such as by taking advantage of the complementary skills of staff.


                        Fig. 7
                         presents a framework that emerged from the case study, and that allows the classification of attributes across two dimensions: manageability (irreducible/manageable) and impact (liability/asset). This framework establishes a link between the complexity characterization and the assessment of the guidelines. It may also support the identification of the most adequate tools for dealing with each type of attribute. For instance, traditional visual management devices, such as safety signs, may be useful for giving visibility to the manageable portion of complexity, associated with formal interactions. By contrast, in order to give visibility to the irreducible portion, such as informal working practices, a different approach is required, such as the use of task analysis methods.

Concerning the guidelines adopted in this paper, possible ways of coping with the irreducible/liability portion of complexity are the design of slack and the development of resilience skills. For example, the management of unexpected demand may benefit from the planning of slack resources to be used if required, such as the existing practice of calling for extra professionals to work in the shifts. Also, the wide diversity of internal elements has already been used for the development of resilient skills, such as by using multidisciplinary teams in patient care.

As to the manageable attributes that are liabilities, they might be interpreted as opportunities for reducing unnecessary complexity, taking advantage of a number of process improvement methods that have been applied in EDs (Crane and Noon, 2011). For example, visual management may help to reduce unnecessary complexity, both in the sense that employees will have a greater awareness of the existing interactions, and that unnecessary interactions in terms of looking for equipment, people and materials, are likely to be reduced.

The case study also provided insights into the contents of the guidelines. For example, it was found that visual management faces restrictions in healthcare. Visibility should be traded-off with the need for privacy of patients, such as during certain types of examinations and exchanges of information with staff. In the ED, such trade-offs were managed through the use of mobile walls placed around the beds, which did not guarantee acoustic privacy. Also, legal requirements did not allow the full display of patients' personal data and information on their clinical condition. These findings are in line with arguments for the need of a balance between visibility and privacy in STSs (Bernstein, 2012).

Furthermore, it was realized that slack is not necessarily designed into the system, and so it is proposed that the guideline design slack has a dimension related to taking advantage of opportunistic slack. On the one hand, designed slack refers to spare resources whose quantity, place of storage/usage, and nature, result from decisions made by groups of individuals and supported by management (organizational level). A possible example of this type of slack, undetected in the ED, is the existence of stocks of medication with a safety margin that is explicitly sized and visually delimited in stock areas. On the other hand, opportunistic slack refers to isolated and informal initiatives by staff in times of need. Examples of such type of slack include locating a specific piece of equipment at another hospital, and the placement of beds in hallways. This type corresponds to the creation of slack via local reorganization, which is one of the three types of margins of maneuver identified by Stephens et al. (2011) in EDs. Thus, designed slack arises from proactive organizational resilience, while opportunistic slack relies on reactive individual and team resilience, which is often overused, and misused (Wears and Vincent, 2013). It is also worth noting that both designed and opportunistic slack do not necessarily rely on the need for adding extra resources. For instance, conceptual slack refers to a “divergence in analytical perspectives among members of an organization over theories, models, or causal assumptions” (Schulman, 1993). Indeed, the existing staff may provide different perspectives, supported either by formal management actions (e.g. top management defines the members of a care team in order to account explicitly for cognitive diversity), or opportunistically – e.g. a physician seeks advice from senior nurses and doctors who, by chance, were working on the same shift as them.

It was also found that the use of conceptual slack as well as the guideline encouraging different perspectives in decision-making tended to be limited by distinctions between professional categories (e.g. status and gender). Uneven managerial power distribution may hinder joint decision-making, although the identified multidisciplinary care team shows that this is beneficial for patients. In this respect, it is remarkable that the questionnaire results indicated that physicians were much more critical than the other categories concerning the use of the guidelines, with the exception of the guideline encouraging different perspectives in decision-making (M physicians = 9.8; M nurses = 8.2; M technicians = 8.3). However, other evidence (e.g. no formal moments in which all professional categories share information) suggests that the physicians' perceptions can be too optimistic. Different expectations and understandings of the meaning of collaboration may explain the contrasting perspectives. In a study by Sexton et al. (2006) “nurses often described good collaboration as having their input respected, whereas physicians often described good collaboration as having nurses who anticipate their needs and follow instructions”.

The results indicated several moderate correlations (i.e. from 0.3 to 0.7, according to Hair et al., 2009) among the guidelines (Table 12
                        ), which indicates that they are more likely to be effective if used together. The strongest correlation (0.73), which is supported by the qualitative data, is between the guidelines of designing slack (G1) and giving visibility to processes and outcomes (G2). The poor visual management of the ED increases non-adding value activities, and in turn this consumes slack that could be useful for safety critical situations. The guideline of creating an environment that supports resilience (G6) displays moderate and relatively uniform correlation with the other five guidelines, which supports the notion that resilience is an emergent phenomena (Hollnagel, 2012). Still concerning resilience, a new development for the guideline associated with creating favorable conditions for it was identified: to shorten the time of hazardous interactions, which are likely to require performance adjustments. One means of achieving this is shortening lengths of stay in the ED. The longer the stay the greater the possibility of undesired interactions emerging (such as contamination by other patients) and, as a result, the possibility of resilience being needed is increased.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Although ergonomics has paid increasing attention to the perspective of complexity, methods for its operationalization are scarce. This study contributes to filling this gap, by introducing a framework for the operationalization of the attribute view of complexity. It allows the characterization of attributes and the assessment of management guidelines that fit the nature of CSSs. An instantiation of the framework in an ED was presented, providing empirical evidence to validate the adopted attributes and guidelines.

The framework encourages the analysis of the relationships between the attributes, based on Fig. 6 and on the correlations among the statements. The main assumption underlying that figure is that the more complex the system the stronger the correlations should be. However, based on the case study, it seems that some correlations are more desirable than others. For example, resilience had either moderate or low correlations with the large number and wide diversity of elements – such correlations ideally should have been stronger. This conclusion was also supported by interviews and observations, which indicated the lack of organizational measures to support proactive and effective resilient performance.

Guidance for what to do with the characterization was also presented. While the separation between irreducible/manageable and liability/asset is ultimately a decision to be negotiated between stakeholders, it raises questions on the assumptions regarding the nature of the STS and on the realistic control measures. For instance, in the analyzed ED, overcrowding is for the time being accepted as a fact of life, and so the measures directed to handle the resulting complexity should be focused on coping with it, rather than on its reduction. Lastly, the results indicated that the guidelines may contribute for a “quality check” of practices being adopted for the management of CSSs. If the practices are adequate for CSSs, they should account for one or more of the guidelines, which can reduce the probability of undesired non-linear interactions. In the case study, that quality check helped to identify a number of positive examples and difficulties of using the guidelines.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The limitations of the framework have also been identified, as follows: (i) a philosophical limitation of any framework of this type is that a full description of the STS is impossible; otherwise the system would not be complex; (ii) the graphical and mathematical modeling of the dynamic nature of the interactions is not stressed; while interactions have been identified in the ED, the use of more focused methods might provide a better picture of the dynamics of the CSS; (iii) there was a difficulty in conducting an in-depth analysis of each guideline, since they are associated with different disciplines that have their own theoretical framework; (iv) the details of how to operationalize the guidelines were not discussed since the study focused on their assessment rather than on their implementation; and (v) the improvements in the contents of the guidelines were bounded by the domain investigated. However, no step of the adopted research method assumes the need for a specific context, leaving room to replicate the study in different areas.

A number of opportunities for further studies resulted from this research, such as: (i) the joint use of the framework with methods for modeling interactions in STSs, such as the FRAM – the framework may be useful to deal with some drawbacks of the FRAM (Macchi, 2010), as it may help to identify when its use is really necessary (i.e. when complexity is high) as well as to identify control measures; (ii) the joint use of the framework with industrial engineering methods focused on the identification and control of waste, as this may help to identify unnecessary complexity arising from gross inefficiency; (iii) the design of tools for the implementation of specific guidelines; in particular, we propose that investigation of the guideline design slack might be a source of innovation, given its ambiguous nature, multiplicity of forms, and key role in safety-critical systems; (iv) to develop new guidelines that are more explicitly safety-oriented; this may help to establish stronger correlations between the perceived use of the guidelines and perceived safety; correlations identified in this study were no higher than 0.38; and (v) to apply the framework in other CSSs, in order to evaluate its generalizability and needs for improvement.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

