@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of caffeine and menthol on cognition and mood during simulated firefighting in the heat

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined changes in cognition and mood during stimulated firefighting in heat.


                        
                        
                           
                           We examined the separate effects of caffeine and menthol on mental efforts.


                        
                        
                           
                           Cognition is well maintained during short duration firefighting.


                        
                        
                           
                           Mood is severely deteriorated even with regular rests.


                        
                        
                           
                           No effects of caffeine and menthol on cognition and mood.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Hyperthermia

Dehydration

Protective clothing

Cognitive performance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study examined the separate effects of caffeine and menthol on cognition and mood during simulated firefighting in the heat. Participants (N = 10) performed three trials in a counterbalanced order, either with 400 mg caffeine, menthol lozenges, or placebo. The simulated firefighting consisted of 2 bouts of 20-min treadmill exercise and one bout of 20-min stepping exercise in the heat with two brief 15-min rest periods between each exercise phase. Exercise induced significant dehydration (>3%) and elevated rectal temperature (>38.9 °C), for all three conditions. Neither caffeine nor menthol reduced perceived exertion compared to placebo (p > 0.05). Mood ratings (i.e., alertness, hedonic tone, tension) significantly deteriorated over time (p < 0.05), but there was no difference among the three conditions. Simple reaction time, short-term memory, and retrieval memory did not alter with treatments or repeated evaluations. Reaction accuracy from a math test remained unchanged throughout the experimental period; reaction time from the math test was significantly faster after exposure to the heat (p < 0.05). It is concluded that, exhaustive exercise in the heat severely impacted mood, but minimally impacted cognition. These treatments failed to show ergogenic benefits in a simulated firefighting paradigm in a hot environment.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

While the physiological consequences of firefighting have been extensively studied, less is understood about how cognition and mood would be affected during firefighting in harsh and demanding environments. Firefighters are often exposed to multi-stressors, including intense and sustained physical tasks, environmental extremes, anxiety, uncertainty, and obligations of victim rescue. There is considerable anecdotal documentation of these multi-stressors negatively impacting on the ability to process cognitive information and act quickly, effectively, and decisively (Grandjean and Grandjean, 2007; Hancock and Vasmatzidis, 2003). Furthermore, a firefighting job is characterized by shift work which can contribute to episodic sleepiness, and may cause deterioration of alertness and operational efficiency. A recent article highlighted sleep disruption, heat, and smoke on physical and cognitive performance encountered by wildland ﬁreﬁghters (Aisbett et al., 2012). Impaired cognition and mood would likely increase risks of injuries and accidents.

Caffeine and menthol might provide a practical intervention to preserve sufficient mental efforts during firefighting missions. The behavioral effects of caffeine as a stimulus are well known. Following crossing the blood-brain barrier, caffeine binds to adenosine receptors and exerts centrally psychostimulant effects through antagonism of adenosine A1 receptors. Caffeine's well-documented stimulating effect on human cognition and mood include increased alertness, attention, vigilance, and memory (Lieberman, 2001; Nehlig, 2010). For shift workers, use of caffeine products are likely to be encouraged for prevention of work errors and possible injuries resulted from fatigue and sleepiness (Ker et al., 2010). The beneficial effects on cognitive information processing likely contribute to the widespread use of this drug. Menthol has a mild arousal effect. When applied to the skin and mucous surfaces, menthol induces subjective sensation of coolness, the underlying mechanism being a stimulating action on peripheral cold receptors (Eccles, 2003). Nasal inhalation or oral administration of menthol brings perceived sensation of breathing cool and fresh air and of improved airflow; it has been suggested this cool sensation influences arousal and alertness levels (Eccles, 2000). Mints and lozenges with menthol additive are frequently used in situations where a mild stimulus is required to maintain alertness. Interestingly, Mündel and Jones (2009) studied swilling menthol solution during exercise in a hot environment and it was found endurance capacity was enhanced by an average of 9% with menthol. They suggested that change in the sense of effort (average of 15% reduction in ratings of perceived exertion) partially accounted for the improvement in heat tolerance. Thus, effects of stimulus such as caffeine and menthol might be expected, especially when individuals experience low arousal and high fatigue levels, or in tasks requiring explicit and sustained cognitive processing, or in situations of high demand on controlled mood. Therefore, for firefighters experiencing dehydrated, hyperthermic, and exhausted states, caffeine and menthol might offer simple solutions for combating fatigue and preserving cognitive information processing and mood.

Failure to detect any dangerous situations can be critical and life-threatening. Therefore, this study examined the separate effects of caffeine and menthol on cognition and mood during a simulated firefighting exposure. We hypothesized that in a heat stress prolonged exercise condition, caffeine and menthol would increase cognitive performance and improve mood across time relative to placebo. Administrators need to be aware of the potential for mental efforts deficits in highly stressful situations and seek potential interventions to mitigate adverse effects.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Ten males, unacclimatized to heat, volunteered to participate in this study. They were confirmed to be regular coffee drinkers, consuming at least one cup of regular coffee per day. Their physical characteristics were age: 24 ± 4 yr, height: 179 ± 6 cm, weight: 76.3 ± 15.3 kg, percentage of body fat: 8 ± 5%, and maximal oxygen uptake: 52.8 ± 5.3 ml kg−1 min−1. This study was approved by the university's Institutional Review Board for protection of human subjects.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

This study used a placebo-controlled, counter-balanced cross-over repeated measures design. This study required participants to complete four laboratory visits. Experimental trials were conducted once per week. The first visit consisted of preliminary testing, workload assessment, and familiarization. The remaining three visits were experimental trials with placebo, caffeine, or menthol treatments. For the caffeine trial, caffeine was administered in capsule form (400 mg of caffeine) ten minutes prior to the 1st treadmill exercise. For the menthol and placebo trials, participants took menthol lozenges (10-mg menthol, 6-mg benzocaine) (Chloraseptic, Prestige Brands, USA), or placebo lozenges (6-mg benzocaine) (Cepacol Fizzlers, Combe Inc., USA). Each of the three trials consisted of a baseline assessment of cognition and mood (described below) followed by repeated post-treatment assessments. Before each experimental day, participants were asked to refrain from strenuous exercise and consuming any caffeine-containing drinks or food from 8 P.M. the previous evening until completion of the trial during the experimental day.

The first visit was to determine individual's maximal oxygen uptake and maximal heart rate from a graded treadmill test, and the consequent individual workloads. Each experimental trial consisted of two treadmill exercises and one stepping exercise with brief rest periods between the each exercise phase. For the treadmill exercise, participants performed 4 bouts of 4 min of walking on a motor-driven treadmill to elicit a metabolic rate of 60% maximal oxygen uptake followed by 1 min of 15 arm curls (bar weighing 4.5 kg). For the stepping exercise, participants performed 4 bouts of 4 min of constant cadence stepping exercise at a cadence of 25 steps per min (using a metronome) on a 40-cm high platform followed by 1-min 15 arm curls. Participants were required to complete this familiarization trial to ensure that they were acquainted with the exercise regime, equipment, and measurement scales. Three sample sets of cognition and mood tests were also introduced and practiced during the familiarization period to reduce learning effects. Participants verbally confirmed their confidence with all experimental protocols after the initial visit.

During the experimental days, participants were asked to provide a urine sample to verify the hydration status prior to the trials. Participants were not tested if they were dehydrated (urine specific gravity >1.020). Participants' nude body weight (shorts only) was measured on a calibrated scale (Detecto Scales Inc., USA). Participants then self-inserted a rectal thermocouple (Physitemp, USA) and the rectal temperature was monitored with a portable system (Physitemp Thermalert model TH-8, USA). Participants donned a Polar heart rate monitor (Polar, USA). During the experimental trials, participants wore firefighter protective clothing (i.e., turnout coat/pants made of Nomex fiber out shell with Goretex barrier (LION, USA) and gloves (American Firewear Inc., USA)), a self-contained breathing apparatus tank (Survivair Respirators Inc., USA), and a helmet (E.D. Bullard Co., USA). Instead of firefighting boots, athletic shoes were worn to avoid unnecessary discomfort. The total weight of the personal protective equipment was approximately 19.1 kg.

The environmental chamber setting for three 20-min exercise periods was 35 °C wet bulb global temperature (wet: 31 °C, dry: 45 °C, globe: 43 °C; 40% relative humidity). During two 15-min rest periods, participants were seated in the main laboratory room where the ambient temperature was 21 ± 1 °C (45% relative humidity). Participants took either one menthol lozenge (menthol trial) or placebo lozenge (caffeine and placebo trials) and entered the environmental chamber. They first completed a set of cognition tests (i.e., simple reaction test, followed by a short-term memory test, and math test) and a mood assessment. Then participants completed the 1st 20-min treadmill exercise, exited the environmental chamber, and completed the 1st 15-min rest period. Water was freely available during rest periods and volume consumed was recorded. A 2nd lozenge was taken prior to the 2nd treadmill exercise. Then participants repeated the 2nd 20-min treadmill exercise. Immediately after the 2nd treadmill exercise, participants completed another set of cognitions tests and mood assessment in the environmental chamber. Then participants exited the environmental chamber and completed the 2nd 15-min rest period. A 3rd lozenge was provided prior to the stepping exercise. Participants re-entered the environmental chamber and performed the stepping exercise. Immediately after the stepping exercise, participants completed the final set of cognition tests and a mood assessment in the environmental chamber. Upon doffing all gear except shorts, participants were weighed again at the end.

Rectal temperature and heart rate were monitored and recorded every 5 min throughout the experimental periods. Body weight loss was calculated as change in pre-trial and post-trial nude body weight adjusted by total fluid volume taken during rest periods. Rating of perceived exertion (Borg, 1998) were recorded every 10 min throughout the trials.

The simple reaction test (O'Neal and Bishop, 2010) was performed on a laptop computer. In a task box orbiting on the computer screen, participants had 30 s to mouse-click a black dot that randomly appeared in a 6 × 10 grid of white circles. Participants were required to click on the target dot as soon as they detected the dot. For every correct click, one point was added and every incorrectly clicked circle (e.g., miss clicked the closing dot) resulted in one point taken away. The total reaction score was recorded at the end.

In the short-memory test (O'Neal and Bishop, 2010), a list of 15 words was presented via automated slides flashing on a laptop screen at a rate of one word every 4 s. All of the words were nouns five letters long. No plurals or names were used. Participants were told to remember as many words as possible. Immediately after 1 min of memory, participants were given 2 min to use a pencil to write down (no order required) all the words that they could remember on a piece of blank paper. The dependent variable was the number of words correctly recalled (the higher, the better; no penalty for words not on the list).

The serial addition/subtraction test was a mathematical test requiring sustained attention. This test has been shown to be a reliable and valid measurement of sustained attention (Thorne et al., 1983). For this test, two randomly selected digits and either a plus or minus sign were presented on a paper. The participant performed test and entered the least significant digit of the result (e.g., “7,5,+” equals 12, so write down 2). There were total of 20 addition/subtraction tasks performed during each math test. The dependent variables were response accuracy (number of correct responses; the higher, the better), response time (speed of response; the quicker, the better). The response time was recorded using a hand hold stopwatch.

At the end of the stepping exercise, participants were shown 30 words which consisted of the 15 words shown at the 2nd short-term memory test plus 15 new distracter words. Participants had 2 min to decide which words were in the earlier list of 15. The dependent variables were the number of correct responses (correctly accepting target words and correctly rejecting distracter words) and the number of false responses (wrongly accepting a distracter as being in the original list). The finals score was calculated from correct responses minus false responses. Given a small dose (i.e., 40 mg) of caffeine is associated with improved alertness, attention, and retrieval memory task (Smith et al., 1999).

Mood was assessed using 100-mm visual analogue rating scales (Smith et al., 1999). These 18 scales (e.g., Tense/Calm, Muzzy/Clear-headed, Antagonistic/Friendly) can be categorized into three factors: alertness, hedonic tone, and tension. Each factor score was calculated by summarizing the scores of the individual mood adjectives (e.g., Anxiety Mood = Relaxed/Excited + Troubled/Tranquil + Tense/Calm), and was later used in the statistical analysis. These scales are reported to be sensitive to caffeine administration for fatigued personnel (Smith et al., 1999).

A repeated measures Analysis of Variance was used, and when a significant main effect was found, Fisher's LSD was performed to identify specific differences. All values were reported as mean values and standard deviations. Statistical difference was considered to be significant at alpha ≤0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Heart rate responses are shown in Fig. 1
                        . Heart rate was significantly elevated relative to baseline throughout the exercise periods. There was no significant difference in heart rates among the three conditions (p > 0.05). At the end of the experimental period, rectal temperatures were 39.0 ± 0.2 °C, 39.0 ± 0.2 °C, 39.1 ± 0.1 °C, for placebo, menthol, and caffeine trials, respectively (p > 0.05). Exercise-heat stress resulted in mean dehydration of 3.1 (±0.7)%, 3.1 (±0.7)%, 3.0 (±0.7)%, for placebo, menthol, and caffeine trials, respectively.

Effects of caffeine and menthol on perceived exertion were shown in Fig. 2
                        . Perceived exertion significantly increased during the exercise periods (p < 0.05). There was no difference in perceived exertion among the three conditions (p > 0.05). Exercise-heat stress caused dramatic decreases in all three mood ratings (Fig. 3
                        ) (p < 0.05), but caffeine and menthol treatments did not significantly affect the mood compared to the placebo (p > 0.05).

Changes in cognition are summarized in Table 1
                        . Generally, neither simple reaction test, short-term memory test, nor retrieval memory test were affected by experimental exposure to the heat and exercise or treatments (p > 0.05). For the math test, repeated exercise and rest intervals did not alter the response accuracy (p > 0.05); however, participants showed faster response times (p < 0.05) during the two post-exposure tests. There was no difference in math test performance among the three conditions (p > 0.05).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Changes in mental efforts during firefighting are little known due to limited data. In this study, repeated firefighting-simulating exercise was performed in a hot environment. After a total of 90-min experimental period (including 15 min for each of two rest periods), exercise-heat stress caused significant cardiovascular strain, dehydration, and a hyperthermic state, which are considered to be detrimental for both physical and mental efforts (Barr et al., 2010; Grandjean and Grandjean, 2007). The current laboratory-based simulations somewhat resemble physical challenges in field environments. Based on the experimental conditions and results of this study, the cognition should not be impaired for short firefighter missions under one hour, though mood could be negatively affected under multi-stressors. Furthermore, acute administration of caffeine or menthol presented no ergogenic effect on perceived exertion, cognition, or mood, at least under current test conditions of a high heat strain and a dynamic exercise protocol. To our knowledge, this is the first study seeking practical interventions on mental efforts during simulated firefighting tasks.

The series of simple cognition tests were selected due to their relevance to specific operations firefighters often encounter in a fire scene. For examples, the ability to maintain sustained attention and rapidly detect threats is significant in a hazardous environment: reaction to intervene and take appropriate actions; and memory to recall of important details such as critical geographic locations to navigate rescue and evacuation. Meanwhile, Lieberman et al. (2006) have suggested simple cognition tests are more sensitive and suitable for use in a multi-stressors environment than complex tests. Research suggests that dehydration in heat or during exercise would cause a significant reduction in cognitive performance (Cian et al., 2000, 2001; Grandjean and Grandjean, 2007). During a dehydrated and fatigued state, it was anticipated that caffeine and menthol might exert a positive effect on information processing ability. We compared the treatment effects from immediate assessment of a various simple cognitive measurements that are sensitive to effects of caffeine when a person is fatigued (Smith et al., 1999). However, our results found caffeine and menthol did not alter the cognitive information processing during dynamic heat exposure.

Our results suggested cognitive information processing capacity, speed, and accuracy were well maintained over the experimental period. This is in agreement with the findings involving a group of U.K. firefighters in which no change in rapid visual information processing, spatial memory span, and choice reaction time were detected following a firefighting simulation (Rayson et al., 2005). Hence, acute exercise in heat may exert enhancement in cognition (Hancock, 1982; Hancock et al., 2007), evidenced in our results, in that the completion time of the math test was actually improved (i.e., shortened) (Table 1) during later bouts of exercise without sacrificing the accuracy. Therefore, despite the rigorous nature of exercise and the extreme environment, cognition was well maintained in our testing conditions over three firefighting work/rest transitions. It should also be pointed out that, our participants were well rested before each experimental trial. In real world situations, continuous shift work is typical for firefighters particularly, and a state of sleep deprivation creates practical situations where both caffeine and menthol might be expected to exert their alerting effects. This paradigm warrants further testing.

Maintenance of a positive mood (e.g., alertness, calmness) is a matter of important consideration for safety and mission success. All mood states substantially deteriorated even with regular rest periods (Fig. 3). Working in a multi-stressors environment brings about a rapid transition from positive mood to a state that might impact on the mission success. It is logical to believe that caffeine administration, which may partially restore the mood states, could be beneficial under such circumstances. However, neither caffeine nor menthol provided any positive effect on mood. There was also no positive effect on perception of fatigue status neither. Though one previous study (Hogervorst et al., 2008) employing a similar exercise regime of cycling at 60% oxygen uptake for 150 min, reported no effect of caffeine on perceived exertion, the majority of the literature suggest that caffeine could reduce perceived exertion (Doherty and Smith, 2005). Another study of swilling a menthol solution also suggested that menthol reduced global perceived exertion and delayed time to fatigue (Mündel and Jones, 2009).

It is unlikely that the current protocol duration was too short to observe positive effects of caffeine on mood, since peak plasma time of orally administered caffeine usually presents within 45 min period (Mumford et al., 1994). It is likely that the intense nature of exercise and extreme environment may suppress effects of caffeine or menthol. None of previous studies had tested a condition that involved in combination of protective clothing, heat strain, and eliciting near maximal exercise capacity. It is possible that the challenging testing protocol overwhelmed any small positive effect of caffeine (e.g., average of 6% of advantage in rating of perceived exertion in literature) (Doherty and Smith, 2005) or menthol on mood and perception. An alternative possibility is that our participants were less accustomed to the firefighting scenario (e.g., protective clothing and equipment, extreme radiate heat, and profuse sweating), and therefore might have over-responded to the testing conditions, blunting any positive effect of treatments on cognition or mood ratings. Current results could not confirm caffeine or menthol treatments would allow better mental tolerance to intense exercise in the heat.

Taken the above results collectively, it was relatively surprising to find that participants were able to maintain cognitive function despite less favorable perceived exertion and mood ratings since it is generally believed that fatigue (i.e., physically as of heart rate, rectal temperature, dehydration, and psychologically as of perceived exertion, mood) is associated with a reduction in mental efforts. Whereas lack of a clear functional hypothesis to explain this relationship, from a positive standpoint, possible defensive mechanism would allow firefighters to continue working at a high operational efficiency; on the other hand, firefighters may also expose themselves into greater risks of accidents if the mission lengthens beyond one hour as in our test condition (e.g., wildland firefighting missions). This observation should also be explored further.

Lastly, it is worth noting that simulated firefighting protocol and environments are not the same as in a fire situation. Clearly, other hazardous factors (e.g., smoke) and emotional pressures are not faced up to in our participants and would likely cause underestimation of the mental efforts deficits in firefighters and restrict accurate conclusions made about performance changes in harsh rescue environments. Incidents and accidents from errors are more likely to occur in work place practice and future field studies remain needed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study examined potential practical interventions for performance deficits in a multi-stressors work environment. Working in a thermal stressful environment dramatically deteriorated mood states and increased perceived exertion. Cognition was minimally altered during exercise-heat exposure. Furthermore, under this challenging multi-stressors environment, no potential ergogenic effects were found with caffeine or menthol. Both physiological and mental efforts are critical for the health, safety, and operational effectiveness for firefighting. Impact of exercise in hazardous environments on mental efforts warrants more attention for planning and preparing firefighters.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We thank the students, professors, and administrators of The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, who helped to make this study possible. We thank the Tuscaloosa Fire & Rescue Services Department, who provided the firefighter protective gears used in this study. We also thank Prof. Dr. Andrew P. Smith of Cardiff University, who assisted in the planning of the mood assessment in this article.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

