@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Microclimate in ski boots – Temperature, relative humidity, and water absorption

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Low temperature in the ski boot caused pain sensation.


                        
                        
                           
                           High moisture in the ski boot likely affected thermal insulation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Liner material with high water absorption capacity and hydrophobic socks were suggested to prevent wet feet.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Ski boots

Foot temperature

Foot relative humidity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Ski boot quality is determined by mechanical properties and comfort. Comfort is strongly affected by cold feet. The purpose of this study was to determine the microclimate in ski boots. Climate chamber tests with five male subjects and field tests with two male subjects were conducted. Temperature and relative humidity were measured using four sensors placed on the foot and one on the liner. Absorbed water in liners and socks was measured with a precision balance. The subjects gave subjective ratings for comfort. The toe sensor temperature dropped below 20 °C at an ambient temperature of 0 °C, −10 °C, and −20 °C. Relative humidity values at the foot were as high as 78% in the climate chamber and 93% in the field. Water absorption in socks and liners ranged from 4 to 10 g in the climate chamber and 19 to 45.5 g in the field. The results reveal the importance of keeping the feet and in particular the toes warm during skiing. One possible improvement may be to construct the liner so that sweat and melted snow are kept as far away as possible from the foot. Liner material with high water absorption capacity and hydrophobic socks were suggested to prevent wet feet.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Winter sports are popular. Skiing is enjoyed by approximately 200 million people in the world (Hunter, 1999). Important factors to enjoy the sport are performance and comfort of the ski boots, which act as an interface between skier and skis. Several studies focused on the mechanical properties of ski boots with respect to performance (Corazza and Cobelli, 2005; Schaff and Hauser, 1993; Schaff et al., 1997). Besides mechanical properties the quality of ski boots is determined by their comfort characteristics. Comfort of ski boots is related to the correct fit of the boot and to the microclimate in the boot. Temperature is the most critical factor for assessing thermal wear comfort (Senthilkumar and Dasaradan, 2007). Foot temperature is determined by ambient temperature, duration of the exposure to cold, level of physical activity, and moisture in the ski boot (Gavin, 2003; Rissanen and Rintamäki, 2009). Ski boots possess quite good thermal insulation properties. But moisture vapour transmission through the ski boot liner is in general hindered by laminated liner materials. Foot sweating and lack of moisture vapour transmission through the liner lead to moisture saturation inside the ski boot. The presence of condensate facilitates the conductive heat loss. Hence sweat or melted snow in the liner increase the thermal conductance and leads to insulation break downs (Fauland et al., 2011; Heus et al., 2005; Kuklane, 2009; Kuklane et al., 1999). Despite the importance of the temperature management for feeling comfortable there are no published data about the climate in ski boots during skiing. So the purpose of this study was to determine the microclimate in ski boots assessed by temperature, relative humidity, and water absorption.

@&#METHOD@&#

The microclimate in the ski boot was assessed during imitated skiing in a climate chamber and during field tests.

Five male subjects (Mean ± SD: age 32.0 ± 5.3 years, body height 181.6 ± 3.6 cm, body mass 79.4 ± 9.7 kg) were exposed in the climate chamber for 1.5 h to ambient temperatures of +10 °C, 0 °C, −10 °C, and −20 °C. All subjects were in good health and were experienced skiers. Relative humidity was set to 65%. The climate chamber (Kältepol Inc., AT) allows adjusting ambient temperature (−30 to +60 °C) and relative humidity (10–90%). All tests were performed in the morning hours with intervals of at least 1 day between two measurements. Preparations for the tests took about 20 min in an ante-chamber at room temperature. Skiing respectively lift transportation was imitated by repeated 1 min 90° box squats with a loaded barbell followed by a 10 min break sitting on a chair. A metronome gave the rhythm of 40 beats per minute for the squats. Barbell and discs (Eleiko Sport Inc., SE) were loaded with 20% of body weight. The measurement started with a 10 min rest period.

Temperature and relative humidity were measured in the liner between skin and sock using four SHT15 sensors (Sensirion Inc., CH). These sensors have a thickness of 2.5 mm and a surface area of 0.37 cm². The four sensors were placed with FIXOMULL (BSN medical Inc., DE) at the lateral side of the metatarsophalangeal joint of the first toe (toe sensor), in the arch of the foot sole (sole sensor), on the dorsum of the foot above os cuneiforme II (dorsum sensor), and between liner and shell above the medial ankle (shell sensor). The signals were stored using a 122 g data logger fixed at the lower leg. To determine the amount of water in liner and sock a precision balance (Kern 500, Kern & Sohn Inc., DE) was used. Immediately after the test liners and socks were weighed separately. In order to prevent evaporation before weighing liner and sock were placed in a pre-weighed airtight plastic bag. The weight of liner and sock respectively was recorded before and after testing as well as after drying. From the relative humidity and temperature the absolute humidity was calculated.

The subjects were asked for subjective ratings every 20 min and at the end of the test. The subjective responses on thermal sensation (scale from +4 = very hot to −4 = very cold) and pain sensation (scale from 0 = no pain to 4 = intolerable pain) were recorded in an observation sheet (ISO 10551, 1995).

The subjects used their own skiing clothes. The clothes were chosen individual based on the ambient temperature. For the same ambient temperature the same clothes were worn. Long-legged and long-sleeved underwear, socks, ski jacket and trousers, knitted cap, gloves, and scarf were used. The subjects wore socks of the same type (Speedmachine, Nordica Inc., IT) of the following composition: 18% wool, 40% acrylic, 40% polyamide, and 2% elastane. Prior to the test the ski boots were cooled in the climate chamber at the test temperature for 45 min. The subjects put on the ski boots in the climate chamber. During the test the buckles of the ski boots stayed locked. Each subject had to perform the test twice with different ski boots (Edge+8.5 and Vector 120, Head Inc., AT).

Field tests were carried out with two male subjects (age 31 and 41 years, body height 188 and 180 cm, body mass 83 and 65 kg) on five skiing days. The subjects performed recreational skiing on all terrain without rests between 1.6 and 5.4 h per day. The sensor setup and skiing clothing ensemble were the same as during the climate chamber tests. Additionally, ambient temperature and ambient relative humidity were recorded in the middle part of the slope with a meteorological station.

Prior approval for the testing was given by the Institutional Review Board. The subjects were informed of any risks associated with participation in the tests and gave written informed consent before the testing. Testing was carried out according to the Declaration of Helsinki.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Fig. 1
                      shows the mean decrease of the sensor temperature during the climate chamber tests at −20 °C ambient temperature. At the beginning of the test the temperature of the foot sensors (sole, dorsum and toe) was around 25 °C. Especially the temperature of the toe sensor dropped remarkably. After 29 min the temperature was below 20 °C. The temperature of the shell sensor decreased from 3.1 to −3.3 °C. Table A.1 summarizes the measured sensor temperature during the climate chamber tests.


                     Fig. 2
                      shows the mean relative humidity in the ski boots during the climate chamber tests at −20 °C ambient temperature corresponding to the temperature values in Fig. 1. The relative humidity increased after each box squat set. The curves show an increase of all sensors. Notable are the low dorsum sensor values in comparison to the other sensors. Table A.2 summarizes the relative and absolute humidity during the climate chamber tests.

In Fig. 3
                      the mean (±SD) of the minimal sensor temperature during the climate chamber tests at the measured ambient temperatures are presented. With decreasing ambient temperature the sensors showed lower minimal temperatures. For the sole and dorsum sensors nearly the same minimal values were measured whereas the toe sensor was between 4.5 and 9.1 °C lower. At the ambient temperature of −20 °C the minimal temperature of the shell sensor decreased below 0 °C.


                     Fig. 4
                      shows the mean of the toe sensor temperature during the climate chamber test at the measured ambient temperatures. At the beginning of the tests the temperature of the toe sensor was around 25 °C and decreased subsequently. After 30–72 min the temperature dropped below 20 °C except at 10 °C ambient temperature.

In Fig. 5
                      the relation between toe sensor temperature and thermal/pain sensation after 1.5 h in the climate chamber is presented. There was no negative thermal and pain sensation when toe sensor temperature stayed above 25 °C. The first signs of pain were sensed when toe sensor temperature dropped to about 20 °C.


                     Fig. 6
                      shows the relation between the temperature difference between toe and metatarsal (sole and dorsum) sensors and thermal/pain sensation after 1.5 h in the climate chamber. Negative thermal and pain sensation increased with increasing temperature difference. The first signs of thermal and pain sensation were reported when toe sensor temperature was about 5 °C lower than the temperature of the metatarsal sensors. Very cold (value −4) and intolerable pain (value 4) were sensed when the temperature difference was about 9 °C.

During the six field tests the ambient temperature was between −6.8 °C and 6.0 °C and the ambient relative humidity between 36% and 70%. The mean temperatures during the field tests were 22.1 ± 3.3 °C at the toe sensor, 30.4 ± 1.7 °C at the dorsum sensor, 30.6 ± 1.7 °C at the sole sensor, and 10.8 ± 1.6 °C at the shell sensor. The toe sensor temperature dropped in four cases clearly below 20 °C and the difference between toe and metatarsal sensors was in all tests more than 5 °C. The lowest temperatures were measured between shell and liner with 5.2 °C, at the toe with 13.9 °C, at the dorsum with 25.7 °C, and at the sole with 25.8 °C.


                     Fig. 7
                      shows exemplarily the temperature in the ski boot for a subject during skiing. During this test mean ambient temperature and humidity were 5.2 ± 0.6 °C and 65 ± 1.1% respectively. At the beginning of the test the sensor temperatures showed the highest value and subsequently a clear decrease to the ambient temperature occurred within circa 1 h.

During the six field tests the relative humidity ranged from 50 to 93% at the toe, from 22 to 89% at the dorsum, from 30 to 91% at the sole, and from 16 to 87% at the shell sensor (between shell and liner at the ankle) during the field tests. The mean values for the absolute humidity were 16 ± 1.2 g/m³ at the toe, 23 ± 0.7 g/m³ at the dorsum, 17 ± 1.5 g/m³ at the sole, and 5 ± 0.7 g/m³ at the shell sensor during the tests.


                     Fig. 8
                      shows the relative humidity in the ski boot corresponding to the temperature values in Fig. 7. The curves show an increase of all sensors.

The mean water absorption was 4.3 g for the socks and 26.3 g for the liners over an average test period of 4 h. Fig. 9
                      compares the water absorption in the liners during climate chamber and field tests at 0 °C ambient temperature. After the 1.5 h climate chamber tests water absorption between 2 and 7 g (Table A.2) whereas after a 1.5 h field test 17 g and after a 4 h field test 38 g were measured.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

During all climate chamber and field tests the temperature inside the ski boot decreased. In the climate chamber the temperature at the toe dropped below 20 °C at an ambient temperature of 0 °C, −10 °C, −20 °C and in the field in four of six cases. Due to the absence of big foot muscles the foot is warmed mainly by blood flow. However, the blood flow is already significantly reduced at foot temperatures below 25 °C (Allwood and Burry, 1954; Kaufmann, 1983). This problem may be amplified in ski boots since bad fitting of the ski boot may reduce the blood flow additionally. Once the flow through the superficial veins of the lower leg has ceased, rewarming the foot does not produce superficial flow until the whole body is sufficiently warmed (Kaufmann, 1983).

Sensitive movements of the feet are necessary to steer the skis. Studies indicate that motor control of the foot is impaired by cooling. For example cooling increased the latency of the soleus H-reflex (Dewhurst et al., 2005) or the ability to maintain dynamic balance in females was reduced (Piedrahita et al., 2009). If motor control is impaired the risk of falling may be increased and with it the risk to suffer an injury. Moreover, ligaments show strong temperature dependence. Decreased temperature caused larger peak forces for similar strains (Bass et al., 2007; Woo et al., 1987). More falls and affected mechanical properties of ligaments may be an explanation for the reported increase in knee injuries at low ambient temperatures for female skiers (Ruedl et al., 2011).

In our study first signs of negative thermal and pain sensation appeared when the temperature at the toe dropped to about 20 °C and the temperature difference between toe and metatarsus was about 5 °C. According to Enander et al. (1979) hands and feet start feeling cold at finger and toe temperatures around 25 °C and discomfort from cold was noted at temperatures below 20–21 °C. A strong perception of cold and pain corresponded with foot temperatures below 20 °C (Luczak, 1991). Similar temperature thresholds were referred in other studies (Kuklane, 2004; Kuklane et al., 1998; Tochihara et al., 1995). We measured the lowest temperatures at the toe with 11 °C which was occasionally referred as numbness by the subjects. Holmér et al. (2003) and Kuklane (2009) reported that numbness develops at around 7 °C and that the risk to suffer cold injuries increases. This indicates the importance of cold protection of the toes during skiing.

The results revealed relative humidity values up to 78% in the ski boots and water absorption in socks and liners up to 10 g during the climate chamber tests. Low relative humidity values at the dorsum in comparison to the other sensors were measured. This may be explained by the higher water absorption capacity of the material in the dorsum zone compared to the foot bed. With values up to 93% and 45.5 g relative humidity and water absorption respectively were considerably higher during skiing than in the climate chamber. This is likely due to the penetration of snow in the ski boot with subsequent melting during skiing whereas in the climate chamber the water absorption was caused only by sweating. However, high values of moisture reduce the thermal insulation of shoes (Kuklane, 2009; Kuklane et al., 2001; Kuklane and Holmér, 1998) and of ski boots (Heus et al., 2005). Kuklane et al. (1998, 1999, 2009) showed that thermal insulation reduction of the footwear depends on the sweat rate, the penetration of snow or water, the evaporation–condensation rate, the absorption capacity of the footwear materials, moisture transport in it and environmental conditions. The measured temperature decrease during skiing and in the climate chamber may be due to the increase of moisture in the ski boot with subsequent gradually reduction of the thermal insulation.

Based on this study it is important to prevent cooling of the feet and in particular of the toes during skiing. Ski boots possess quite good thermal insulation properties (Fauland et al., 2011) but the shell is not snow proof causing an increase of the thermal conductance and a breakdown of the thermal insulation (Fauland et al., 2011; Heus et al., 2005; Kuklane, 2009; Kuklane et al., 1999). The development of shells in which snow and water cannot penetrate would improve the situation. However, due to the flexing movement of the ski boot during skiing it is difficult to avoid the penetration of snow and water through little gaps between shaft and lower boot. Another solution is to reconsider the basic assembly of liners in order to improve their moisture management. Water absorption and distribution inside the liner are mainly determined by water absorption capacity and water transport properties of the liner's materials, as well as by the rate of sweating and the penetrated snow or water. For liner and sock material used in this study insulation and moisture management properties were studied by Fauland et al. (2011). Based on this information and literature data (Haudek and Viti, 1978) on water absorption capacity of the used material the formation of liquid water can be avoided when a higher share of water absorbing material is used. The amount of water take up will be the lowest in case of synthetic materials and the highest in case of hygroscopic wool (Li et al., 1992). In a previous study we suggested as possible improvement to construct the liner so that sweat and potentially melted snow water are kept as far away as possible from the foot. For this the outer layer of the liner should have a higher water uptake than the inner layer. In addition, sock fabric should be highly hydrophobic to keep the socks dry and to avoid wet feet. In this way the skin surface would stay dry and comfort sensation may be maintained for a longer period (Fauland et al., 2011).

Overnight drying of the liners is necessary to avoid reduction of the thermal resistance of the ski boot. For this it is recommended to take off the liner from the shell or use a ski boot dryer. Otherwise complete drying is unlikely due to the restricted water vapour permeability of liner and shell.

The presented results were based on a limited number of subjects. Therefore, only descriptive statistic was presented. However, the results provided valuable insight on temperature, relative humidity, and water absorption in the ski boot. Further tests are required to confirm the results.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#


                     
                        
                           •
                           Temperature decrease inside the ski boot as well as perceived thermal and pain sensation revealed the importance to prevent cooling of the feet and in particular of the toes during skiing.

Ambient temperature and moisture inside the ski boot affected strongly foot temperature.

High water content in socks and liner very likely reduced the thermal insulation properties of socks and boot.

Waterproof shells in which snow and water cannot penetrate are recommended.

Complete overnight drying of the liner is essential. The liner should be taken off the shell or the use of a ski boot dryer is recommended.

Liner materials with high water absorption capacity and hydrophobic socks are suggested to keep sweat and melted snow water as far away as possible from the foot.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was financially supported by the Interreg IV project “Verletzungsprävention im alpinen Skilauf: Sicherheit als Erfolgsfaktor alpiner Regionen” (SkiProTech) and the Austrian Research Promotion Agency FFG K-PROJECT Nr. 820494 “Sports Textiles”.


                     
                        
                           Table A.1
                           
                              gives an overview of the collected temperature data during the climate chamber tests. The means (±SD) over the exposition time of all subjects as well as minimum and maximum values are presented.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Table A.2
                           
                              gives an overview of the collected relative/absolute humidity and water absorption data during the climate chamber tests. The means (±SD) over the exposition time of all subjects as well as minimum and maximum values are presented.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

