@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluating the physical demands when using sled-type stair descent devices to evacuate mobility-limited occupants from high-rise buildings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We simulated evacuating people with motor disabilities from high-rise buildings.


                        
                        
                           
                           This study compared 6 sled-type devices designed for stair descent.


                        
                        
                           
                           Surface EMG, heart rate, trunk motion, and perceived exertion data were collected.


                        
                        
                           
                           There are significant differences across devices, particularly on the landings.


                        
                        
                           
                           Two-evacuator devices, did well on biomechanics, evacuation speed, and usability.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

EMS/firefighter

Healthcare facility evacuation

Evacuating individuals with dissabilities

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The physical demands on evacuators were investigated when using different types of sled-type stair descent devices designed for the emergency evacuation of high rise buildings. Twelve firefighters used six sled-type stair descent devices during simulated evacuations. The devices were evaluated under two staircase width conditions (1.12, and 1.32 m). Dependent measures included electromyographic (EMG) data, heart rates, Borg Scale ratings, and descent velocities. All stair descent speeds were below those reported during pedestrian egress trials. With the exception of the inflatable device, the devices operated by two evacuators had higher descent speeds than those operated by a single evacuator. High friction materials under the sleds facilitated control and reduced the muscle demands on stairs but increased physical demands on the landings. Usability assessments found devices with shorter overall lengths had fewer wall contacts on the landing, and handles integrated in the straps were preferred by the evacuators.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

When high rise buildings need to be evacuated in emergencies or non-emergencies, for example during extended power outages, first responders (firefighter/paramedics and emergency medical service (EMS) providers) often need to transport individuals with mobility limitations down multiple flights of stairs. When these high-rise structures are hospitals or skilled nursing facilities, many of the facility staff will also be engaged in these evacuation activities given that many of the evacuees are immobile on their own (Manion and Golden, 2004). However, first responders, and even military personnel, may be called upon to serve as evacuators and assist in such evacuations.

In prior work, firefighter/paramedics indicated that stair transport was one of their most physically demanding and frequently performed work tasks (Conrad et al., 2000). Prior biomechanical studies have confirmed that the transporting of people can be very physically demanding (Fredericks et al., 2002; Lavender et al., 2000) and there is epidemiological evidence that such tasks performed by EMS workers are often associated with injury development (Gershon et al., 1995; Hogya and Ellis, 1990; Karter and Molis, 2011; Maguire et al., 2005). Furber et al. (1997) in their study of 477 worker compensations claims, specifically found that stair transport within private residences was a strong factor contributing to injuries reported by ambulance officers.

When disaster strikes, people use whatever is available in terms of equipment to conduct evacuations. A report of the 1994 evacuation of hospitals following the Northridge, California earthquake indicated that, for the six hospitals without electric power that were evacuated, no specialized devices were used (Schultz et al., 2003). Instead, evacuators used blankets or sheets, backboards, wheelchairs, and gurneys. However, different types of equipment are available to assist first responders and healthcare personnel in transporting individuals down flights of stairs. Most common are hand-carried stair chairs. These are minimally carried by two individuals, and depending on staircase width, patient weight, and evacuator availability, carried by as many as four individuals. Prior work by our research team and others has documented that stair descents with hand-carried chairs is a physically demanding task (Fredericks et al., 2002; Lavender et al., 2000, 2013). Track-type stair chairs, which eliminate the need for lifting/carrying and instead have evacuators gliding or rolling the chairs down the stairs on long tracks that bridge two or three stair nosings, reduce the load experienced by the evacuator (Fredericks et al., 2006; Mehta et al., 2015). Alternatively, sled-type devices are another option. As the name implies, patients in these devices are slid along corridors and slid down the stairs. These devices may be attractive to building owners and health organizations in that their cost is substantially lower than the track-type and some of the hand-carried devices and they are suitable for transporting patients that would be unable to maintain a sitting posture. Moreover, sliding should be easier than carrying and will therefore reduce the physical demands on the evacuators and possibly the number of evacuators required for each evacuee.

There are several variations of sled-type devices that are commercially available. Some require two evacuators for safe operation while some are designed to be used by a single evacuator. Some are made from hard plastic material, some are made from flexible plastic material that can be rolled up when not in use, some are made from fabric, and one product includes inflatable sections akin to an air mattress. Some of these devices have small rollers on the bottom which are designed to facilitate movement on horizontal surfaces. Some of the devices have two straps for the evacuators to hold on to while descending the stairs, while others have just one. In all cases, the sleds would be able to transport IV medications, however, they would not be in a position to drip during the transport period. Likewise, oxygen canisters could be transported along with the patient if necessary.

In addition to considering the physical demands on the evacuators, the evacuation performance also needs to be considered. For example, hand-carried evacuation devices, particularly those where the lead evacuator must descend the stairs walking backwards, have stair descent velocities that are slow relative to published pedestrian evacuation speeds (Peacock et al., 2012) and therefore may disrupt evacuation flow in emergency situations (Lavender et al., 2013). On the other hand, track-type devices have stair descent velocities that are well within the range of Peacock et al.'s (2012) evacuation speeds (Mehta et al., 2015). Adams and Galea (2010) reported vertical descent speeds on the stairs when using a drag mattress that were very similar to a hand-carried chair device yet significantly slower than that observed for a track-type stair chair.

Environmental features, such as the width of the staircase and landing are expected to impact both the physical demands on the evacuators and descent speed, particularly if the stair descent involves landings where there are changes in the direction of travel. Drury (1985) provided evidence that task performance measures, such as task duration or movement speed, are dependent upon the available space, at least up to the point where space no longer potentially restricts movement. Likewise, Karwowski and Hashim (1991) reported a trend towards a lower acceptable weight of lift with more restricted lifting spaces. This implies that staircase and landing dimensions could impact performance measures and muscle recruitment levels as sled-type devices are maneuvered through smaller versus larger landings.

The objectives of this study were to (1) compare the physical demands experienced by seasoned fire service personnel who served as evacuators as they used six sled-type devices, each representing a different design approach to transport individuals who are ill or who have ambulatory disabilities down multiple flights of stairs of varying widths; and (2) to assess usability issues with the tested devices through video analysis and a structured interview process. Specifically, the following hypotheses were tested:
                        
                           1.
                           There are differences among sled evacuation device designs with regards to the physical demands placed on evacuators as measured via heart rate, electromyographic measures, spine postures, and ratings of perceived exertion while descending the stairs and transporting evacuees through landings.

The physical demands on the evacuator increase with narrower staircases.

There are differences in occupant evacuation times across sled evacuation devices and as a function of staircase width.

@&#METHODS@&#

Twelve male professional firefighters between the ages of 26 and 64 (mean = 41 years, sd = 12.4 years) were recruited to serve as evacuators for this study. Mean height and weight were 1.73 m (sd = 0.09 m) and 86 kg (sd = 20 kg). Their fire service experience ranged from 2 to 23 years (mean = 12.8 years, sd = 6.5 years), however, none were experienced with the sled-type devices used in this study. All participants signed IRB approved consent documents and were free from any musculoskeletal pain.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

A repeated measures randomized block experimental design was used in which participants used the six evacuation devices on the two staircase widths. Four of the devices require two evacuators. For these devices, one of the investigators (GH) served as the second evacuator. The “leader” typically descends the stairs in front of the device and primarily provides the pull force to slide the sled through the landing. The “follower” descends behind the device and controls the descent while on the stairs and may be able to assist on the landing in a limited capacity as the devices generally cannot be pushed. Participants were asked to descend three flights of stairs, each with 10 steps, and proceed through two landings under each experimental condition. For the four devices that required two people, the participant repeated the descent so that data could be collected in both the leader and follower positions.

National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Code 101-2009 specifies staircase widths based on building occupant load. Specifically, this study evaluated stair descent tasks performed with stair case widths of 1.12 m (building occupancy < 2000), and 1.32 m (approximates the 1.42 m required for ≥ 2000 occupants). Data collection in the experiment was blocked on the two staircase widths. The sequence of staircase widths was counterbalanced across participants, the sequence in which the six different devices was used for each staircase width was randomized, and the order in which the participant performed the task in the leader or follower positions was counterbalanced across the participants.

The dependent measures obtained as participants performed these tasks included task performance measures, levels of muscle recruitment, spine posture, and physiologic demands. Task performance measures were comprised of overall task duration, stair descent velocity, and time required for strapping the occupant into the sled. This latter measure was obtained with the occupant already in the sled, and in the case of the inflatable sled, did not include inflation time. Muscle recruitment was assessed using surface electromyographic (EMG) signals sampled bilaterally from the Erector Spinae, Latissimus Dorsi, Deltoid, and Biceps muscles. These muscles were selected as they were expected to experience substantial loading during the evacuation tasks and to potentially vary across the different sled types used in the study. Three-dimensional spine postures were assessed using a Lumbar Motion Monitor (LMM). Physiological demands were obtained by sampling the heart rate and ratings of perceived exertion (Borg, 1982) at the completion of each condition. Maneuverability, one aspect of usability, was assessed using a camera mounted above one of the landings which required an 180° turn. Wall contact frequency and contact location were tallied for each device.

Other usability issues were assessed through structured post-study interviews which were conducted primarily by one of the investigators (P.R.). In the interview process the participant was asked to describe operability (from both the leader and follower positions), concerns about occupant safety and comfort, concerns about their safety and comfort, how well they felt they could complete the task and what features of the equipment made this easier or more difficult. At the end of the interview the participants were asked to rank the equipment in terms of ease of use and asked if they would recommend the equipment to the fire service, and to building owners. Pictures of the devices were shown to the participant as they talked about the different pieces of equipment so that there would not be any confusion regarding which device was being discussed.

The sled occupant was a training mannequin having a mass of 73 kg. The six sleds selected for this study are shown in Fig. 1
                        . The staircase was 1.32 m wide and the corresponding landings were 1.32 m deep. The width of the staircase and the depth of the landing were narrowed using tape lines and partitions placed on the landings and the last step above the landing to simulate the 1.12 m staircase width. The rise and run of each step was 0.17 m and 0.28 m, respectively.

Trunk motion data were collected using the triaxial Lumbar Motion Monitor (LMM). (Chattanooga Group, Chattanooga, TN, USA). This device was attached to the body via a chest harness and waist harness and measures the relative motion between the top of sacrum (L5/S1) and the lower part of the thorax. A telemetry system streamed the data at 60 Hz to a computer where one of the team member marked the stair and landing phases of each trial using key presses on the computer.

EMG data were obtained using a Delsys (Boston, MA) Trigno wireless EMG system. Data were sampled at 1000 Hz using the Motion Monitor Software™ (Chicago, IL). Heart rate data were sampled using a chest-band transmitter unit that displayed data on a wristwatch (Polar Electro, Inc., Lake Success, NY). The participants were polled as to their perceived level of effort at the completion of each stair descent using a 10-point Borg-type rating system (Borg, 1982).

Two video cameras (Kodak, Rochester, NY) captured each stair descent task. One of the investigators followed the participant down the stairs and through each landing while holding a video camera. The second video camera was positioned above the first landing to obtain overhead views as the sleds were maneuvered through the landing to provide data for the usability analysis. Theses images were used to quantify the number and type of contacts made by the device and/or evacuator with the walls while maneuvering through the landing. Wall contact could either be due to the evacuator touching the wall or due to the sled touching the wall. Therefore wall contact, depending upon the nature of the contact, could be an indicator of a space constraint imposed on the evacuator, or potentially a patient safety concern.

After signing an IRB approved informed consent document, the volunteers were prepared for the study by placing surface EMG electrodes bilaterally over the: (1) Erector Spinae muscles at the L3 level approximately 5 cm from the midline; (2) the Latissimus Dorsi muscles at the T7 level approximately 13–15 cm from the midline; (3) the belly of the Anterior Deltoid muscles; and (4) the belly of the Bicep muscles. A baseline sample of the EMG activity during quiet standing (resting EMG) was obtained. The heart rate monitor was strapped on the chest and a resting heart rate value was obtained.

A series of maximal voluntary isometric exertions were performed to elicit maximal EMG signal amplitudes for each muscle that could be used for normalizing the data obtained during the stair descent tasks. These tasks were performed in postures that approximated the postures observed during pilot testing that occurred during the more physically demanding portions of the stair descent tasks. The maximal exertion task for the Erector Spinae muscles required participants perform a back-style lift from a position in which their torsos were flexed approximately 30°. The maximal exertions for each Latissimus Dorsi muscle were performed by having the participant sit with feet braced and pull backward on a handle located just above the knees. Bicep maximal exertions were performed with the participant standing upright and the elbow flexed approximately 80°. Anterior Deltoid maximal exertions were performed by having the standing participant pull upward on the dynamometers with the shoulder flexed approximately 30° and the elbow fully extended. Following the maximal exertions, the Lumbar Motion Monitor was placed on the participant's back and baseline data were obtained as the participant stood in an upright neutral posture.

Where available, participants viewed instructional videos provided by the manufacturers of the sled devices. Where these were not available or the technique was not applicable, one of the investigators demonstrated how the device should be used. The participant then practiced descending the stairs with the training mannequin in each of the sleds. For the four two-evacuator devices, practice descents were performed in each position. This was done by having the participant and the assisting member from the investigative team switch places after three flights of stairs. These training descents included more flights of stairs than the actual measurement task to allow for added practice in each role with fewer elevator returns. Participants were instructed to remain close to the inside hand rail during the stair descents as this position makes it much easier to complete the 180° turn on the landing. Participants were also told they could use the handrail if they were so inclined, however, functionally all the tested devices required the use of two hands. This process allowed the participant to become familiar with the operation of each device, the simulated evacuation task, and the data collection procedures including the Borg scale.

Data collection trials were initiated by one of the investigators who reminded the evacuators that this was an “urgent” evacuation condition and a repeating recorded message was played stating “this is an urgent condition” for the duration of the stair descent task. During each evacuation trial the participant descended three flights of stairs and moved through two landings. A time marker was manually used to differentiate in the data stream when the participant was on the stairs versus on the landings. This same time marker was used to obtain the descent duration data. At the completion of each descent the participant's heart rate was obtained and the participant was asked to provide a rating of perceived exertion. A nearby elevator brought the participant and the sled (with training mannequin) back to the initial starting level. Descent tasks were separated by at least five minutes to minimize fatigue development.

Following the stair descent tasks, each participant participated in a structured interview where open-ended questions were asked that aimed at identifying usability issues with the devices as well as identifying features of each device that facilitated or hindered completion of the task. These interviews typically lasted 10–15 min during which the participants were shown photographs of the devices to facilitate comments specific to each device.

For each participant, raw EMG signals were processed using a Matlab program that employed high and low pass filters of 25 and 450 Hz, respectively. Data were rectified and smoothed with a moving average window of 150 ms (Hanning filter). The processed EMG data from each muscle were normalized to their maximum values obtained during maximum isometric contractions. Timing marker data were used to extract data during flight and landing. Given that the task on the stairs is largely a static exertion by the back and the arm muscles, the normalized EMG data were averaged over the sample obtained from each flight of stairs. Due to the asymmetric handling of some sleds, the muscle from each bilateral pair with the largest mean value while descending the stairs was used in the analysis. In addition, this mean value was multiplied by the average stair flight duration across the three flights to yield an integrated EMG value (mean activity* stair flight duration).

For the landing data, the 90th percentile EMG values from each of the landing samples were obtained and then averaged across the two landing samples. The largest averaged 90th percentile landing response for each bilateral muscle pair was analyzed. The rationale for using the 90th percentile on the landing was that we anticipated there would be short peaks in the EMG activity as the participant transitioned on to or off of the landing, or as they made the 180-degree turn that would be washed out if the mean value was used.

As spine postures measured with the LMM were relatively consistent while on the stairs, mean values for the forward bending, lateral bending, and twisting obtained for each flight of stairs and averaged for each participant. The peak postural deviations from neutral across the two landings were used in the analysis of variance procedure.

Other computed measures included percentage of maximum heart rate and stair descent speed. Heart rate data were scaled relative to anticipated maximal heart rate (220 – age) and converted to a percentage. Descent speed is based on the distance traveled along the stairs and the distance traveled on the landings (Peacock et al., 2012).

Analyses of the wall contact was done by reviewing the video for each participant. Wall contact was defined as significant contact between the evacuator and the wall or the sled and the wall that could easily be seen and/or heard on the video. Minor contact, for example a light touch of the wall panel or railing would really not be a usability concern of evacuators.

In the statistical analysis of the heart rate, EMG, and trunk posture data, each of the 10 device-role combinations was considered as a different level of the “device/role” independent variable. Therefore, the two-way analyses of variance (ANOVA), which were blocked on subjects, were conducted for each of these dependent measures to assess the effects of the two independent variables: devices/role combination and the staircase width, plus their interactions. Separate ANOVAs were conducted for the EMG and the trunk kinematic data collected on the stairs and on the landings. The ANOVA for the descent speed used average descent speeds across roles and therefore evaluated the six devices and the two staircase widths. The Ryan, Einot, Gabriel, Welch q (REGWQ) procedure within SAS (version 9.3) was used for post-hoc tests to further evaluate significant differences between means.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Table 1
                      summarizes the outcomes of the statistical tests used across the different measures sampled in this study.

Across the six devices, stair descent speeds were 15 percent faster for the wider staircase width (p < .001). When comparing devices, Fig. 2
                         shows that descent speeds were faster with the Roll-up, Corrugated, and Fabric Mat devices as compared with the Inflatable, Hard Shell, and Wheeled devices.

Overall there were differences in the cardiovascular demands, however, the differences between devices were subtle as indicated by the equivalence in the post-hoc tests (p < .05) indicated by the horizontal lines in Fig. 3
                        . Generally, the subjective ratings of physical exertion followed a similar trend to the heart rate data (line chart in Fig. 3). While not statistically different from the other devices, the two single evacuator devices did show the highest physiologic workload. Across the four devices using two evacuators, there was no consistent difference regarding which role had higher physiologic demands. Relative to the narrow 1.12 m wide stairs, the average heart rate was six percent lower on the 1.32 m wide stairs.


                        Fig. 4
                         shows the Erector Spinae use on the stairs was lowest for the evacuator in the follower role when using the Fabric Mat. The remaining device-role combinations had very similar Erector Spinae activations. When considering the cumulative loading on this muscle the product of the mean Erector Spinae activation on the stairs and the stair duration times indicate that the Wheeled device required a significantly larger sustained effort (Fig. 4). The width of the stairs only affected three specific device/role conditions. Relative to the 1.32 m wide stairs, the 1.12 m-wide stairs increased the Erector Spinae activation for the Fabric-mat/Follower and decreased the Erector Spinae activation for the Inflatable/Leader and the Wheeled device.

The mean values for the Latissimus Dorsi and Bicep while descending the stairs are shown in Fig. 5
                        . Even though the statistical analyses indicated significant differences across devices (p < .001), overall the use of the Latissimus Dorsi was relatively low despite the task requiring that the follower pull back to slow the descent and the leader to pull forward to initiate the descent. Few differences were detected with post hoc tests.

With the exception of the two single operator devices, the Biceps activations on the stairs were relatively modest with most devices requiring activation levels less than 15 percent MVC. The higher bicep activation with the Wheeled device was associated with the tendency to pull up on the strap with one arm while pushing down on the occupant's legs with the other arm. Across the device/role conditions, the wider stairs reduced the bicep activations by approximately 2 percent MVC.

The Deltoid muscles for the most part had very low activation levels while on the stairs with the exception of when the Wheeled device was used. With this device there was significantly more Deltoid activation (p < .05) as the participant stabilized their arm while pushing down on the device to engage the higher friction material and slow the rate of descent.

For the landings, the analysis focused on the muscle within each bilateral pair that had the higher 90th percentile activation level. Overall, the devices affected the recruitment of all four of the sampled muscle groups. While a significant effect for the device and role combinations were found for the Erector Spinae, all the 90th percentile activations were between 30 and 37 percent MVC and showed only minor differences across devices. The significant width by device/role interaction was due to a significant reduction in the follower's Erector Spinae activity when using the Roll-up device while on the 1.32 m-wide landing relative to the activation on the 1.12 m-wide landing. A similar trend was seen in the follower's Erector Spinae activation when using the Fabric Mat device (p < .10).


                        Fig. 6
                         shows that both the Latissimus Dorsi and the Bicep muscles showed a range of activations across devices and roles while on the landing. For the Latissimus Dorsi, the leader roles had the higher activations as most of the effort to pull the sled through the landing was supplied by the person in this position. For the Bicep muscles, those in the follower role with the two-person evacuations had higher Bicep activation levels than did the leaders. This was particularly true for the follower position with the fabric mat, inflatable, and Roll-up devices with the 1.12 m stair conditions. Frequently the individuals in this role were trying to lift slightly to facilitate turning the corner. This happened more with the 1.12 m wide stairs than with the 1.32 m wide stairs, hence the significant device/role by staircase width interaction effect.

The Deltoid muscles were also activated in the landings, and like the Biceps, with some of the largest activations associated with the follower role as they tried to assist the leader with the landing maneuvers (Fig. 7
                        ). Overall, staircase width did not affect Deltoid recruitment, nor did staircase width selectively affect certain device/role combinations.

On the stairs the trunk postures consisted primarily of some degree of forward flexion. The average amount of lateral bending and twisting was less than five and seven degrees, respectively. The forward bending was significantly larger with the wheeled device, averaging 43°. On the other hand the follower role with the fabric mat and the corrugated device had the least flexion, 15 and 17° respectively. The differences between the remaining device/role combinations were smaller and showed little in the way of statistical differences.

On the landings the same trends in the forward flexed postures from the stairs were continued, however, the forward flexion associated with the wheeled device increased to 60°. There was less than 12° of lateral bending for all devices. The amount of twisting ranged between 6 and 12°. The lowest values were found by those leading the two-person devices through the landings, whereas the highest values were found by those following the two-person devices through the landings.

For both stair widths, the number of contacts with the wall varied significantly (p < .005) across the devices. Fig. 8
                         shows the contact rates for the narrower, 1.12 m wide stairs and landings as a function of four wall panel locations (see insert in Fig. 8). The Wheeled sled had the highest contact rate, mostly with wall panels 1 and 2 on the entry side of the landing. These contacts were primarily the head end of the device as it slid off the stairs onto the landing. The side of the Inflatable tended to contact the wall panels across from the stairs during the turn. The lowest contact rate during the 1.12 m condition was when the Fabric Mat was used. For the Inflatable and Wheeled, the contact rates were reduced with the wider stairs and landings (p < .05). It should be noted that with the 1.32 m stairs and landing, there was no contact with the walls when the Fabric Mat and the Hard Shell were used, and very few contacts when the Roll-up and Corrugated were used.

Following the stair descent tasks the participants were interviewed and asked to identify design features or characteristics of each device that they liked and disliked. The results of these interviews are summarized in Table 2
                        . In general, this group of experienced evacuators identified as positive design features the length and size of the handle straps on the Corrugated and Fabric Mat devices and the relative ease the Corrugated, Fabric Mat, and Roll-up devices could be maneuvered around the corner on the landing. As for negative design features, some participants thought the length of the Corrugated device increased the difficulty of making the corner. Negative design features with the Hard Shell included the length of the strap, that it felt as though the strap could slip, and the difficulty controlling and turning the device. Concerns were expressed about the Inflatable device being top heavy and having a tendency to tip on the corners. Comments concerning the Roll-up focused on the fact that the material could potentially slide too fast. Negative design features for the Wheeled device focused on the position of the single evacuator in front of the device on the stairs and the way the evacuee's head swings on the landing. Overall, about half of this sample of evacuators would recommend the Corrugated, Fabric Mat, and the Roll-up for fire service use. A slightly larger proportion would recommend these same devices for purchase by building owners.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The comparison of six sled-type evacuation devices has highlighted several different design features across these devices and their biomechanical effects on the evacuator. Overall, the Fabric Mat, Corrugated, and Roll-up devices allowed for quicker evacuations and were perceived as easier to use. It should be noted that none of the devices tested showed stair descent speeds that were consistent with the pedestrian evacuation speed data reported by Peacock et al. (2012) and Ma et al. (2012). These slower speeds indicate that the evacuation of individuals from high rise buildings with any of these devices would create a bottleneck in a mass evacuation scenario. With all of the devices tested in this study, the slowest movement was through the landing. This is particularly important as it is the landings where the bottlenecks in the evacuation flow typically occur, especially as more individuals are merging into flow from different floors (Galea et al., 2008). This would be even more important with narrower staircases, as we found this further slowed the overall speed of descent. One could argue that the slow descent speeds were due to the lack of experience with these types of devices. However, one could also argue that this level of inexperience should be expected given the limited use of these types of evacuation devices by fire service personnel. Likewise, other healthcare personnel who work in the facilities that have purchased these devices would be expected to have limited practice opportunities with the devices. Consequently, slow evacuation speeds with sled-type devices relative to normal pedestrian egress should be expected.

Two of the slower devices were operated by a single evacuator. If used in a medical facility where pedestrian egress may be less important, due to the lower density of mobile building occupants, the allocation of a single evacuator per evacuee may be a much more efficient process overall if several patients need to be evacuated. The heart rate and ratings of perceived exertion data indicate that while these two single evacuator evacuation devices have the largest physiologic demands, the overall magnitude was less than that found with two-person hand-carried devices (Lavender et al., 2013). The spine posture and muscle recruitment data, on the other hand show the Wheeled device, largely due to the slower descent rate and the sustained forward flexion, has significantly higher time-integrated levels of Erector Spinae use, therein suggesting localized muscle fatigue could be a factor in longer multi-story evacuations. Manion and Golden (2004) estimated that six to seven evacuators per intensive care unit patient would be needed when the patients are hand-carried on litters. Therefore, any of these devices would allow for more efficient transport than current methods.

Overall, the Erector Spinae recruitment data on the stairs are clearly less than that observed with hand-carried evacuation devices (Lavender et al., 2013) and are similar to those seen with track-type devices (Mehta et al., 2015). On the landings, the muscle activation levels were of similar magnitude to those seen with the hand-carried devices, indicating that this is the more physically demanding component of the task. Unlike when using hand-carried devices, it is easy for evacuators to pause and rest for a period of time on a landing. Setting down hand-carried devices and lifting again to resume an evacuation requires additional exertions.

Specific sled design features and how the may have affected the data are worthy of review. First, the coefficient of friction affected how much effort was required to control the speed of descent, and therefore the muscle use on the stairs, for example, the low Erector Spinae and Latissimus Dorsi use with the Fabric Mat on the stairs. Clearly, there needs to be balance as the higher coefficient of friction of this same device was associated with the highest Latissimus Dorsi use on the landing. The wheels and rollers on the Wheeled and Hard Shell devices were specifically aimed at easing the movement on horizontal surfaces. The data does not show a direct benefit of using the wheels and rollers in these devices due to other issues that most likely masked the potential benefit of these design features. Second, the overall size of the device affected the wall contact and the ratings of perceived exertion. The Fabric Mat, which could be shortened to match the stature of the occupant by pulling one cinch strap, had the fewest wall contacts on the landing. This was closely followed by the Hard Shell sled, which also had a shorter overall length. Third, the type of interface with the evacuators was found to be significant in the post trials interviews. The simple straps with clear demarked hand-holds in the Corrugated and Fabric Mat devices were favorably noted in the post study interviews. These two devices were also the two devices with the lowest ratings of perceived exertion. The strap on the Hard Shell, by wrapping around the waist, transferred loads directly to the pelvis and should have reduced the bending moments on the spine and muscle use. However, the participants still flexed forward on average 22° when using this device and tended to pull back on the strap therein using the muscles at levels similar to those found with the other devices. This could be explained by the comment made by some participants that the strap was made of a material that the participants thought could slip. Fourth, while the biomechanical data supports the use of the inflatable device, one concern with this device is the availability of electric power necessary to operate the pump in these evacuation situations.

In sum, when choosing a device, it appears that the sleds using two evacuators and those with handles integrated into the straps should receive strong consideration. Given that evacuators have may have very limited experience or training with these devices, having affordances in designs, such as integrated handles, will be useful for guiding unfamiliar evacuators towards to proper operation of the device when needed. Devices that cocoon the occupant, in addition to protecting the occupant from wall contact, serve to minimize the device width and facilitate turns on the landings. Likewise, devices that can be shortened in overall length to match the stature of the evacuee also make the turns on the landing easier. For those who design and manufacture these devices, it may be worthwhile to look into how the coefficient of friction can be maintained on the stairs and reduced on the landings.

There are several limitations to this analysis that should be acknowledged. First, we do not have any assessment of occupant comfort. However, all of these devices would be better than the “blankets or sheets” (Schultz et al., 2003) used in the evacuation of hospitals following the Northridge, CA earthquake. One concern with the Corrugated, Roll-Up, Fabric Mat, and Wheeled devices was the possible extension of the occupant's spine as these devices were transitioned from the landing to the actual flight of stairs. To maintain patient comfort, a coordinated action of elevating the legs and tipping up the torso needs to be practiced by the evacuators.

Second, these devices were evaluated with relatively short three-flight evacuations. This was done to manage participant fatigue levels given that each participant was being asked to perform 20 descents in addition to the six training descents. The cumulative fatigue effect that would be encountered with longer evacuations from large high-rise structures has to be considered. Relatively small differences in muscle recruitment levels may still affect the fatigue rate and the ability for the evacuators to effectively control the device. Moreover, localized fatigue in the muscles sampled alters the characteristics of the EMG signal (Basmajian and De Luca, 1985), therein confounding the interpretation of these signals.

Third, female participants were not included in the sample. The research was open to female participants, however, none volunteered. There were few female firefighters in the fire departments recruited which is consistent with the national average (Karter and Stein, 2013).

Fourth, the participants performed the evacuation tasks in comfortable clothes to help maintain a normal body temperature. This was necessary, to prevent fatigue and to minimize the perspiration that results in electrodes falling off. The downside of this methodological decision is that many times firefighters would be performing these evacuations in heavy turnout gear. Our hypothesis is that had the experiment been conducted in full turnout gear the overall levels of the response variables would have been elevated, but the relative differences between devices would be of a similar magnitude.

Fifth, tape marks, as opposed to moveable wall panels, were used along the stairway to “narrow” the staircase width. Therefore, any psychological effect and resulting behavioral change due to the visual narrowing of the stairs was not considered in this study. However, given that the participants were instructed to remain close to the inside rail on the stairs, as this facilitated the turn on the landing, and pilot testing showed that while on the stairs the participants were not close to crossing the tape marks, moveable wall panels were not used.

Fifth, the weight of the evacuee was only 73 kg. Consistent with the CDC's report on obesity (CDC, 2012), many of the firefighters indicated that many of the people they transport weigh considerably more. Heavier patients may require additional people to control the rate of descent and additional people to slide the evacuee through the landing.

Sixth, the participants in the current study were instructed to descend the stairs along the inside rail to maximize the space that would be available for making the turn on the landing. This could potentially be problematic if there was upward bound foot traffic (i.e., additional firefighters) at the same time as was true during the World Trade Center evacuation (Sheilds et al., 2009).

Seventh, the maximum width of the widest stair condition used in this study was 10 cm less than what is called for in the NFPA code for buildings with greater than 2000 occupants. However, while we found differences between our two staircase widths for some of our measures, it is unlikely that these results would have changed significantly had the stairs, and more importantly the landings been 10 cm wider.

Eighth, the assumption behind this evaluation is that the devices are in place and ready to use. We did not evaluate the time to set-up the devices in preparation for use, nor did we assess the physiologic demands experienced if an evacuator needed to transport the device to the scene by carrying it up multiple flights the stairs.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Looking across the tested devices, there are significant differences with regards to evacuation times and the physical demands placed on the evacuators during stair descents. Based on these findings, we recommend two-person devices with handles integrated into the straps, including the inflatable if the availability of electric power can be assured. Devices that cocoon the occupant and can be shortened in overall length to match the stature of the evacuee facilitate movement through the landings and minimize wall contact. In sum, these data suggest that it is equally important to consider how easy it is to control the descent on the stairs and how much effort is required to work a device through a landing.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

