@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#An investigation of pointing postures in a 3D stereoscopic environment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined pointing postures while interacting with virtual targets.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hand-directed pointing contributed to better overall performance and usability.


                        
                        
                           
                           Gaze-directed pointing provided higher accuracy in tracking tasks.


                        
                        
                           
                           Targets with negative parallax were easier for users to manipulate.


                        
                        
                           
                           Pointing postures affected both task performance and muscular fatigue.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Stereoscopic parallax

Pointing technique

3D virtual environment

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Many object pointing and selecting techniques for large screens have been proposed in the literature. There is a lack of quantitative evidence suggesting proper pointing postures for interacting with stereoscopic targets in immersive virtual environments. The objective of this study was to explore users' performances and experiences of using different postures while interacting with 3D targets remotely in an immersive stereoscopic environment. Two postures, hand-directed and gaze-directed pointing methods, were compared in order to investigate the postural influences. Two stereo parallaxes, negative and positive parallaxes, were compared for exploring how target depth variances would impact users' performances and experiences. Fifteen participants were recruited to perform two interactive tasks, tapping and tracking tasks, to simulate interaction behaviors in the stereoscopic environment. Hand-directed pointing is suggested for both tapping and tracking tasks due to its significantly better overall performance, less muscle fatigue, and better usability. However, a gaze-directed posture is probably a better alternative than hand-directed pointing for tasks with high accuracy requirements in home–in phases. Additionally, it is easier for users to interact with targets with negative parallax than with targets with positive parallax. Based on the findings of this research, future applications involving different pointing techniques should consider both pointing performances and postural effects as a result of pointing task precision requirements and potential postural fatigue.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Large displays have become popular as they become more affordable. In order to improve the experience of interacting with large amounts of information in virtual environments without losing details, designers are recommended to provide large size displays for remote uses (Vogel and Balakrishnan, 2005). A number of object pointing and selecting techniques for large screens have thus been proposed in the research field of remote control for several years (Banerjee et al., 2012; Jota et al., 2010; Park et al., 2012; Vogel and Balakrishnan, 2005). The hand gesture effects on user's performances (Banerjee et al., 2012) and the provision of arm support to users' muscular fatigue improvement (Park et al., 2012) had been investigated. Relatively few studies have evaluated the performance of pointing methods for remote control in virtual environments. Within these researches, Jota et al. (2010) classified remote pointing into two controlling types: rotational control (were used to point at targets by rotating the angle of the user's hand) and positional control (were used to decide target positions by the placement of the user's hand). Their results showed that pointing techniques with rotational control provided better throughput and faster performance than those with positional control. Vogel and Balakrishnan (2005) compared three methods, including ray-casting and two other modified ray-casting approaches (relative pointing with clutching and hybrid RayToRelative) for better accuracy during remote selection of targets. The traditional ray-casting techniques provided the fastest selection but also the highest error rate among the three methods in that study. Although the above studies discussed the issue of using various pointing methods to interact with very large displays remotely, they all focused mainly on investigating the performance and preference of these different techniques in non-immersive virtual environments. In addition, these researches did not point out how the postural effects would influence the usability and task efficacy. In our study, these pointing techniques are categorized into two types in terms of the body postures involved, the hand-directed and the gaze-directed approaches which will be described later in the method section.

In order to interact with objects in a virtual environment, issues related to how to point and select 3D stereoscopic objects are important. However, not enough studies have discussed how to effectively manipulate targets with a consideration of parallaxes. In general, stereoscopic objects can be manipulated in two ways: by touching the screen and by selecting them remotely. Only a handful of studies have discussed the use of direct touch to manipulate the virtual targets (Valkov et al., 2012, 2011). Valkov et al. (2011) reported that with negative parallax, users would have difficulty touching designated screen areas located behind the targets. Valkov et al. (2012) found that the problem of losing the stereoscopic impression would influence users' judgments of whether objects were in front of or behind the screen. Valkov et al. (2012, 2011) both indicated that parallax would have an effect on users' experiences of interacting with 3D targets through direct touching on the screen. However, they did not mention that whether there will be parallax effects while using pointing techniques to interact with virtual objects. There was one study exploring users' performances while manipulating objects with various parallaxes through remote pointing (Teather and Stuerzlinger, 2013). However, rather than comparing the influence of different pointing postures, their research focused on comparing mouse and ray-casting methods. Their results showed that the mouse resulted in better performance than ray-casting, and users demonstrated better performance while interacting with targets closer to the screen than while interacting with those farther away from the screen. The above discussions have demonstrated that parallax would play a role on user's experience and performance interacting with virtual environments. However, it is still unclear that whether the postural effects will influence users' interaction of stereoscopic objects. Whether different level of muscular fatigue resulted from postures will influence the interaction of 3D targets is also an issue. Banerjee et al. (2012) have speculated that less muscular fatigue would result in better performances for participants in the laser pointer using group who could hold their arms naturally than the group being asked to hold their arms at shoulder level. In light of their discussion, we found that there is a need to gather further evidences to compare the muscle fatigue levels of two pointing postures, with and without holding the arm at shoulder level, both in the condition of freehand pointing; in other words, without holding any devices.

Regarding visual problems, in the previous literature, visual symptoms have been identified as one of the major concerns for users in immersive virtual environment (Pölönen et al., 2013; Rushton and Riddell, 1999). Besides visual discomfort, some symptoms resulting from visually exposure to visual displays without body motion, referred as visually induced motion sickness, is also an important issue that has been explored recently (Dziuda et al., 2014; Kennedy et al., 2010). However, little information is available on postural effects of pointing techniques for interacting with targets in truly stereoscopic environments. This research explored how different pointing postures influence users' performances and experiences while they are remotely interacting with objects with various parallaxes. Two featured pointing methods (gaze-directed and hand-directed) were included in this research to investigate the effects of different pointing postures. In addition, unlike the direct touching of the screen, as in Valkov et al. (2011, 2012), freehand remote pointing was adopted in this research. Our primary focus was to investigate user performance during interactions with stereoscopic objects with two pointing methods generalized from the literature of remote pointing techniques. Furthermore, in order to examine interactions with multiple forms of targets in the virtual environment, we included tapping and tracking in static and dynamic tasks.

@&#METHOD@&#

Before the data collection, the experimental protocol and participant consent procedure were developed according to the ethical guidelines of the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology (NTUST), and approved by the Research Ethics Office of NTUST. After the approval, fifteen right-handed subjects (10 males and 5 females) were recruited from NTUST. Their average age was 25 (S.D. = 3.59). Their average eye height was 161 cm (S.D. = 9.12 cm). All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Before the experiments started, they were first provided with a verbal description of the possible risks of this study. After hearing the description, all participants voluntarily signed the written informed consent form. Finally, they were asked to avoid heavy visual and muscular work for 24 h before the experiment.

NVIDIA 3D vision glasses and a ViewSonic PJD6353s projector with a 1024 × 768 resolution at a refresh rate of 120 Hz were used in this study to establish an immersive 3D navigation scene. The aspect ratio of the projector is 4:3. The Microsoft Kinect depth camera was used to detect the coordinates of the subject's right hand for manipulating the cursor position. Participants wore the right-hand 5DT Data Glove for gesture triggering to capture the virtual targets. The software automatically took records of clicking time, errors, and coordinates of clicking events. The experimental setting for this research was built in a laboratory with an 81.5 inch (165.61  cm × 124.21  cm) front-projected screen. Participants were instructed to stand at a fixed position 3 m in front of the screen. The Microsoft Kinect depth camera was set 1.3 m in front of the screen, as shown in Fig. 1
                           .

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

The experiment was a 2 × 2 × 6 repeated-measures design (Table 1
                           ). The purpose was to investigate if pointing methods, parallax manipulation, and index of difficulty (ID) would influence the user's performance and experience while doing a static task (multi-directional tapping task) in a virtual environment. There were three independent variables: pointing method (gaze-directed and hand-directed) and parallax (positive and negative), and index of difficulty (2.58, 3.17, 3.46, 4.09, 4.14, and 4.79). A total of 24 trials (2 pointing methods × 2 parallaxes × 6 IDs) were randomly arranged for each participant.

The multi-directional tapping task was adopted from ISO-9241-9 (2000). In this task, the 12 spherical targets were three sizes, 3 cm (1.86 pixels), 5 cm (3.09 pixels), and 10 cm (6.18 pixels), and between each target were two distances, 50 cm (30.92 pixels) and 80 cm (49.47 pixels). Six task levels were obtained by calculating the different sizes of the targets and the distances between them using Shannon's formulation (Soukoreff and MacKenzie, 2004) of index of difficulty (ID), including 2.58 bits, 3.17 bits, 3.46 bits, 4.09 bits, 4.14 bits, and 4.79 bits. Twelve targets were placed around a circle, as shown in Fig. 2
                           .

The error rate was calculated as follows:
                              
                                 (1)
                                 
                                    
                                       Error rate
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             (
                                             
                                                ER
                                             
                                             )
                                          
                                       
                                       =
                                       
                                          
                                             number of errors
                                          
                                          
                                             number of errors
                                             +
                                             number of hits
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where the errors were defined as the events of clicking outside the desired target. In addition, the throughput was calculated based on the equation in ISO-9241-9 (2000) as
                              
                                 (2)
                                 
                                    
                                       Throughput
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             (
                                             
                                                TP
                                             
                                             )
                                          
                                       
                                       =
                                       
                                          
                                             effective ID
                                          
                                          
                                             movement time
                                             
                                             
                                                
                                                   (
                                                   
                                                      MT
                                                   
                                                   )
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where movement time was defined as the duration of movement from one target to the next target.

Two different pointing methods, gaze-directed pointing and hand-directed pointing, were used in a stereoscopic display. In the gaze-directed pointing method, the user has to look at a selected object and indicate the selection based upon the user's current gaze direction (Mine, 1995). In contrast, the hand-directed pointing technique, which is similar to the method developed by Shoemaker et al. (2007), is more similar to methods of controlling a traditional mouse. In this method, the users' gaze and hand direction are inconsistent, as shown in Fig. 3
                           . In addition, we conducted a pretest and found that a control/display gain of 5 was appropriate for both pointing methods in this study. The cursor movement was five times the distance of the hand movements. In other words, when a participant moved a hand 5 cm, the cursor would move 25 cm. Therefore, participants could easily capture and track the virtual targets.

The three stereoscopic parallaxes were used. A target's position was manipulated by the distance between the right and left images to produce positive, zero, and negative parallax (Steinicke et al., 2008). This arrangement causes the eyes to focus behind the screen, on the screen, or in front of the screen, respectively. The convergence controlled by the eye muscles sends depth cues to the brain (Hong et al., 2012). Based on the depth cues, the various parallaxes create the illusion that an object is in a specific location in relation to the screen. In this study, we tested positive and negative parallaxes, which caused targets to float 1 m behind and in front of the screen, as shown in Fig. 4
                           .

The parallax was determined by the separation distance (IMG) between two images of the same object on the screen. The equation described by Seigle (2009) is:
                              
                                 (3)
                                 
                                    
                                       IMG
                                       =
                                       IPD
                                       
                                          
                                             (
                                             
                                                1
                                                −
                                                
                                                   1
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         d
                                                         /
                                                         D
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             )
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where IPD is the interpupillary distance. As shown in Fig. 5
                           , symbol “d” represents the distance between the object and the viewer, and symbol “D” stands for the distance from the viewer to the screen. A distance of 6.5 cm was adopted as a fixed interpupillary distance (IPD), because a measured IPD did not significantly improve overall performance as compared with using a fixed IPD (Willemsen et al., 2008). As a result, IMG of 1.625 cm and −3.25 cm were adopted for positive and negative parallax in this study.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants' eye heights were measured before the training session. Then they were guided into the interactive system for the training session to familiarize with the experimental environment. During the task execution, participants were asked to click on the highlighted target as quickly and accurately as possible. They were also asked to use thumb interphalangeal flexion to represent clicking on the target while wearing the data glove. After hitting the target correctly, the target would disappear and the next target would appear. Each level would end when the participant completed clicking all twelve targets in the level. The operator would then move on to the next ID level in random order.

The questionnaire consisted of 24 items divided into three parts: a usability scale, a simulator sickness questionnaire, and the Borg CR-10 scale. The usability scale was modified from the System Usability Scale (SUS) as a tool for the subjective usability evaluation, including 9 items: (1) I would like to use this pointing method to have an interaction with virtual environment; (2) I would like to have an interaction with present environment setting; (3) I can effectively complete task using this pointing method; (4) I am able to efficiently complete task using this pointing method; (5) I am satisfied with this pointing method to complete task; (6) I feel comfortable when using this pointing method; (7) This experimental configuration that I can easily to use; (8) This experimental configuration that I can easily to learn; (9) I can easily detect error and recover quickly. Eight items related to our experiment from the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) were adopted and administered immediately before and after the virtual reality session, as in previous studies (Kennedy et al., 1993). The eight items include (1) general discomfort; (2) headache; (3) eyestrain; (4) difficult focusing; (5) nausea; (6) difficult concentrating; (7) blurred vision; (8) dizzy. The widely used Borg CR-10 scale was used for collecting data on perceived body exertion (Borg, 1998).

The 5-point Likert scale was used to answer the usability and simulator sickness scales, and 0–10 point was used in Borg CR-10 scale. Higher SUS scores indicate better usability, while lower SSQ and Borg CR-10 scores represent lower fatigue. Participants were asked to complete the questionnaire before and after each condition. In order to reduce the influence of accumulated visual fatigue, a 15 min break was provided between each condition. After each break, they were asked to complete the next condition, until all conditions were completed.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The repeated measure ANOVA results of movement time revealed that movement time was significantly longer for the gaze-directed (5070 ms) than for the hand-directed (3280 ms) pointing (F
                           1,14 = 18.529, p = 0.001). There were no significant differences between the two stereo parallaxes (F
                           1,14 = 2.018, p = 0.177) on movement time. As expected, there was a main effect of ID (F
                           5,70 = 29.055, p < 0.01) on movement time. Significant interactions were found between pointing method and ID (F
                           5,70 = 7.218, p < 0.01) on movement time (as shown in Fig. 6
                           ). All other interactions were not significant.

The error rate was significantly higher with the gaze-directed (37.6%) than with the hand-directed (27.1%) pointing (F
                           1,14 = 20.429, p < 0.01). There were no significant differences between the two stereo parallaxes (F
                           1,14 = 0.717, p = 0.411) on error rate. There was a significant effect of ID (F
                           5,70 = 61.744, p < 0.01) on error rate. Furthermore, there was also a significant interaction between pointing method and ID, F
                           5,70 = 6.011, p < 0.01 (Fig. 7
                           ). All other interactions were not significant.

Significant effects on throughput were found for all three variables, including pointing method, stereo parallax, and index of difficulty. Participants using the hand-directed pointing method (1.13 bits/s) exhibited significantly better TP than those using the other method (0.75 bits/s) (F
                           1,14 = 26.095, p < 0.01). TP was also significantly higher in negative (0.99 bits/s) than in positive (0.89 bits/s) parallax (F
                           1,14 = 5.996, p = 0.028). There was a significant effect of TP in ID (F
                           5,70 = 20.456, p < 0.01) as well. However, there were no interactions for the pairs of variables, nor for the three variables together, based on the analysis.

Using means of all the 9 usability item scores, analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed significant better overall usability scores for hand-directed than for gaze-directed pointing (F
                           9,35 = 8.07, p < 0.01). In contrast, there was no evidence showing that the two stereo parallaxes were significantly different on any usability items. The results revealed that neither pointing method nor parallax variables showed significant effects on overall SSQ variable. Additionally, according to ANOVA results of the Borg CR10 Scale, There were no significant effects of parallax. In terms of each of the respective body part effects, univariate F tests for each body part showed significant main effects of pointing method only for the shoulder, upper-arm, forearm, wrist, and hand (not including the neck and back), as shown in Table 2
                           .

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Based on the results of the tapping task in experiment 1, we obtained several major findings, including significantly better performance using the hand-directed than the gaze-directed pointing, significant parallax effects on performance variables, and an interaction between pointing method and index of difficulty. Regarding the interaction between variables of pointing method and index of difficulty, as shown in Figs. 6 and 7, both MT and ER were magnified as the index of difficulty increased. In order to see whether there is a threshold of ID beyond which the difference in error rate starts to increase, a paired t test (p < 0.05) was performed at each ID level. It was found that below 3.46, there was no difference but beyond that ID level the difference was significant. Therefore, an ID of 3.46 bits was established as the threshold between two different pointing methods in a stereoscopic environment. In other words, with an ID larger than 3.46 bits, users would perform more accurately with hand-directed than with gaze-directed pointing. However, the accuracy would remain almost the same with an ID below 3.46 bits.

@&#METHOD@&#

The same fifteen participants joined the second experiment. As described in the first experiment, the experimental protocol and participant consent procedure were developed according to the ethical guidelines of the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology (NTUST), and approved by the Research Ethics Office of NTUST. Participants were also asked to avoid heavy visual and muscular work for 24 h before this experiment.

Based on the different task requirement, the 5DT Data Glove was only used in the first experiment, multi-directional tapping task, but not in the second experiment. Besides this device, all other apparatus and experimental environment were settled the same as in the first experiment. Additionally, the software logged completion time, missing errors, and moving trajectory in this experiment.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

This experiment was a 2 × 2 × 3 repeated-measures design (Table 3
                           ). The purpose was to explore whether pointing methods and parallax manipulation would influence participants' performance and experience under dynamic circumstances (multi-directional tracking task) in virtual environments.

There were three independent variables: pointing method (gaze-directed and hand-directed), parallax (positive and negative), and path (frontal plane, sagittal plane, and transverse plane) (Moore, 2013), as shown in Fig. 8
                           . The grids and shadows were provided as visual cues to help subjects perceive depth (Richard et al., 2012). This task followed the ISO-9241-9 (2000) standard tracing task. The three tracking paths were considered as three circles of a given radius. The curvature was calculated by ρ = 1/radius. The sizes of the cursor and target were 3 cm (1.86 pixel) and 5 cm (3.09 pixel), and the path distance was 158.08 cm (97.74 pixel).

A total of 12 trials (2 pointing methods × 2 parallaxes × 3 paths) were randomly arranged for each participant in this experiment. In each trial, the target moved at a constant velocity in a clockwise direction relative to the participant facing the screen. We applied the model from Accot and Zhai (1997) to set ID equal to 25 bits for this test. For the width of index of difficulty, we calculated the distance between the moving trajectory of the cursor and the predefined moving path. The number of errors was calculated once the cursor went beyond the predefined trajectory. The throughput was calculated by (ISO, 2000)
                              
                                 (4)
                                 
                                    
                                       Throughput
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             (
                                             
                                                TP
                                             
                                             )
                                          
                                       
                                       =
                                       
                                          
                                             effective ID
                                          
                                          
                                             Completion time
                                             
                                             
                                                
                                                   (
                                                   
                                                      CT
                                                   
                                                   )
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where the completion time was the duration of movement from the starting position to the end of each path.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

All participants completed the training session before starting the normal experimental condition. This task was designed to emulate a multidirectional object pursuit task. Initially, an object was placed in the virtual environment to be tracked. The subjects were directed to control the cursor by pointing within the radius of the ball. Once the cursor was placed inside the target, the target would start to move along a pre-defined trajectory at a constant velocity. In this phase, the target color would turn green, indicating that the cursor was inside the target. Subjects were asked to continuously track the moving target. If participants failed to locate the cursor on the target, the target would instantaneously stop moving and turn red as visual feedback. In this situation, the subjects were required to position the cursor inside the target again, until the target reached its end position. After subjects completed one condition, they filled in the same questionnaire as mentioned in experiment 1 and had a 15 min break. This procedure was repeated until 12 combinations had been completed.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Based on the results of ANOVA, there was a significant main effect of path variable on completion time (CT) (F
                           2,28 = 24.721, p < 0.01). However, neither pointing method (F
                           1,14 = 0.04, p = 0.845) nor stereo parallax (F
                           1,14 = 0.578, p = 0.46) revealed significant effects on CT. A post-hoc Tukey HSD was conducted to further compare each path level. Completion time was shortest on the frontal plane (31,043 ms), followed by the sagittal plane (87,831 ms) and the transverse plane (107,452 ms). All interactions were not significant.

The ANOVA results indicated that the subjects made significantly more errors when using hand-directed (127 ± 86) than gaze-directed pointing (109 ± 62) (F
                           1,14 = 12.289, p = 0.003). However, there was no significant effect on parallax (F
                           1,14 = 0.002, p = 0.969). The effect of target moving path was significant on number of errors (NE), F
                           2,28 = 92.620, p < 0.01. A further Tukey HSD test showed that NE was fewest when targets were on the frontal plane (34 ± 13), followed by the sagittal plane (157 ± 45) and the transverse plane (164 ± 64). In addition, ANOVA results showed a significant interactive effect between pointing method and path, F
                           2,28 = 5.507, p = 0.01, as illustrated in Fig. 9
                           .

According to the NE differences between two pointing methods for each path level, participants using gaze-directed pointing performed significantly more accurately than those using the other method in the sagittal (F
                           1,44 = 8.54, p = 0.005) and transverse planes (F
                           1,44 = 11.61,p = 0.001). All other interactions were not significant.

The analysis of throughput (TP) indicated significant main effects of pointing method, stereo parallax, and path. Participants performed better using hand-directed (0.86) than gaze-directed (0.73) pointing (F
                           1,14 = 4.662, p = 0.049), and better with negative (0.84) than with positive (0.75) parallax (F
                           1,14 = 5.571, p = 0.033). For the further comparison of the effect from each path level, post-hoc test was conducted. The analysis revealed that TP was greatest when the path was in the frontal plane (1.59 ± 0.58 bits/s), followed by the sagittal (0.45 ± 0.21 bits/s) and transverse (0.35 ± 0.15 bits/s) planes. ANOVA results also revealed a significant interaction between parallax and path (F
                           2,28 = 6.055, p < 0.007), as illustrated in Fig. 10
                           . However, all other interactions were not significant.

Using means of all the 9 usability item scores, the ANOVA results revealed significant overall main effects of pointing method (F
                           9,153 = 7.40, p < 0.01) and path (F
                           18,308 = 4.46, p < 0.01), but not of stereo parallax. The analysis revealed no significant differences of overall main effects in pointing method, parallax, and path on the simulator sickness questionnaire. Furthermore, according to ANOVA (Table 4
                           ), the scores of two pointing methods were significantly different only in the shoulder, upper-arm, and forearm. Additionally, the analysis also revealed significant differences among the three path levels in the shoulder.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Based on the results of the tracking task, several major findings are summarized. Performance was significantly higher with hand-directed pointing, but accuracy was higher with gaze-directed pointing. Additionally, performance was significantly better with negative parallax than with positive parallax. Furthermore, participants performed better in the frontal plane than in the sagittal or transverse planes. In relation to moving paths, the results of this experiment support the notion that moving forwards and backwards in depth is slower and more inaccurate than moving left and right for participants in a virtual environment (Grossman et al., 2004; Liao and Johnson, 2004). The result indicated that performance was significantly higher in the frontal plane than in the sagittal and transverse planes. This indicates that subjects might have a weaker depth perception in the stereoscopic environment than in the real world. Thus, although we provided a grid and shadow in this experiment, subjects still could not perform well on the planes of depth.

Two experiments were conducted here to compare the influences of two featured pointing postures for users interacting with virtual targets of different parallaxes under static and dynamic task requirements. Both postural and parallax effects were found to be significant in the two tasks.

The finding revealed that, for users in stereoscopic environment, regardless of participation in tapping or tracking tasks, the use of hand-directed pointing posture as compared to the gaze-directed method, could induce better performance as measured by the combined metric of speed and accuracy, throughput. However, users performed more accurately using the hand-directed pointing in the tapping task, but they made fewer errors with the gaze-directed pointing in the tracking task. Better throughput performance by hand-directed pointing in both tasks can be explained by three possible reasons as described in following paragraphs.

First, gaze-directed pointing may have caused more arm muscle fatigue, and in some cases might even induce hand tremors in the participants. The muscle fatigue would have reduced the precision and speed of the pointing performance. Several previous studies (Bowman et al., 2002; Gallo and Minutolo, 2012; Lee et al., 2003) have pointed out the problem of tremors in precise pointing tasks. The results of the Borg Scale in our experiment indeed showed that participants reported more muscle fatigue with gaze-directed than with hand-directed pointing. The influence of muscle fatigue on the accuracy of hand placement has been supported by Lee et al. (2003). Additionally, Bowman et al. (2002) mentioned that hand tremors may influence the precision of target selection with the ray casting method and termed this phenomenon the “Heisenberg effect”. In a recent article, Gallo and Minutolo (2012) also found that hand tremors affected pointing accuracy, and this phenomenon was exacerbated when the arm was stretched out, as in the gaze-directed pointing method. Langolf et al. (1976) found that distal parts (fingers, wrists) of the upper extremity moved faster than proximal parts (elbows, shoulders). According to this effect, participants in our experiment using the hand-directed pointing, which involves more movement of the distal parts and less movement of the proximal parts, would perform faster than those using gaze-directed pointing, which involves more movements of proximal parts (more arm movement and control). Our finding on the movement time is in accordance with the basic principle found in human movement. Based on the above evidence and our findings, it can be seen that due to the lower muscle fatigue and greater movement of distal parts involved, the hand-directed pointing method generates better performance in tapping task applications within a stereoscopic environment than the gaze-directed pointing method, where more static arm holding is required.

The second reason is related to convergence difficulty. Using the gaze-directed pointing method, participants might feel difficult to make the real hand and the virtual image converge, i.e., to make the eyes, the fingertip, and the target on the display into one line of sight. There would be no converging or alignment need with the hand-directed pointing, since the hand was not required to be aligned in the gaze direction during interactions with targets. Valkov et al. (2011) also mentioned this problem with convergence when users had to touch a display screen while pointing at a virtual object. Although the pointing method in their study was not truly gaze-directed, it has a shared feature with the gaze-directed pointing method, which is that the eye, fingertip, and target have to be on the same line during the pointing. Due to the convergence difficulty associated with the gaze-directed pointing, the participants have to spend more effort, and thus could not point both quickly and accurately at the same time.

Third, with the hand-directed pointing, since the range of rotation was not as limited as in the case of the gaze-directed pointing, participants might have been able to perform more naturally. With the gaze-directed pointing, participants were asked to hold their arm flexed to make both the fingertip and target aligned with the gaze direction. In this particular posture, participants could point at the desired target only by rotating their proximal body parts, mainly the shoulder and elbow. However, using the hand-directed pointing, participants could move to the target simply by rotating their hand and involving the wrist joint only, which motion was light and flexible than the entire arm to move. Therefore, this could be an additional reason why users performed much better using the hand-directed over the gaze-directed pointing.

Findings in this research showed that although participants had higher throughput while using the hand-directed pointing method in both tasks, they had better accuracy using the gaze-directed method in the tracking task, but higher error rates in the tapping task. It should be noted that there is a difference in the definition of error between experiment 1 and experiment 2. The error rate in experiment 1 was defined as the occurrences of clicking outside the desired target divided by total number of clicking events. However, in experiment 2 an error was recorded and the counts of error accumulated once the cursor went beyond the predefined trajectory border in experiment 2. According to our finding, the posture effect could be different due to different task requirement. In tracking task, the gaze-directed pointing method benefitted to higher accuracy; however, in tapping task, the hand-directed pointing method contributed to lower error rate. This finding was consistent with Gallo and Minutolo (2012). They compared two pointing methods, laser-style (similar to hand-directed) and image-plane (similar to gaze-directed) pointing modalities in a non-virtual environment. They found that the image-plane pointing method would be more effective than laser-style in selection tasks where more fine and precise adjustments were needed. In our research, compared with tapping, tracking task needed more fine-grained adjustments. Although the task requirements and the environmental setting were not exactly the same, our finding that the gaze-directed pointing performed better than the hand-directed in terms of accuracy in tracking task is consistent to Gallo and Minutolo (2012).

The finding of better accuracy with the gaze-directed than the hand-directed pointing could also be explained from the perspective of field of view. While using the gaze-directed pointing method, the participant's view is narrowed down to the adjacent areas of the target since the finger and the target must be followed and aligned; therefore, he or she can focus on the target more easily than with the hand-directed pointing method. This could make it easy for participants to remain in the predefined trajectory in the tracking task while using the gaze-directed pointing. This might also be a reason behind the lower error times with the gaze-directed than the hand-directed pointing in the tracking task. Proper pointing postures should be considered for designing virtual tasks. Based on our finding, gaze-directed pointing methods can be suggested in tasks requiring precise selection and tracking to provide accuracy. Though, in direct shooting and clicking tasks (i.e. selection on the virtual menu), if the target size is sufficient to support pointing, hand-directed pointing postures can be considered to enhance participants' overall usability and performance.

Regarding usability and simulator sickness, similar outcome was found in the tapping and tracking tasks. Based on the results of the usability scale, we found that participants preferred hand-directed to gaze-directed pointing in both experiments. This result of subjective measurement is consistent with our objective evaluation, the performance investigation. Participants in this research exhibited significantly better throughput performance with hand-directed than with gaze-directed pointing. Considering the usability results and the performance evaluations simultaneously, we speculate that one reason why participants preferred hand-directed pointing was the better performance. Similar result was also found on the moving paths in the tracking task. We found that participants prefer more to interact on a plane with less depth variance, especially in the frontal plane, and they also performed better on this plane than other planes, based on the evaluation of speed and accuracy. In addition, according to the results of the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire, there were no significant evidences that the type of pointing method or parallax affected visual comfort and simulator sickness symptoms in the stereoscopic environment, although some previous researches (Dziuda et al., 2014; Pölönen et al., 2013) have shown the visual discomfort and symptoms induced by the interaction within virtual environments. It may be due to the use of the projection-based display in this research, where the users did not wear the head-mounted displays with fully immersive setting.

Last, in both tasks, the Borg scores of the shoulder, forearm, and upper arm were significantly higher for gaze-directed than for hand-directed pointing. A partial explanation for this could be the need to hold the arm out while aiming at targets with gaze-directed pointing. Although the experimental duration was shorter in experiment 2 than in experiment 1, participants still perceived muscle fatigue in experiment 2. Furthermore, it should be noted that in experiment 1, participants perceived significantly more muscle fatigue not only in the shoulder, upper arm, and forearm but also in the wrist and hand after gaze-directed pointing than after hand-directed pointing. However, in experiment 2, muscle fatigue was greater only in the shoulder, upper arm, and forearm after gaze-directed pointing than after hand-directed pointing. This might have been due to the different physical requirements of the two tasks. Experiment 1 involved a clicking action by movements of thumb adduction, which was not required in experiment 2. The clicking action could have induced muscle fatigue around the wrist and hand. According to our finding, this effect would be more severe while using gaze-directed than while using hand-directed pointing. One possible reason is that gaze-directed pointing with the arm held out straight would induce proximal part muscle exertion, simultaneously resulting in perceiving muscle fatigue over the distal parts of the wrist and hand during movements involving distal muscle contraction. Further investigations should be conducted in order to obtain a proper understanding of the mechanism behind this phenomenon.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The objective of this study was to explore users' performances and experiences while they interacted remotely with virtual objects in a stereoscopic environment. Based on our findings, hand-directed pointing is suggested for both tapping and tracking tasks, as it results in better overall performance, less muscle fatigue, and better usability. However, accuracy-stressed applications would find gaze-directed pointing more reliable. Commercial applications in 3D virtual environment may involve various forms, including tasks with high accuracy requirements and needs of several continuous fine-grained controls of movement sequences. Future research is recommended for exploring postural effects under these task requirements, particularly in 3D gaming and sculptures. It should still be noted that the results obtained in this study were based on limited number of subjects and all of them were right-handed. It would be interesting to include a wider varieties of characteristics for participants in future research. Additionally, in both tapping and tracking tasks, considering the speed-accuracy issue, our study shows that targets with negative parallax are easier for users to manipulate. If a performance difference does indeed exist with depth variance, another issue for further research is how to improve users' performances and experiences while interacting on moving paths with depth variance. The finding can contribute to important implications in appliances of wearable 3D products, where the virtual objects are displayed in front of users' eyes at various depths.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The funding was supported by National Science Council of Taiwan under the contract number NSC 100-2221-E-011-162-MY3.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

