@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Self-rostering and psychosocial work factors – A mixed methods intervention study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Implementing self-rostering has a potential to improve the psychosocial factors at work.


                        
                        
                           
                           There were large differences of implementing self-rostering on the effects of psychosocial factors at work.


                        
                        
                           
                           The effect on psychosocial factor seemed to be dependent on the aim and content of intervention.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Flexible working hours

Social support

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study aims at 1) examining the effect of self-rostering on emotional demands, quantitative demands, work pace, influence, social community at work, social support from leaders and colleagues, job satisfaction, and negative acts, 2) examining whether this effect was mediated through increased influence on the scheduling of working hours, and interpreting the results in light of the different implementation processes that emerged in the study and by including qualitative data. We conducted a 12 months follow-up, quasi-experimental study of self-rostering among 28 workplaces out of which 14 served as reference workplaces. We also interviewed 26 employees and 14 managers about their expectations of introducing self-rostering. In the present study implementation of self-rostering had a positive effect on job demands and the social environment of the workplace, especially if the intervention does not comprise drastic changes of the organisation of the employees' work and private life.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

During the last years at least two reviews concerning the effect of work-time influence or related concepts have been published. In 2010, Joyce et al. stated that self-scheduling can have beneficial health, social and organizational effects (Joyce et al., 2010). Likewise, in 2012, Nijp et al. concluded that for theoretical and empirical reasons, work-time control is a promising tool for the maintenance of employees' work–non-work balance, health and well-being, and job-related outcomes (Nijp et al., 2012). However, there is relatively little knowledge about the mechanisms through which, work-time influence affects health and well-being.

It has been suggested that work-time influence affects health through the adjustment of the working hours to the individual's needs and preferences, e.g. personal resources, demands from private life and need for restitution (Ala-Mursula et al., 2004; Garde et al., 2012). An alternative hypothesis is that the effect of work-time influence on health is mediated through improved psychosocial working environment. Indeed, in the previously mentioned 2010-review, Joyce et al. suggest that future research focuses on the effect of self-scheduling on psychosocial work factors, e.g. job satisfaction, worker performance, and employee morale (Joyce et al., 2010).

A few previous intervention studies have investigated the effect of work-time influence and psychosocial work factors with contradictory results: When implementing an open-rota system in a Danish psychiatric hospital, job satisfaction, social support and sense of community at work increased (Pryce et al., 2006). In a Danish intervention study of the effect of work-time influence among eldercare workers, supplementary analyses showed that the degree of social support increased in the intervention group (Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2011). Also, in Swedish retail the implementation of self-scheduling improved satisfaction with colleagues but at the same time there was a decrease in job satisfaction and in the perception of a calm and pleasant work climate (Lowden and Åkerstedt, 2000).

In spite of the sparse empirical evidence it seems possible that interventions aiming at increasing employees' work-time influence, e.g. by the implementation of self-rostering, may affect both job satisfaction, the social climate (e.g. social support and social community at work), and the intensity and demands of work (e.g. the amount to be accomplished and the speed of work). Regarding the intensity and demands of work, some self-rostering systems imply that the leader provides information about the required number of employees with specific skills on duty at different time points and thus optimizes the balance between staff demands and staff on duty. Hypothetically, such an improved balance might eliminate the efforts associated with understaffing – and thereby reduce work pace – at some time points. Alternatively, potential breaks and surplus of resources associated with overstaffing may be reduced – and thereby increase work pace. Thus, we did not have an a priori assumption about the direction of the effects of self-rostering on work pace as both a positive and negative effect could be anticipated.

Furthermore, previous research showed that the work tasks, i.e. exposures in the working environment, differ between day, evening, and night shifts and it is also likely that exposure differs between weekend and weekdays. Compared to day workers, night shift workers were more exposed to low influence, low social support, and more conflicts, harassment, bullying, or violence at work (Bøggild et al., 2001; Mohren et al., 2002; Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2009). In general, night shift workers also reported lower job demands, although Bøggild et al. (2001) found that female night workers were more exposed to cognitive demands, and Mohren et al. (2002) found that night shift workers of both genders were more exposed to emotional demands. Self-rostering may provide the individual employee with the opportunity to composite a work schedule that take preferences for (or against) certain work tasks into account and that balances job demands with (fluctuating) individual resources. The consequence may be that work demands are perceived less strenuous, even if the overall demands at the workplace are unaltered. Additionally, some self-rostering systems offer the employees the possibility to see their colleagues' preferred working hours, and, thus, they have the possibility of taking their preferences for (or against) specific colleagues into account, when they schedule their own working hours. This may lead to an improved social climate at work (e.g. higher social support, higher social community at work, and fewer experiences of negative acts) for the majority but also to social exclusion of some individuals. Thus, self-rostering may have positive effects on the social climate at work, but also unintended negative effects.

Indeed, in a previous paper, we showed that when employees schedule their own working hours, 36% considered the professional challenges, 26% considered the type of work tasks, 17% considered colleagues that they wanted to work together with, 7% considered colleagues that they did not want to work together with, and 6% considered the risk of violence (Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2013). Thus, although family life and leisure-time activities were among the top-priorities, employees also considered factors which eventually may lead to changes – positive as well as negative – in the psychosocial working environment.

Even if work-time influence can be improved by interventions such as the implementation of self-rostering this is not always the case (Lowden and Åkerstedt, 2000; Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2011). Actually, it is likely that interventions aiming at increasing employee work-time influence – but do not succeed – will have an adverse effect on the psychosocial working environment due to disappointment and dissatisfaction.

On this background, our overall aim was to investigate whether computerised self-rostering (i.e. the systematic involvement of the individual employee in the planning of his or her own work schedule by use of a computer program) has an effect on the psychosocial factors at work. More specifically, we first aimed to investigate the quantitative effect of self-rostering on job demand (i.e. emotional demands, quantitative demands, work pace), influence, job satisfaction, and social climate (i.e. social community at work, social support from leaders and colleagues, and exposure to negative acts). Second, we investigated to which extent the effect of the intervention depended on changes in the perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours.

By including qualitative data we interpreted the results in light of the different implementation processes that emerged in the study.

@&#METHODS@&#

The present study is part of an intervention project that aimed at exploring the consequences of self-rostering on health, recovery and working hours (Albertsen et al., 2014; Garde et al., 2012). Workplaces planning to implement self-rostering were recruited through public advertising, meetings, and by personal contacts. The requirements for workplaces to participate in the study were that (part of the) employees had shift work (i.e. that they worked outside the conventional day time covering evenings/nights and/or weekends). All activities related to the interventions were planned, executed and financed by the workplaces.

Data collection included questionnaires, interviews, and collection of working schedules at baseline and after 12 months follow-up. At follow-up, all interventions had been implemented for at least 9 months. In total, 28 workplaces were included. They were cluster-allocated to an intervention (n = 14 workplaces) or a reference group (n = 14 workplaces). Allocation to the intervention or reference groups was decided by the workplace, i.e. non-randomized.

Focus-group interviews and individual interviews with employees and managers were performed in each of the intervention workplaces. In total, 26 employees and 14 managers were interviewed at baseline, and 25 employees and 16 managers were interviewed at follow-up. Managers, employees responsible of the scheduling, and representatives of employees, who did not hold a central position in the implementation of self-rostering, were selected for interviews. All interviews were conducted by two researchers, one posing questions and the other taking notes. Through the qualitative interviews, we collected data about the involved companies, working conditions, and time schedules. The baseline interviews included questions about the motives for introducing self-rostering in the company. The follow-up survey included information about the change processes and attitudes to the project. In the reference group, nine leaders or other personnel responsible for the planning of working hours filled in a small questionnaire with open questions on how the working hours were planned at baseline. The questionnaire provided the basis for a half hour telephone interview. At follow-up, a summary was sent to the leaders, and they were asked to report any substantial changes that had occurred during the past 12 months (for more details on the qualitative data collection and results, see Albertsen et al. (2014)).

All employees at the workplace at the time of data collection were invited to participate. A total of 1065 participants were eligible for inclusion at baseline and 1070 at follow-up. At baseline 840 employees returned the questionnaire (response rate = 78.9%) and 785 participated at follow-up (response rate = 69.2%). In total, 567 responded to the questionnaire at both baseline and follow-up (follow-up response rate = 63.9%). The baseline measurements consisted of a questionnaire on personal background, work environment and working hours. The baseline survey and interviews took place between October 2008 and October 2009 and the follow-up took place 12 months later. At 13 out of 14 intervention workplaces, the management completed workplace questionnaires on the context of the implementations. The Danish Data Protection Agency approved the data usage (reference number: 2008-54-0458).

The intervention was to implement self-rostering by use of commercially available IT-software chosen by the workplace (Garde et al., 2012). The employers had to implement the software and specify the need for man-power on a running basis. Three different commercial IT-softwares were used. The three IT-softwares resembled each other and had more or less the same possibilities and training of the employees in using the IT-software prior to the implementation. Three subgroups of interventions (A–C) were made based on the workplaces' choice of IT-software, due to differences in the way they were introduced and implemented. Table 1
                         shows which mandatory and eligible opportunities were available and used in the three interventions. Eligible opportunities were length of shift, starting and ending times, possibility to transfer hours from one period to another (a time-bank), and a point system for distribution of unwanted hours or shifts. A work schedule for the employees was generated based on employees' preferences and their choices and the need for resources. Some workplaces included a step where the employees were invited to solve discrepancies between preferences and the need for resources by voluntarily altering their preferences (puzzle-phase). Finally, adjustments were made by the leaders, and the schedules were published. In order to be included in the study, it was mandatory that the intervention included a possibility for the employees to choose their work schedule, i.e. what days the employees wanted to work or did not want to work.


                        Intervention A was implemented among all caregivers at 6 workplaces, mainly psychiatric and somatic hospital care settings with a need for 24/7 manning. The main aims for introducing self-rostering were to increase workers' satisfaction and wellbeing and thereby ensure possibilities for recruitment and retention. Before the intervention, working hours were planned for 4–8 weeks at a time and published with at least four weeks' notice. The implementation process involved the work council and the union representatives at 80% of the workplaces. New individual work schedules were created every 1–5 weeks. Employees in intervention group A were encouraged to rethink their usual habits and attitudes towards organizing their working hours around their private life rather than their private life around the working hours, when entering their choices. After implementation 75–90 % of the employees' wishes were fulfilled.


                        Intervention B was implemented among caregivers at 7 workplaces, mainly psychiatric care settings and intensive and somatic care units in hospitals with a need for 24/7 manning. As a rule, all employees at the workplace were obliged to use the software. However, some employees were excluded e.g. due to social or health problems. The main aims for introducing self-rostering were to increase workers' satisfaction and wellbeing and thereby ensure possibilities for recruitment and retention. Before the intervention, working hours were planned for 4–8 weeks at a time and published with at least four weeks' notice as in intervention A. After implementation working hours were planned for 4–8 weeks and 75–80 % of the employees' wishes were fulfilled.


                        Intervention C was implemented at a call centre in the financial sector. The call centre was open from 08:00 to 20:00 on Monday to Friday and 08:00 to 16:00 during weekends. A few employees did not participate in the intervention due to either social or health problems. The main aim of intervention C was primarily to optimise resources in relation to needs of the company and secondly to improve workers' satisfaction. Before the intervention, all employees had a stable 4 weeks' roster with good possibilities to swap duties among themselves. According to the workplace questionnaire the work council had been involved to a low degree, union representatives to a high degree and employees to some degree in the implementation process of the self-rostering IT software. New individual work schedules were created every 12 weeks. It was not reported how many of the employees' wishes were fulfilled.

The reference group comprised psychiatric, intensive, and somatic hospital wards and a handicap home with a need for 24/7 staffing. From telephone interviews it is known that the workplaces in the reference group refrained from engaging in working hour interventions during the study period.

We used scales from the medium length of the Copenhagen Psychosocial Questionnaire (COPSOQ) to assess how the respondents perceived their current psychosocial factors at work (Pejtersen et al., 2010). Job demands were measured by emotional demands, quantitative demands and work pace, whereas single scales were used for influence and job satisfaction.


                        Emotional demands (two items): 1. Does your work put you in emotionally disturbing situations?, 2. Do you have to relate to other people's personal problems as part of your work?


                        Quantitative demands consisted of three items: 1. Does it happen that you do not complete all your work tasks?, 2. Do you get behind with your work?, 3. Do you have enough time for your work tasks?


                        Work pace (two items): 1. Do you have to work very fast?, 2. Do you work at a high pace throughout the day?


                        Influence (four items): 1. Do you have a large degree of influence concerning your work?, 2. Do you have a say in choosing who you work with?, 3. Can you influence the amount of work assigned to you?, 4 Do you have any influence on what you do at work?

The questions on demands and influence were responded to on five-point scales either using intensity (from 0: ‘to a very small extent’ to 4: ‘to a very large extent’) or frequency (from 0: ‘never/hardly ever’ to 4: ‘always’).


                        Job satisfaction (four items): Regarding your work in general. How satisfied are you with: 1. – your work prospects?, 2. – the physical working conditions?, 3. – the way your abilities are used?, 4. – your job as a whole, everything taken into consideration? The items were responded to on a four-point scale from ‘very satisfied’ to very ‘dissatisfied’.

All scales were established as a mean score of the items responded to and a high score was equal to high demands, high influence, and high job satisfaction. Cronbach's alphas were: quantitative demands: α = 0.84; emotional demands: α = 0.64; work pace: α = 0.81; influence: α = 0.74; and job satisfaction: α = 0.85.

Social climate at work were operationalized as social community at work, social support from colleagues and supervisors, and exposure to negative acts.


                        Social community at work (two items): 1. Do you feel part of a community at your workplace?, 2. Is there a good atmosphere between you and your colleagues? The items were responded to on five-point scales using intensity (from 0: ‘to a very small extent’ to 4: ‘to a very large extent’).


                        Social support from colleagues (two items): 1. How often do you get help and support from your colleagues?, 2. How often are your colleagues willing to listen to your problems at work?


                        Social support from supervisors (two items): 1. How often is your nearest supervisor willing to listen to your problems at work?, 2. How often do you get help and support from your nearest supervisor?

The items were responded to on five-point scales using frequency (from 0: ‘never/hardly ever’ to 4: ‘always’).

We used negative acts at the workplace as a measure of early or subtle signs of conflicts. We used a short version of the Negative Acts Questionnaire that addressed both work-related and person-related negative acts (Einarsen et al., 2009; Notelaers et al., 2006). The items were introduced by the following text: ‘Over the past six months, how often have you been subjected to the following negative acts at work?’ The items were responded to on five-point scales (4: ‘daily’ to 0: ‘never/hardly ever’). The scales were established as a mean score of the items responded to and high scores were equal to high level of negative acts.


                        Work-related negative acts was calculated as the mean score of four items which assessed experiences of: 1. Someone withholds information which affects your performance, 2. Being given tasks with unreasonable or impossible goals or deadlines, 3. Having key areas of responsibility removed or replaced with more trivial or unpleasant tasks, 4. Pressure not to claim something which you are entitled to by right (e.g. sick leave, holidays, covering of travel expenses).


                        Person-related negative acts was calculated as the mean score of seven items which assessed experiences of: 1. Having your opinions and views ignored, 2. Spreading of gossip and rumours about you, 3. Being ignored or facing a hostile reaction when you approach, 4. Having insulting or offensive remarks made about your person (i.e. habits and background), your attitudes or your personal life, 5. Being ignored or excluded, 6. Being shouted at or being the target of spontaneous anger (or rage), and 7. Practical jokes carried out by people you don't get along with.

All scales were established as a mean score of the items responded to and a high score was equal to good social climate and more negative acts. Cronbach's alphas were: social community at work: α = 0.78; social support from supervisors: α = 0.76; social support from colleagues: α = 0.73; work-related negative acts: α = 0.60 for and α = 0.78 for person-related negative acts.

At baseline and follow-up, we measured the perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours with one question: To what extend do you experience having influence on the arrangement of your working hours? The response categories were (from 0: ‘to a very small extent’ to 4: ‘to a very large extent’).

Sex and age were assessed at baseline from the central Personal Register-numbers.

Differences between the three intervention groups and the reference group at baseline were tested through analysis of variance (ANOVA) using IBM SPSS statistics software version 20 (Table 2
                     ).

To describe the covariance between the outcome variables, Pearsons rho was calculated for the psychosocial work factors.

Analysis of covariance models (ANCOVA) with repeated measures was used to analyse changes in the psychosocial work factors. In these analyses, we used Mixed procedures in SAS statistical software to perform the analyses (version 9.2). We analysed four models:
                        
                           i)
                           In Model A1 group (2 levels: 1 = reference group; 2 = intervention group [i.e. A, B and C collapsed]), time (2 levels: baseline and follow up) and the interaction term group * time were included.

In Model A2 we included perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours as a continuous variable (data from Models A1 and A2 are not shown in the tables).

In Model B1 we replaced group by type of intervention (4 levels: 1 = reference; 2 = intervention A; 3 = intervention B; 4 = intervention C) to test for differences in the effect in the three intervention subgroups A, B and C.

In Model B2 we included perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours as a continuous variable (data from Model B2 are not shown in the tables).

Due to Bonferroni correction, the associations were considered significant if the p-value for the interaction term (group * time) was <0.015. All models were adjusted for age and gender. We also calculated effect estimates and their 95% confidence intervals expressing the difference in the outcome between baseline and follow-up in the intervention group that could be ascribed to the intervention.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Number of workplaces per company and number of participants in the intervention groups (A, B, and C) and in the reference group are presented in Table 2. Between 82% and 91% of the participants were women and the mean age in the four groups ranged between 40 and 46 years. In intervention groups A and B and in the reference group about 40% of the employees perceived to a large or very large extent influence on their working hours. The corresponding figure for intervention group C was 53%. Perceived influence on the working hours increased from baseline to follow-up among employees in intervention A (31%) and B (18%), but not in intervention C (−6%) and the reference group (1%) (Fig. 1
                     ).


                     Table 3
                      presents a Pearson's correlation coefficient for emotional demands, quantitative demands, work pace, influence, job satisfaction, social community at work, social support from colleagues, social support from supervisors, work-related and person-related negative acts. The psychosocial factors were highly correlated with the highest positive correlation between emotional and quantitative demands (ρ = 0.436) and the negative correlation between job satisfaction and work related negative acts (ρ = −0.460).


                     Table 4
                      presents the raw mean scores for all psychosocial work factors. We found that, as a whole, employees in the intervention group perceived a slightly higher increase in social support from colleagues at follow-up than would have been expected from the changes in the reference group (Model A1: p for interaction = 0.01; effect estimate = 0.15, 95% CI: 0.04–0.27). Adjusting for perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours in model A2 did only marginally change this effect (p for interaction = 0.018; effect estimate = 0.14, 95% CI: 0.02–0.26). We found no other significant effects of self-rostering in models A1 and A2 (data not shown).


                     Table 5
                      presents the effect estimates adjusted for gender and age for all outcome variables together with p for the interaction term type of intervention * time as described in the section on statistical analyses (model B1). Model B1 showed that in intervention group A, self-rostering was associated with increased influence (effect estimate = 0.20, 95% CI: 0.05–0.34) and a decrease in social support from supervisors (effect estimate = −0.27, 95% CI: −0.47 to −0.07). In intervention group B, self-rostering was associated with decreased quantitative demands (effect estimate = −0.28, 95% CI: −0.4 to −0.15), decreased work pace (effect estimate = −0.23, 95%: −0.38 to −0.08), increased social community at work (effect estimate = 0.15, 95%: 0.03–0.27), and increased social support from colleagues (effect estimate = 0.23, 95%: 0.09–0.38). In intervention group C, self-rostering was associated with increased social community at work (effect estimate = 0.22, 95% CI: 0.06–0.37).

Model B2 showed that when adjusting for the changes in perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours, the effect of self-rostering on ‘influence’ in intervention group A, was no longer present (effect estimate = 0.02, 95%: −0.12 to 0.17). In contrast, the effect of self-rostering on social support from supervisors increased in a negative direction (effect estimate = −0.41, 95% CI: −0.61 to −0.21). We also found a negative effect of self-rostering on job satisfaction (effect estimate = −0.18, 95% CI: −0.28 to −0.07) and a negative effect on work-related negative acts (effect estimate = 0.10, 95% CI: 0.003–0.20). In intervention group B, the effect of self-rostering on quantitative demands, work pace, and social support from colleagues only changed marginally, whereas the effect on social community at work was eliminated (effect estimate = 0.11, 95% CI: −0.01 to 0.24). In intervention group C, adjusting for changes in perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours did not change the effect of self-rostering on social community at work.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

We studied the quantitative effect of self-rostering on emotional demands, quantitative demands, work pace, influence, job satisfaction, social community at work, social support from leaders and colleagues, and work- and person-related negative acts. Additionally, we studied whether this effect depended on changes in perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours.

Overall, the results showed that social support from colleagues increased significantly in the intervention group compared to the reference group, and adjusting for perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours did not change this result. When analysing the effect of self-rostering in the three intervention subgroups (i.e. A, B, and C), we found rather large differences between the subgroups: The only significant effect in group A was negative, also when adjusting for perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours. In contrast, self-rostering had a positive effect on psychosocial work factors in group B and group C. In group B, four factors showed positive effects and in group C we found one positive effect.

With respect to job demands, Lowden and Åkerstedt (2000) reported a decrease in staffing level and in the feeling of a calm and pleasant work climate, which may reflect increased work demands. We observed a decrease in both quantitative demands and work pace in one of the intervention groups (group B), but not in the two other groups.

Previous studies on job satisfaction show contradictory results: Pryce et al. (2006) found increased job satisfaction, and Lowden and Åkerstedt (2000) found decreased job satisfaction after introducing self-rostering or similar interventions. In our study, job satisfaction also decreased when adjusting for perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours in group A, but there was no significant changes in the two other groups.

Previous studies on self-rostering or related interventions reported an increase in social support, sense of community at work, and satisfaction with colleagues (Lowden and Åkerstedt, 2000; Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2011; Pryce et al., 2006). These previous results are partly supported by the findings in group B and C, as we found an improved social climate in terms of improved social support and social community at work.

The interventions in group A, B, and C were similar in that it was mandatory for all workplaces to make it possible for the employees to influence their work schedule by expressing their wishes about 1) their work schedule on a running basis, 2) days they wanted to work and 3) days they did not want to work. Still, different types of self-rostering were implemented and contextual discrepancies appeared which may contribute to the apparent differences in the effect of self-rostering on other psychosocial work factors.

In both groups A and B the main aims for introducing self-rostering were to increase employees' satisfaction and wellbeing and thereby ensure possibilities for recruitment and retention.

Nevertheless, whereas almost all employees at workplaces implementing intervention B were satisfied with the intervention, there were both satisfied and dissatisfied employees at workplaces implementing intervention A (Hvid et al., 2011). In group A, employees were encouraged to rethink their usual habits and attitudes towards organising their working hours around their private life and not the other way round. Thus, intervention A had comprehensive consequences for both the occupational and private spheres of the employees. Therefore this intervention may have been rather demanding for the employees, and it is likely that some employees have perceived the intervention as a threat rather than a potential improvement. At the same time, employees in group A experienced a decrease in the social support from their supervisor despite that the intervention successfully increased influence on the arrangement of the working hours. It has been argued that support from leaders may be essential for the success in workplace interventions (Kompier et al., 2000; Kristensen et al., 2005).

Adjusting for changes in perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours had the largest impact on the effect of self-rostering in group A, which indicates that the effect of the intervention relates, for example, to the implementation process and other contextual factors. In contrast, employees in group B experienced a smaller increase in their perceived influence on the arrangement of their working hours and they were less encouraged to rethink how working hours were planned than employees in group A. Accordingly, in group B influence on the arrangement of working hours was successfully increased without radical changes in organisation of work and private life, and the intervention was therefore easier for the employees to adjust to within the nine month from the implementation to the evaluation. In group C, implementing self-rostering was associated with increased social community, but the perceived influence decreased. The dilemma may be due to the implementation process of self-rostering. The intervention in group C was introduced primarily as a mean to obtain increased organizational flexibility, where continuously adjustment of the staffing could be optimized, and secondarily to give employees more influence on working hours (Albertsen et al., 2014). In order to adjust to wishes from the costumers, more employees were in the same period obliged to be on duty in the evening hours. A ‘‘buffer-zone’’ was introduced on each side of a preferred meeting time, e.g. if an employee wished to start work at 9.00 the scheduled starting time could be between 8.15 and 9.45, in which the management could choose to delay or postpone the meeting time and still count employee wishes as ‘‘fulfilled’’, and thereby increase employer flexibility (Albertsen et al., 2014). The consequence was more evening work, more unpredictability and variability in working hours, more problems combining work and private life, and a widespread employee resistance to the use of the IT-planning tool (Albertsen et al., 2014). It may be speculated that this widespread resistance increased the social community despite the decrease in perceived influence over working hours. All-in-all the employees perceived the new flexibility as employee unfriendly lean-and-mean management practice. In the literature, some indications of equivocal or negative effects have been shown if self-rostering were motivated or dictated by organizational interests (Joyce et al., 2010). To sum up, the motives for implementing self-rostering and the extensiveness of the changes may explain some of the differences in the effect of self-rostering between group A, B, and C.

Data from our qualitative interviews can add even more to our interpretation and understanding of the effects of implementing self-rostering. Introducing self-rostering may seem from outside to be a rather small intervention. However, the reflections and considerations mentioned at the initial interviews among managers and employees revealed that some workplaces might have underestimated how sensitive the working hour schedules were to the employees. Employers expected that the implementation of self-rostering would increase employee satisfaction and wellbeing and improve possibilities for recruitment and retention (group A and B) and optimise resources in relation to the needs of the company (group C), whereas the employees expressed both worries and positive expectancies to the implementation of self-rostering. For example, employees expected better work–family balance (Albertsen et al., 2014), more employee responsibility for the planning of work, both more and less influence at work and fear of less social cohesion and less social integration. However, we were not able to distinguish between worries related to self-rostering per se, worries related to process of change and worries about the implications for the work tasks.

In the initial interviews, employees also expressed worries about the social climate and the emergence of a negative atmosphere due to the implementation of self-rostering. For example, a) if special attention towards and considerations for some employees would cause bad feelings and conflicts, b) if colleagues became less flexible when an employee wanted to swap a shift, and also c) if the new system would push the employees to work shifts that they didn't want. Therefore, we expected that negative behaviour might emerge when employees were asked to take a larger responsibility for working hours scheduling. In this study, we found that work-related negative acts increased in group A only when adjusting for changes in perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours. No previous studies investigated self-rostering and negative acts. However, a recent study found a relationship between organisational changes and an increase in negative acts and bullying at work (Skogstad et al., 2007). Furthermore, previous research has found that stressful and poorly organised working environments may give rise to conditions resulting in negative behaviour (Hauge et al., 2007; Skogstad et al., 2011).

With more than 1000 employees eligible for inclusion at baseline, this is to our knowledge the largest intervention study on self-rostering among shift workers. Furthermore, the fairly high response rates at baseline (78.9%) and follow-up (73.1%) make it more likely that the results are representative of the studied population. In order to avoid potential bias due to seasonal variation questionnaires were issued 12 months apart. Since all baseline questionnaires were to be answered before the intervention, the interventions had been implemented for approximately nine months at the time of follow-up, which might have been too short. Most organisations contributed with workplaces to both the intervention and the reference group which may be regarded as a strength, but this allocation procedure also increased the risk of dissemination of interventions and ideas between workplaces in the same organisation. The workplaces in our study were not randomised to the intervention group or the reference group, and although we adjusted for group differences in psychosocial work factors at baseline by analysing changes, such group differences indicate a potential risk of bias due to unmeasured confounding. Furthermore, the call centre (group C) provided no participants for the reference group and the validity of the effect of self-rostering in this group may therefore be limited. The recruitment procedure ensured that only workplaces having the resources for and being willing to plan, finance, and implement self-rostering were included in the study. Furthermore, the procedure also ensures that the intervention can be implemented without research collaboration or interference. The inclusion criteria may have influenced the generalizability of the study results as it is likely that only well-resourced organisations choose to engage in the self-rostering on such premises.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The overall effect of implementation of self-rostering was increased social support from colleagues. Subgroup analyses revealed mixed effects in the group experiencing the most profound changes (A), mainly positive effects in the group with more moderate changes (B), and one positive effect in the group where the intervention was guided by organisational needs and interests (C). In conclusion, the implementation of self-rostering may have a positive effect on job demands and the social environment of the workplace, especially if the intervention does not comprise drastic changes of the organisation of the employees' work and private life.

Anne Helene Garde, Kirsten Nabe-Nielsen, Karen Albertsen, Henrik Lund, Helge Hvid and Åse Marie Hansen designed the study and collected the data in 2009 and 2010. Åse Marie Hansen managed the literature searches and analyses. Åse Marie Hansen undertook the statistical analyses and drafted the manuscript. Kirsten Nabe-Nielsen substantially contributed to the manuscript. All authors contributed to and have approved the final manuscript.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

The study was funded by The Danish Work Environment Research Fund (ref: 7-2007-09).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

