@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Using Failure Mode and Effects Analysis to design a comfortable automotive driver seat

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Automotive seating comfort is developed iteratively, which is expensive.


                        
                        
                           
                           DFMEA is proposed as a more efficient alternative.


                        
                        
                           
                           Paper includes a step-by-step guide for applying DFMEA to seat comfort development.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Word

Automotive seating

Comfort

FMEA (Failure Mode and Effects Analysis)

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Given enough time and use, all designs will fail. There are no fail-free designs. This is especially true when it comes to automotive seating comfort where the characteristics and preferences of individual customers are many and varied. To address this problem, individuals charged with automotive seating comfort development have, traditionally, relied on iterative and, as a result, expensive build-test cycles. Cost pressures being placed on today's vehicle manufacturers have necessitated the search for more efficient alternatives. This contribution aims to fill this need by proposing the application of an analytical technique common to engineering circles (but new to seating comfort development), namely Design Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (DFMEA). An example is offered to describe how development teams can use this systematic and disciplined approach to highlight potential seating comfort failure modes, reduce their risk, and bring capable designs to life.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Design Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (DFMEA) is an analytical methodology used in product development circles to ensure that potential problems have been considered and addressed. It was developed by reliability engineers in the 1950s to study problems stemming from malfunctions of military systems (Rausand and Hoylan, 2004). When DFMEA is used properly, it provides many benefits. These include: [1] improved product/process quality, reliability and safety, [2] reduced development time, [3] fewer late changes, [4] increased customer satisfaction, [5] shorter time to market, [6] early identification and elimination of potential product failure modes, [7] improved validation process, [8] reduced warranty, [9] documented evidence of due care, and [10] improved company image and competitiveness (“FMEA Benefits”, 2013).

A DFMEA is, in principle, a form of inductive reasoning. The intent is to supply strong evidence for (not absolute proof of) the truth of the conclusion. It stems from experience with similar products and/or usage conditions (i.e. examples that may include both successful and unsuccessful executions). Contrast this with deductive reasoning where a logically certain conclusion is reached from general statements. Ergonomists trained in the scientific method would recognize deduction as the approach through which hypotheses and theories are tested. This is not to argue that inductive reasoning has no place in the scientific method. The point, instead, is that hypotheses and theories are, often times, formulated using inductive reasoning.

Automotive seat systems are products that are developed to deliver four primary functions. Listed in no particular order, they are [1] be aesthetically pleasing, [2] be safe, [3] be supportive, and [4] be comfortable. Most seat design and engineering efforts are concentrated on these functions.

Product development geared toward delivering a good automotive driver seat is always a balance between these competing functions/demands. As one example, the safest head restraints are not necessarily the most comfortable. Franz et al. (2012) have realized this and are actively working to improve head restraint comfort. Eriksson (2005) describes how the incidence of whiplash associated disorders in rear-impact crashes can be decreased by positioning the head restraint closer to the head, in line with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) 202a (NHTSA, 2004). Unfortunately, having introduced several new vehicles that comply with FMVSS 202a, vehicle manufacturers are reporting an increased number of complaints from consumers regarding head restraint closeness (Kolich, 2010). As another example, highlighted by Kamp (2012), aesthetics compete with comfort in that highly contoured (i.e. stylish) seats may not always be the most accommodating (e.g. sport car seats do not always fit everyone).

Further complicating matters is the lack of consensus concerning an operational definition of automotive seating comfort. The task of creating a universally accepted operational definition is complex. Consider, for example, the fact that there is little agreement as to whether comfort and discomfort should be regarded as being a bipolar continuum or as composing two experiential dimensions. Branton (1969) assumed that an automobile seat is unlikely to impart a positive feeling to the sitter. That is, the best a seat can do is to cause no discomfort. From the same perspective, Hertzberg (1972) defined comfort as ‘the absence of discomfort’. Many of today's researchers have adopted this definition because, in the current environment, it is more straightforward to quantify discomfort than to measure comfort. Other researchers argue that seat comfort is a bipolar dimension that can be attributed to characteristics of design (Richards, 1980). Evidence to support this claim comes from the fact that occupants, when given the opportunity, rate their subjective responses across an entire continuum, ranging from positive comfort to discomfort. This is the school of thought subscribed to by researchers involved in designing comfort enhancing products (e.g. massaging seats).


                     Zhang et al. (1996) believe that discomfort and comfort are based on independent factors. Feelings of discomfort are associated with pain, tiredness, soreness, and numbness. Comfort, on the other hand, was based on feelings of well-being and the aesthetic impression of the seat. A reduction of discomfort does not necessarily bring about feelings of comfort. There is no connection between the two entities.


                     Shen and Vertiz (1997) have proposed that comfort and discomfort coexist as separate dimensions, with the possibilities for comfort increasing when discomfort decreases. They describe comfort as the result of a continuous behavioural process of decreasing discomfort. For example, a wider, more supportive seat may provide better comfort than a narrower seat, even though the narrower seat does not produce a different level of discomfort.

Specific to automotive seating and in support of his own research activity, Kolich (2008) defines comfort as a consensually held construct [i.e. a large group of representative people (aligned to the target customer/market in terms of demographics, anthropometry, and values) perceive the seat in a similar manner] possessing a static and dynamic component that can be manifested objectively (i.e. is consistently quantifiable). This definition was used to guide the remainder of the present work.

Relative to those responsible for seating comfort development (typically, but not exclusively, ergonomists), there appears to be a lack of emphasis on traditional engineering disciplines and the related analysis techniques that are foundations to product development. They have, historically, been substituted by elaborate subjective evaluation methods (executed in the form of clinics), which are applied at specific points in the development process. It is common, in seating comfort development, to conduct clinics that coincide with program milestones. An example of these milestones is provided in Fig. 1
                     .

The most effective/meaningful form of clinic involves a dynamic component (i.e. driving) and is referred to as a ride & drive. The most common embodiment involves highly structured questionnaires that direct occupants to assign feelings of discomfort to specific regions of the seat. The questionnaires, which typically contain numeric scales (e.g. 1 = very uncomfortable to 10 = very comfortable), yield subjective ratings that are translated, at the competitive benchmarking milestone (Phase I of Fig. 1), from a target seat to a program-specific performance requirement/specification. At all subsequent milestones (from concept demonstration to validation – i.e. Phases II to VI of Fig. 1), seats are built and evaluated using the same subjective evaluation approach. More specifically, the target seat is evaluated against the next generation seat until the new program seat meets or exceeds the comfort level offered by the target seat. The purported strength of this process lies in the A to B comparison of seats. A successful program (one that matches the performance of a target seat), since it takes approximately three years to execute, will be just as comfortable as the best seat in the market three years ago. This is, clearly, a problem.

There are other noteworthy limitations associated with the clinic process. For one, there is no research to suggest an appropriate ride & drive duration (i.e. how long does the evaluator need to sit in the seat to provide a meaningful assessment?). This is an important consideration because it impacts the number of prototypes needed and the number of evaluators (per day) that can reasonably be expected to participate; all of which affect cost, time, and data sufficiency from a statistical power perspective (i.e. confidence in the design recommendations). The interested reader is referred to Kolich (2008) for a more detailed discussion of the limitations.

The limitations produce an overly iterative development process. Prototypes are designed, built, evaluated with target customers, re-designed, re-built, re-evaluated with target customers, etc. in what can, for some ergonomists, seem like a never-ending loop. Even if the process could consistently deliver a comfortable seat (unfortunately, this is not the case), the tumultuous state of the global economy and the associated strain being placed on vehicle manufacturers has made this type of iteration untenable. Since good seats (i.e. seats that the customers and, therefore, vehicle manufacturers are satisfied with) are an exception and not the rule, it must be concluded that the current seating comfort development process is, at least, somewhat ubiquitous and in need of overhaul.

To improve the process, the industry has, moved toward augmenting the subjective clinics with various types of objective indicators. Inherent in this are two assumptions. The first is that the objective indicators have been correlated to subjective impressions. The second is that the objective indicators are more reliable and easy to apply.

Seat contour, for example, is amendable to characterization that is more “objective” in nature. Fig. 2
                      shows how the complex shapes associated with seating surfaces can be reduced to specific sections. It is possible to dimension each section and establish target values. What Fig. 2 does not demonstrate is the important relationship between the seat surface and H-Point (SAE J826, 1995). The H-Point represents the manikin's most important reference point; a joint intended to represent the pivot between the thighs and torso of a vehicle occupant. With the manikin installed in a vehicle seat, the location of the H-Point and the torso and thigh angles are key measures of the vehicle interior geometry. These measures are related to support, which, as described, is one of the four primary functions of a seat, and are audited during assembly operations. Many industry design practices, standards, and regulations (including those related to safety) reference the H-Point (e.g. SAE J287, 2007; SAE J1100, 2002; SAE J1517, 1998).

Initial softness, overall seat hardness, and hardness distribution can also be quantified. The methods are similar in that they all yield load vs. deflection curves of trimmed cushions, seatbacks, and head restraints. The principal purposes are, however, distinct. Each test uses a different sized indenter and load. The initial softness test is intended to replicate a customer touching the seat before sitting and as such the load is comparatively light and the indenter is small. The underlying notion is that hand feel is important to impressions of comfort. The overall hardness test is supposed to provide insight into the seated occupant's perception of softness (highest load and largest indenter), whereas the hardness distribution test provides a means of determining the uniformity/consistency of feel. More detail concerning these methods can be obtained from Montmayeur et al. (2007) and the Society of Automotive Engineers of Japan (JASO B407-87, 1987). Fig. 3
                      displays a typical load deflection machine equipped with a rigid butt form (which is a type of indenter). Sample overall cushion hardness output is shown in Fig. 4
                     . Target curves can be established, correlated to subjective ratings, and used to develop the program seat.

Three other objective indicators that have been used in seat comfort evaluations are pressure distribution (Kolich, 2004), electromyography (Ellgast et al., 2012), and occupied vibration transmissibility (Gu, 1998). Mergl et al. (2005) have correlated the contact forces between people and automotive seats (pressure distribution) to subjective impressions of comfort. Zenk et al. (2012) investigated the concept of “optimal load distribution” based on the relationship between the pressure on the seat and the discomfort felt by the seated occupant. Hartung et al. (2004a, b) have done extensive investigations into human sensitivity to pressure in seated postures and the associated reliability of these types of measurements.

Electromyography (EMG), as applied to seating, is taken as a measure of muscular load (usually of the back muscles). It has also been used to assess body posture and movement, in particular spinal postures. EMG has been used, among many other applications, to compare and contrast the effects of different lumbar mechanisms integrated into automotive seats (Kolich et al., 2001).

Transmissibility is especially interesting in that it has, for many years, been used as an indicator of ride quality. Transmissibility is the non-dimensional ratio of the response amplitude of a seat system in steady state forced vibration to the excitation amplitude expressed as a function of the vibration frequency (Griffin, 1990). The ratio may be one of forces, displacements, velocities, or accelerations. The most direct method of measuring the transmissibility is to compare the acceleration on the seat surface with that at the base of the seat. To accomplish this, standard practice is to acquire signals provided by accelerometers mounted at the base of a seat (e.g. floor attachment points) and at the interface between the seat surface and the human body. The transmissibility of a seat can be measured on any axis (e.g. vertical, lateral, or horizontal) or at any point (e.g. beneath the ischial tuberosities or between the human back and the seatback). Most of the available research involves only the vertical transmissibility from the seat base to the ischial tuberosities, as this is thought to be the primary axis affecting ride quality (Kolich et al., 2004; Lee and Ferraiuolo, 1993; Fairley and Griffin, 1986).

More recently, the focus of the automotive industry, including seat engineering, has shifted toward simulating the aforementioned objective tests and integrating digital human modelling (Paul et al., 2012a; Mergl et al., 2004). As an example, Paul et al. (2012b) showed that the interface between the human occupant and driver seat could be modelled in enough detail to determine the contribution of various seat components to hardness and pressure. Kim and Martin (2012) established an empirical database that could support a biodynamic model taking into consideration human activity to predict reaching performance under whole body vibration exposure. Marca et al. (2011) have recognized that, in order for this type of virtual work to significantly reduce development cost and time, it is necessary to “chain simulations”. That is, to expand beyond comfort-related attributes and into safety, durability, and craftsmanship.

With this as the back-drop, the objective of this paper is to demonstrate, via a working example, how and when a staple of engineering, namely Design Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (DFMEA), can be applied to the seating comfort development of a full-foam driver's seat (i.e. a driver's seat in which the trim and foam is placed on a “dead pan” and rigidly mounted to the vehicle floor pan; contrasted this with a seat system in which the trim and foam rests on top of a spring system of some type). The belief is that, by incorporating this systematic and widely applied/accepted analytical approach, ergonomists could decrease the excessive iteration that is part of the current development process (thereby reducing cost, time, and measurement error), minimize the likelihood of failure, and further the science of seating comfort.

@&#METHOD@&#

This section is, admittedly and purposely, not fashioned as a typical description of a methodology. Rather, it provides a step-by-step guide for how to apply DFMEA to the development of a comfortable full foam driver's seat. The blank DFMEA template, shown in Fig. 5
                     , is consistent with SAE J1739 (2009) and is the crux of this guide. The explanation of each step is augmented with a specific example. The intent is to provide some insight into the thought process and judgements involved in moving from the blank template (Fig. 5) to a populated DFMEA in Fig. 6
                      (i.e. constructing this type of DFMEA).

The first step is to define the Function, which must be written in a measurable/verifiable format. A description of Function should answer the question: “What is this driver's seat supposed to do?” Function is the design intent or engineering requirement of the driver's seat being analysed. As previously stated, there are four primary functions of a driver's seat. The DFMEA associated with this paper is focused on the Function, “Be comfortable”. This function should be entered into the first column of the blank DFMEA template shown in Fig. 5.

For each identified Function, the ergonomist, together with his/her team, must identify what can go wrong. In general, Failure Modes fall within one of the following categories: [1] no Function – seat not operational, [2] partial/over/degraded Function – not all of the function is operating, [3] intermittent Function – seat occasionally does not function, and [4] unintended Function – unexpected function occurs due to seat system interactions. It is important to realize that all Failure Modes must be directly related to the Function. The potential Failure Modes should be entered into the second column of the blank DFMEA template (Fig. 5).

With respect to the primary function of “be comfortable”, the potential Failure Modes are many and varied. They range from psychological issues (perceptions of appearance) to anthropometric issues (questions of fit) to biomechanical issues (postural) to physiological issues (tissue deformation and vibration induced disorders). The ergonomist and his/her team are urged to review internal clinic data and verbatims from past seating comfort development programs, as well as third party information from sources like J.D. Power and Consumer Reports, to arrive at a list of the most common Failure Modes. This information, particularly if it is gleaned from seats/vehicles targeted toward similar market segments/customers, represents a reasonable starting point for any seating comfort DFMEA. This was, in fact, done to arrive at the six potential Failure Modes recorded in Fig. 6.

Having documented the Failure Modes, the ergonomist (and his/her team) must now consider the Effects of each Failure Mode from the perspective of the seat system, the vehicle, the customer, and government regulations. The potential Effects of Failure should be entered into the third column of the blank DFMEA template (Fig. 5). Once the effects have been documented, they need to be evaluated for Severity. Severity is linked to the Effect of failure, and each Effect identified in the list must be assigned a Severity rating. Severity is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual DFMEA. Each Effect must be assigned a Severity rating using the Severity Rating Table (Table 1
                     ).

For Severity values of 9 or 10, where safety and/or government regulations are affected, the ergonomist/team should enter YC (an abbreviation for “Potential Critical Failure Mode”) in the Classification column of Fig. 5 and, if possible, eliminate the Failure Mode without analysing Cause. If not, the ergonomist/team should continue by following the process described in the remainder of this section. Note that, while all Effects are assigned a Severity Rating, only the highest value, for a particular Failure Mode, is entered in the Severity Column of the DFMEA template (Fig. 5).

The Effect of a seating comfort failure is, in this DFMEA, always related to a decrement that negatively affects customer satisfaction. To illustrate the point, consider the first row of the DFMEA in Fig. 6. The Failure Mode is “customer cannot physically fit into the seat/vehicle”. This is more likely in a sub-compact car than a van. If the customer cannot fit, he/she, obviously, cannot experience the seating comfort. As a result, he/she will not buy the vehicle. This is the Effect of the failure. Since this does not affect safety and/or a government regulation, the Severity rating is definitely not a 9 or 10. If the customer cannot fit into the seat/vehicle, the seat can, however, be considered inoperable. This satisfies the criteria for a Severity rating of 8 (Table 1).

The next step is to address the basic or underlying Cause that results in the Failure Mode. Potential Cause of failure is defined as the reason for the primary non-conformance and is the item that requires change to achieve permanent preventive/corrective action. It is an indication of a design weakness, the consequence of which is the Failure Mode. Said another way, Causes address Failure Modes, not Effects. Causes should be written as a design weakness that should be corrected. They are best described in terms of part characteristics, such as dimension, size, form, location, orientation, texture, hardness, tensile strength, appearance, coating, reflectivity, etc. When brainstorming potential Causes of each failure, the ergonomist and his/her team should begin with the following assumptions: [1] the seat is manufactured and assembled within engineering specifications and [2] the seat design may include a deficiency that may cause unacceptable variation, (e.g., misbuilds or errors in the manufacturing and assembly process).

After all the Causes of the Failure Modes have been identified and entered into the DFMEA template (Fig. 5), the ergonomist/team must determine how often each Cause occurs on a scale of 1–10. Occurrence can be defined as the likelihood that a specific Cause will occur during the design life (e.g., 150,000 miles or 10 years). Table 2
                      is used to estimate the failure rate for each Cause and determine the value that should be entered into the DFMEA template (Fig. 5).

When a Failure Mode/Cause combination has a Severity rating of 5–8 and an Occurrence rating of 4 or higher (so that the product of Severity and Occurrence – also known as Criticality rating – is greater than 32), a potential Significant Characteristic exists. In the classification column of Fig. 5, the letters “YS” (which is an abbreviation for “Potential Significant Failure Mode”) should be entered. At this time, the seat manufacturing team should, if possible, start considering special plant inspections to catch “YS” related failures.

The Cause/Mechanism of Failure represents the parameters that the ergonomist can manipulate to influence the Failure Mode. As an extension of the same “fit” example from Fig. 6, it is clear that there are two potential Causes. The first is specific to the size of the seat (i.e. too small/narrow). The second is related to the interior occupant package as indicated by various SAE J1100 (2002) dimensions for head, knee, hip, and shoulder room. In terms of Occurrence, the seat size is a less likely Cause of this Failure Mode than is the occupant package/roominess. Estimates, based on Table 2, are 2 per thousand seats (rating = 5) and ten per thousand seats (rating = 7), respectively. In both instances, because the Failure Mode/Cause combination has a Criticality rating of greater than or equal to 32 (i.e. Severity of 8 and Occurrence rating greater than or equal to 4), a potentially significant failure mode (“YS”) was entered into the Classification column of the DFMEA in Fig. 6.

It is the job of the ergonomist and his/her team to address all Causes by recommending design actions that will either eliminate the Cause or lower its occurrence. This gets into the Current Design Control column of the DFMEA template in Fig. 5. There are two varieties of Design Controls/features to consider. The first is “prevention”. The motivation here is to prevent (before a seat is actually built) the Cause/Mechanism or Failure Mode/Effect from occurring or to reduce the rate of Occurrence. These are design actions that can be ascertained from pre-existing Component-Level Design Guidelines or Internal Product Letters that specify the seat features and adjustability needed to satisfy the target customer's comfort needs. The second variety of Design Control is “detection”. Based on physical tests, like those described in the Introduction section of this paper, the aim is to detect the Cause/Mechanism of the Failure Mode after the seat is prototyped but before the design is released for production tooling (Phase VI of Fig. 1).

Detection rating is the ergonomist's/team's assessment of the Design Control's ability to identify Cause and/or Failure Mode. Detection, much like Severity, is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual DFMEA. Detection ratings (and the associated values to enter into the DFMEA template) are given in Table 3
                     .

The engineer/ergonomist then proceeds to compute the Risk Priority Number (R.P.N.), which equals Severity times Occurrence times Detection (S × O × D). There is only one R.P.N. for each Cause.

Continuing on with the “fit” Failure Mode, the Current Design Controls are Component-Level Design Guidelines for seat width and occupant package/roominess. Both sets of design guidelines could be market-segment specific. Fortunately, the likelihood of Detection by these Current Design Controls ranges from “Very High” for seat width guidelines (Detection rating = 2) to “Moderately High” for roominess guidelines (Detection rating = 4). This information was deduced from Table 3. The resulting R.P.N.'s are 80 and 224, respectively. The reader will note that 224 is the highest R.P.N. in the sample DFMEA (Fig. 6). For this reason, the associated Recommended Action, which calls for the creation of a Computer Aided Design (CAD) model to allow for early evaluation of the occupant package/roominess, would be prioritized over other actions geared toward addressing Failure Modes with lower R.P.N.s.

The purpose of recommending actions in a DFMEA (the last column of the DFMEA template in Fig. 5) is to eliminate potential Failure Modes or reduce their occurrence. The ergonomist/team should prioritize actions based on those Failure Modes with [1] Effects that have the highest Severity ratings, [2] Causes that have the highest Criticality ratings, and [3] the Highest R.P.N.s. Threshold values for R.P.N. should not be used.

In practice, the responsibility for implementing the Recommended Actions would, probably, be spread between the ergonomist/engineer (design guidelines and tests), the industrial designer (development of styling guidelines), the CAD engineers (for parametric models and templates), and virtual engineering analysts (for creation and implementation of simulation tools).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The stepwise process described above was followed for all Failure Modes outlined in Fig. 6. While only a sample DFMEA representing a relatively small subset of the potential Failure Modes associated with a specific automotive seating application (i.e. full foam driver seat), the reader should be struck by the assortment of different Effects, Causes, Current Design Controls, and Recommended Actions. This highlights the complexity associated with seating comfort development and explains, at least partly, why the current process is so iterative.

Quantifying the influence of the Recommended Actions relative to the current Design Controls is an important output of the DFMEA. The column titled Action Results” in Fig. 6 allows for this type of analysis. When summarized, as is done in Table 4
                     , the data demonstrate that the average Criticality and R.P.N. were decreased from 22 and 87 to 12 and 31, respectively. Creating a ‘component level design rule’ to address the ‘head restraint contacting the head/hair in normal driving position’ is the Recommended Action that stands to have the largest impact on the function ‘be comfortable’ (i.e. a 115 point reduction in R.P.N.). The smallest impact (i.e. a 15 point reduction in R.P.N.) comes from the ‘development of a parametric CAD model’ to deal with the seat ‘not holding tight enough during cornering’. This does not imply that the Recommended Action is not effective. It does, however, suggest that the Failure Mode/Cause combinations have comparatively low Severity and Occurrence ratings (low Criticality Rating).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This section is built largely on anecdotes derived from more than 15 years of experience in the automotive seating industry. It is intended to offer additional insight into how the presented DFMEA was used to uncover and then mitigate seating comfort design risks, with special emphasis on justifying the Recommended Actions and supporting the significant improvements (over the current iterative seating comfort development process) described in the preceding section. Also included in this section is a brief discourse concerning the limitations that the ergonomist should recognize before implementing this approach.

Internal Product Letters and Component-Level Design Guidelines, as Current Design Controls, are generally superior to Subjective Tests (ride & drives and other types of clinics) in terms of likelihood of Failure Mode detection (see Fig. 6). They are even superior to Objective Tests in that they move the industry away from requiring expensive prototype seats (and the ensuing seating comfort development iterations). Unfortunately, with the state of current knowledge/technology, there are Failure Modes for which a clinic cannot be avoided. Three examples, shown in Fig. 6, are: [1] “seatbelt does not fit”, [2] “head restraint contacts head/hair in normal driving position”, and [3] “seat is ugly, lacking style”. These happen to be the Failure Modes that produce among the highest R.P.N.s. Since it is impossible to address all design weaknesses at once, it is reasonable for the ergonomist and his/her team to focus their design activity on these Failure Modes.

To elaborate, the “Internal Product Letter”, which comes from the marketing team, is important because it specifies the features and adjustability needed to allow individual consumers, who have a broad range of preferences, to self-select settings that satisfy their personal seating comfort expectations. Seats that offer the most features and adjustability should, theoretically, accommodate the most customers. The cost implications cannot, however, be overlooked. While it is generally true that more is better when it comes to features and adjustability, in some segments, the customer may not have the means or the willingness to pay for added flexibility; choosing instead to live with/accept less comfort or accommodation. The intent of the Internal Product Letter is to reduce the Severity/risk related to the complaint (i.e. Effect of failure). The risk is one of delivering over (or under) specified seats to customers. The Internal Product Letter is the only current Design Control shown in Fig. 6 that impacts the Severity rating. All other current Design Controls serve to decrease, to various extents, the Occurrence ratings and the Detection ratings (and, thereby, the Criticality ratings and the R.P.N.s).

The Internal Product Letter is also listed as one of the Current Design Controls for the “head restraint contacts head/hair in normal driving position” Failure Mode. The Recommended Action, in this case, is to conduct even more thorough customer research. The rationale is that one can never learn too much about customer needs, wants, values, etc. This is, admittedly, a challenge given the immense pressure today's OEMs are under to reduce operating costs, which includes consumer research spending. If implemented, the expectation is that this action would decrease the Severity rating from 5 to 4 (the thought is that satisfaction should improve because the adjustability of the head restraint was matched to the needs of the target customer), the Occurrence rating from 8 to 7 (a reduction of 10 failures per thousand seats), and the Detection rating from 4 to 3 (Fig. 6). This amounts to a 76 point improvement in the R.P.N.

“Component-Level Design Guidelines”, in contrast to the “Internal Product Letter”, are usually documented in lists that are arranged according to specific commodities within the seat (e.g. trim cover, foam, adjustment mechanisms, structure, etc.), as well as occupant package parameters. The most effective and readily accepted guidelines are based on a specific case study, example, or lesson learnt (another form of inductive reasoning). Stakeholders like to know that their seat design is not doomed to replicate the cause of a Failure Mode encountered by a previous program. Many of the Recommended Actions, highlighted in Fig. 6, extend and further systematize the “Component-Level Design Guidelines” by creating Computer Aided Design (CAD) templates or occupant accommodation models, which could be introduced very early in the seating comfort development process. Instead of having the industrial designer release a seat surface model to the ergonomist for a design guideline check after having spent multiple days creating the shapes and developing an affinity for his/her concept, the industrial designer could be provided with CAD templates to guide the design in real-time. In this way, the industrial designer would immediately realize when his/her concept is in violation of a design guideline and likely to cause a Failure Mode.

In the context of “Component-Level Design Guidelines”, the Cause for which CAD templates would have the largest impact is “seat cushion is too narrow”. The expectation is that, in this instance, the implementation and institutionalization of CAD templates would decrease the Occurrence rating from 5 to 3 (1.5 failures per thousand seats) and the Detection rating from 2 to 1 (Fig. 6). In the end, this equates to a 56 point R.P.N. improvement.

Aimed specifically at improving the current iterative development process, there are two more noteworthy Recommended Actions shown in Fig. 6. The first is Seat Styling Guidelines. They are intended to address the “seat is ugly, lacking style” Failure Mode. These guidelines are estimated to have the largest impact on Occurrence rating. More specifically, seat styling guidelines would be expected to decrease the Occurrence rating from 8 (20 per thousand seats) to 6 (5 per thousand seats). A rating of six qualifies as a "Moderate: Occasional failure". While the aesthetic of the seat are known to influence comfort (Kamp, 2012; Branton, 1969), it would be difficult to decrease the Occurrence rating further given the highly subjective nature of this construct. The second is the creation of an Objective Test to address the "seatbelt does not fit" Failure Mode. This Recommended Action is expected to improve the Detection rating from Low (rating of 6) to High (rating of 3). This corresponds to the largest Detection improvement in the DFMEA (Fig. 6).

DFMEAs are primarily concerned with problem prevention. They are aimed at reducing dissatisfaction for all customers and stakeholders. As such, they are best done early in the development process (i.e. when the seat design has not yet reached final definition). The earlier the DFMEA is performed, the more cost effective will be the actions taken. Referring back to Fig. 1, a DFMEA can be used to support, if not supplant, the physical assessments done during Phase II, III, and IV. A significant benefit of the DFMEA is that it documents knowledge and systematizes the design process for use on future seating comfort development programs. This is especially true for those OEMs that are aiming to reuse components to manage costs (e.g. seat structures) while producing a specific seat feel (one that is consistent with a brand promise; sometimes referred to as DNA) across vehicles.

The ergonomist inspired to implement DFMEA in this way will likely be challenged. Questions will come from outside sources (Can comfort be defined/quantified? Is the DFMEA detailed/complete enough to be useful? Is there enough evidence to support the Severity, Occurrence, and Detection ratings?) and from within (Is the approach “scientific” enough? Does it align with classical/traditional ergonomic training?).

One can argue whether comfort can be measured and, therefore, verified. This is a prerequisite for the definition of Function, which is the first step in the creation of a DFMEA (Is “be comfortable” an appropriate primary function?). This debate could, very easily, serve as the subject of a separate dissertation. That said, the industry has evolved under the assumption that seating comfort is consistently quantifiable (hence Kolich's 2008 definition); that consumers distinguish between vehicles and make purchase decisions based partly on this attribute. OEMs have put together elaborate evaluation protocols to quantify the subjective perception of seating comfort. They have gone so far as to attempt to predict, using various statistical techniques, subjective ratings that are published by various third party organizations (e.g. J.D. Power, Consumer Reports, etc.).

The ergonomist will wrestle with how much detail to include in the DFMEA. That is, how to define the boundaries. The decision to focus this DFMEA on the seating comfort development of a full foam driver's seat was based on simplicity of demonstration. A full foam driver's seat, versus a seat with a sprung suspension system, offers one less variable to manipulate. While this can limit the ergonomists tuning capability, it does serve to eliminate a potential Cause(s)/Mechanism(s) of Failure. Consider, for example, the following Failure Mode from Fig. 6: "customer sinks into the seat too much". In addition to the foam being too soft and thick, this Failure Mode could stem from the springs being overly compliant. Beyond this example, some may question whether the sample DFMEA would apply to a passenger or rear seat. Others may view the lack of reference to thermal/climate comfort aspects as a glaring omission. For insight into contemporary approaches in this area, the interested reader is referred to Oi et al. (2012).

Internal to the ergonomist, an automotive seat that accommodates the conventional 5th to 95th percentile anthropometry might be viewed as a success. This would, in the context of DFMEA, produce between 50 and 100 comfort related complaints per thousand customers. According to Table 2, this occurrence rate would be categorized as a very high probability of failure (i.e. persistent failure). The accommodation question is complicated by the fact that not all anthropometrically accommodated customers will be satisfied; just as not all anthropometrically dis-accommodated customers will complain (Kolich, 2003). Anthropometric accommodation is just one element of seating comfort development. This philosophical disconnect may, at least partly, explain why DFMEA, as an analytical tool for product development, has not traditionally been employed by ergonomists charged with seating comfort development.

The ergonomics of seating, obviously, extends beyond automotive applications. Noro et al. (2012), for example, have studied how to design microscopic surgery seating to better conform to the users' needs. Office (Groenesteijn et al., 2012) and aircraft (Vink et al., 2012) seating remain active and worthwhile areas of exploration. The hope is that this paper has stimulated researchers in these areas to adopt/experiment with the DFMEA approach.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Automotive seat comfort, which is, often times, practiced by individuals with a background in ergonomics, has developed as an applied science. Traditional research in this area has been motivated by a practical concern for the health and well-being of the customer and the view that comfort is a product differentiator in the eyes of the end customer. However, the discipline has a tendency to be reactive to current needs, rather than proactive. Convention, among ergonomists, is to attempt to design comfortable automotive seats using a trial and error approach, which renders the discipline difficult to practice. Using empiricism and intuition is not, in and of itself, problematic. The issue, instead, is that the design process is not systematized. Every seat program is a brand new endeavour; even though automobiles have included seats since their inception. From this perspective, this paper demonstrated that a widely applied and accepted engineering analysis technique, namely DFMEA, could have a valuable role to play in seating comfort development (specifically) and ergonomics (generally) by supplying strong evidence for the advantages of particular design alternatives. DFMEA also offers a mechanism through which groups of ideas/principles could be integrating into testable hypotheses and theories. The quest to prove or disprove the theories could then drive research agendas at automotive companies and their partners. Theory is understood to be an essential underpinning of any discipline that aspires to be perceived as a true science, including the burgeoning science of automotive seat comfort.

The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of Ford Motor Company.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

