@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Holistic sustainable development: Floor-layers and micro-enterprises

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Needs to give more attention to microbusinesses as a specific entity.


                        
                        
                           
                           How OHS is inextricably linked with the survival and development of the trade.


                        
                        
                           
                           The active solutions sought with floor layers broaden current views on SD.


                        
                        
                           
                           The import of approaching MiEs as a complex system rather than individual elements.


                        
                        
                           
                           Need for developing strategies combining both material and structural solutions.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Sustainable development

Occupational health and safety

Design

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Attracting and retaining workers is important to ensuring the sustainability of floor laying businesses, which are for the most part micro-enterprises (MiE). The aim of this paper is to shed light on the challenges MiE face in OHS implementation in the context of sustainable development. Participative ergonomics and user-centred design approaches were used. The material collected was reviewed to better understand the floor layers' viewpoints on sustainability. The solutions that were retained and the challenges encountered to make material handling and physical work easier and to develop training and a website are presented. The importance of OHS as a sustainability factor, its structuring effect, what distinguishes MiE from small businesses and possible strategies for workings with them are also discussed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The aims exposed in the Brundtland report (1987) commissioned by the United Nations in 1983 and advised by the Rio conference of 1992 to achieve sustainable development (SD) are based on three pillars: environmental, social and economic. Mainstream thought associates the concept of protection of the environment with the protection of natural resources and spaces, but it could also be considered in terms of industrial risk, including human health. To meet these aims, enterprises must develop competencies and tools to do things differently. An abundance of solutions are proposed in the literature, however, they are mostly aimed at large enterprises. Little has been done for small and medium sized enterprises (Heidrich and Tiwary, 2013) even though they account for a significant portion of employment in several countries (Micheli and Cagno, 2010; Kearins et al., 2010). Also, numerous studies in various fields have shown that the size of an enterprise is a major determinant and that models or tools proposed for large enterprises may not be suitable for smaller sized enterprises (Parker et al., 2009; Bos-Brouwers, 2010; Eakin et al., 2010; Klewitz et al., 2012; Trianni et al., 2012, 2013).

The definition of what constitutes a very small, small, mid-size or large business varies from one country to another. In research, the commonly accepted classification criterion is the number of employees. The European Commission (2005) set the delimitation between large and mid-sized enterprises at 250, but 500 is also used as a criterion in the literature. In Canada, an enterprise with less than 100 employees is considered as small (Government of Canada (2015)), while in Europe, the number retained is 50 employees (European Commission, 2005); some authors propose 20 employees (McVittie et al., 1997). In the USA, this number varies extensively, depending on the industrial sector (US Small business Administration, 2015). Thus, SME (small and medium-sized enterprises) cover a broad spectrum of enterprises and the boundaries that distinguish them are sometimes blurred. In the same way, MiE are beginning to be distinguished not only from SME, but from small-sized enterprises as well. The number retained in studies is below 5 or 10 employees. Interest to study and understand the dynamics of MiE is on the rise, because of their weight in the economy of many countries and their impact in certain sectors (e.g., retail).

For a few years now, we have been working with entrepreneurs from the flooring sector. This sector is essentially made up of micro-sized enterprises. The entrepreneurs were very concerned with the issue of sustainability, with their own sustainability in fact, in regards to maintaining and renewing human capital, both of which entrepreneurs perceived as dependant on the capacity to find and implement solutions to improve their workers' situation in matters of occupational health and safety (OHS). Indeed, the possible transformations identified and recommended in previous ergonomic studies (Gonella et al., 2007; Michaud and Lortie, 2003) did not lead to the implementation of active solutions. Therefore, the basic purpose of the current project was twofold: (i) to identify active solutions having a good probability of success, meaning they would improve OHS without compromising work efficiency, and at a reasonable cost, and (ii) to develop a methodological reflection on how to work with micro-sized enterprises to achieve a long-lasting impact.

Through this case study, the aims of this paper are: (i) to shed light on the challenges these micro-enterprises face as to the implementation of OHS measures in the context of sustainable development, (ii) to expose their point of view as to sustainably issues and, (iii) to clarify if and how micro-sized enterprises may be differentiated from small enterprises or SME.

Mainstream literature is centred on pro-environmental performance and its related tools (ecodesign, eco-innovation, sustainable production systems, product life cycle management, eco-efficiency, green supply chain management, eco labels, etc.), and a good amount of consensus has been reached as to the main factors that prevent the implementation of SD in SME, that is to say, their lack of resources be it financial (they are vulnerable to market fluctuations, have limited access to investments and funds, and limited training budgets), human (in terms of variability, competency and awareness about SD stakes and tools), technological (in particular, information and communication technologies, as well as SD technologies), and networking with other actors in SD or their supply chain (Bos-Brouwers, 2010; Prendeville et al., 2011; Klewitz et al., 2012; Oduoza and Smith, 2012; Frey et al., 2013; Heidrich and Tiwary, 2013; Hernandez-Pardo et al., 2013; Trianni et al., 2012, 2013).

There is also a good consensus on what differentiates SME from large-sized enterprises, in the way they conduct business. At the operational level, SME focus more on short-term objectives and daily activities to achieve rapid production/service. Their communication channels are more informal, less structured and deployed throughout the organization, which gives them at some level a competitive advantage. SMEs are seen as more flexible: the proximity with upper management and the horizontal organizational structure would allow them to quickly adapt to changes and innovate (Bos-Brouwers, 2010; Kearins et al., 2010; Klewitz et al., 2012; Hernandez-Pardo et al., 2013). They are closer to their customers and they focus more on niche markets or local or regional needs (Bos-Brouwers, 2010; Kearins et al., 2010; Battaglia et al., 2010). Their perception and attitudes toward their environmental responsibility - an issue that has been less explored though - also appears to be different: They believe, most notably, that they have little impact on the environment and that such concerns are of little interest for their strategies and planning (Cassells and Lewis, 2011). Most authors propose to set incentives, and sometimes deterrents, to favour SD and OHS practices (Goetz, 2010; Frey et al., 2013).

Innovation processes towards SD have also received some attention in the literature. When SME innovate, it is mostly incrementally rather than radically (e.g., improved technological processes; Bos-Brouwers, 2010; Klewitz et al., 2012; Frey et al., 2013). Innovations as well as the adoption of SD tools are initiated by upper management - as long as the individuals are dynamic, visionaries and emphasize on long term objectives - (Bos-Brouwers, 2010; Kearins et al., 2010).

Studies isolating small-sized enterprises are still rare. They accentuate some of the previous characteristics listed, rather than basic differences. For example, SE appear again more constrained by the time factor, and more focused on their customers and economic survival (Samujh, 2011); they essentially think in terms of responsibility towards their employees, customers and local community rather than in terms of corporate social responsibility (Battisti and Perry, 2011). They appear singular essentially in regards to the source of information privileged, that is to say, their accountant, the members of their families, their professional associations and their supply chain (Samujh, 2011).

To the best of our knowledge, the literature on SD in the context of SME has shown little concern for OHS performance, aside from being briefly mentioned. Yet, OHS in the context of SME has retained some attention. One can say that the factors or attitudes evidenced through the studies are quite the same as those exposed in the previous section, namely the lack of resources whether economic, technological, human or organizational (Gahan et al., 2014).

Overall, in OHS literature, what authors insist on may still pertain more to the issue of information and the lack of expertise to tackle OHS challenges (Waddoups, 2011), especially in small-sized enterprises: risks are underestimated, accidents are under-reported, employees have little training in OHS and OHS is perceived as either a personal concern or as difficult to prevent (Hasle et al., 2009). They appear reluctant to consult experts in OHS for information and the current structures in OHS are not suited to their needs (Eakin et al., 2010; MacEachen et al., 2010). As observed previously with the issue of SD, close informal social relationships dominate (MacEachen et al., 2010) and the most effective way to reach them would be through personal contact (Gahan et al., 2014).

Floor layers (FL) can be divided into three independent sectors: wood floors, tiles (e.g., ceramic, terrazzo) and flexible (e.g., carpet, linoleum). The project targeted specifically the flexible floor layer sector, which can be sub-divided into two areas - institutional/commercial vs. residential - with two main classes of material, provided in rolls or tiles: carpets and resilient (e.g., vinyl, linoleum, sport surfaces). The sector is made up essentially of MiE. For example, in 2013, 1 198 FL were officially registered in the construction industry and 564 businesses were registered at the Quebec building authority (CCQ, 2015). FL may work for different enterprises. According to the actors of the milieu, these numbers are conservative. Roughly, that amounts to 1 600 FL. They estimate that a dozen businesses employ 10 persons and more, the largest one employing 30 persons (in this paper, we will refer to the sector only by the acronym MiE).

The building sector is regulated by a specific law and unionized (five unions). The vast majority of FL come under a single union. A worker needs a competency card to work on a construction site (commercial or institutional). Two other actors oversee the FL sector: a federation grouping the retailers, manufacturers and floor layers (FQRS), and the OHS prevention mutual (chosen by the federation). A last actor is the Construction OHS Joint Association, a union-employer joint parity organization.

The work is difficult and demanding and has been the object of attention since almost 40 years. The prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders is still high (Dale et al., 2015). The most documented problems are knee disorders, namely chronic conditions such as hygroma and arthrosis (Jensen et al., 2000; IIAC, 2010), associated with two main risk factors: force of impact when using the knee kicker carpet stretcher and knee compression stress associated with the kneeling position (Battacharya et al., 1985; Jensen and Friche, 2008). Back injuries and disorders are less documented, but reputed to be as prevalent as knee disorders (Burdorf et al., 2007). The main risk factors reported are the handling of heavy loads and the absence of trunk support when working in a kneeling position, especially when applying glue. Upper limb disorders or injuries are less documented, but doubtlessly significant (Michaud and Lortie, 2003).

Participative ergonomics and user-centred design approaches were used. FL were involved throughout the process: (i) in the defining of solutions and problems to tackle and, (ii) during the process of devising solutions. The prevention mutual counsellor had an extensive knowledge of the FL network. She was in charge of the meeting logistics and was the relay person between the researchers' teams and the FL and all persons related to this sector. She identified and recruited the participants, according to the needs expressed by the research teams. In the same way, one researcher attended most meetings and assumed a relaying role between researchers and OHS stakeholders. Regular coordination meetings were held as well as regular debriefing sessions. A follow-up committee, composed of various stakeholders (Federation, Mutual, Construction OHS joint association, Institute of Research in OHS) was also active in this project.

Depending on the problem or solution targeted, different interview/interrogation tools and methods were used, ranging from open individual interviews, in the tradition of grounded theory, to questionnaire interviews, focus groups or small work groups. Open innovation was privileged in the design of technological solutions. This included a succession of consultations with different FL. They were usually met in small groups of three to five workers. A total of 25 FL and 15 people working with them were involved. At first, meetings with workers were audio recorded, but eventually they were video recorded to capture their non-verbal communication. As the transcription of meetings was very time consuming and expensive, written notes progressively replaced systematic recording or transcription.

Fourteen solutions proposed in the literature or patented were submitted to 15 FL (including two wives involved in their spouse's business), as well as a list of 20 problems or situations identified from a set of interviews conducted in the past (Michaud and Lortie, 2003) The material solutions presented were grouped according to their goal or object of improvement (see Table 1
                        ). For example, the proposed trowel mounted on a telescopic pole (Jensen and Friche, 2008) was intended to enable the worker to apply glue while standing. For some solutions, various models were also presented (e.g., four models of a seat on wheels were shown). For each solution, there was, first, an open discussion about what they knew on the solution and its pertinence. After which, each FL indicated on an individual questionnaire if he had already tried the solution, if it was worthy of being retained and improved, and if they wanted to be involved. At the end, they were asked to pinpoint their three top priorities. As shown in Table 1, solutions that could reduce strain on the spine associated with kneeling work was seen as a priority, as well as the improvement of a particular piece of the handling equipment, the linoleum winder.

The same procedure was used for a list of problems or difficult situations representing five classes of problems. This list was also proposed in order to get a better picture on the evolution of the sectors. FL were asked to assess the potential for improvements (+, ++, +++) and level of priority. As shown in Table 1, two issues dominated: roll handling and training. It was decided that improvement of handling equipment would be a part of the overall solution. Training was retained for further exploration to see if and how the situation could be improved. In fact, in most situations listed, the problem cannot be solved without the involvement of the stakeholder. For example, improvement of building site conditions is dependent on the building site manager, while the size of the rolls is manufacturer and retailer dependent. Thus, FL frequently invoked their relationship with others, and the capability others have for taking into account the FL' needs.

The third issue addressed, was the pertinence or not of developing a professional FL web site. FL saw the web site as being pertinent, however without seeing how they could contribute. It was retained for its potential to connect FL both among themselves and with stakeholders.

Three work teams were formed combining expertise in ergonomics and either design, engineering or knowledge management and transfer and various FL or stakeholders. Two teams worked on material solutions and the third team worked on non-material issues.

The team worked on the design of a multi-position and multi-functional trolley that could make handling activities easier. In a first step, the team met with FL to document their specific needs and user experience. FL were asked to bring the different equipment used. Existing lifting and transportation trolleys were reviewed. The team explored the possibility of merging the different functions needed by the workers into one device and developed four, gradually improved, digital proposals. The concerns of the users were captured through discussions with FL (n = 6) around digital proposals. The fourth digital proposal was materialized, analysed and improved with two more digital proposals.

The team worked on solutions that could reduce the amount of or make kneeling work easier, with a focus on an industrial design know-how interface and user-centred design approach. Whether effective solutions could be identified was unclear since FL assessed most of the solutions presented as uncomfortable or dysfunctional. The team worked on five artefacts, but finally retained two as achievable at a reasonable cost and in a reasonable delay: a thigh pad and a personal hovercraft. The first meeting was an open discussion on the equipment they brought in and on an American device bought by the research team. Three FL participated in assessing five potential solutions to clarify ergonomic issues. Successive meetings were organised around successive generations of prototypes (up to three generations). Seven FL were involved.

The team involved the prevention counsellor. In the training issue, successive meetings with people involved in the training process (trade school teachers, trainers working for manufacturers, federation, union and building commission officers) were organised to map out what was dysfunctional, the main determinants, and the possible solutions. At each meeting, the interlocutor(s) were asked who they thought the next pertinent person(s) to meet would be. In the case of the web site, the development process alternated between two focus group meetings (n = 5; n = 10) and work meetings with various people (e.g., teachers, representatives from the federation of floor layers).

The material collected through the various meetings was reviewed to extract the points of view of our interlocutors on sustainability issues, namely: how they associate sustainability and OHS, and to what other elements they associate the sustainability issue. This analysis was conducted in a mapping perspective, at once vertical and transversal. In a second step, the material was confronted with what is known and said on sustainability issues in the literature, in particular in regards to small or very small enterprises. The perspective adopted was comparative, with a focus on dissociating what may be singular to the FL sector vs. the micro-sized business as determinant.

In the first section, what is documented in the literature on SME is contrasted with what is experienced by the FL' micro-enterprises. Their point of view on various sustainability issues is presented in the second section.

Many issues raised in the literature have little to do with the context of FL. FL enterprises offer a service. They are usually employed by a retailer (floor material sold includes installation), and sometimes by a general contractor. Manufacturers develop the products. In matters of environment, even if FL have opinions about the impact of different products or procedures on sustainability, they have no say as to the choice of floor materials chosen or products developed.

Also, retailers usually work with the same FL enterprises in the long run and the work is territorially anchored and local. As part of the supply chain, FL have very little influence. Thus, corporate social responsibility (CSR) and supply chain as discussed in the literature does not apply to their situation.

Innovation-wise, manufacturers constantly innovate to keep market shares and develop ever greener products. Installation protocols are increasingly product specific, complex and more demanding, all of which has an impact on work and training needs. However, for FL, there is little potential for process, product or organizational innovation as described in the literature. FL may innovate, but in other ways: in finding - and investing -, in more efficient installation equipment, and in homemade equipment design, adapting or transforming existing ones. During this study, we noticed that many FL entrepreneurs met were keen on finding innovations. Most of the material solutions proposed had already been tried or were known.

Nevertheless, most barriers and limitations exposed in the introduction were found relevant to this sector. The level of education of owners, usually a high school degree followed with a trade diploma, is lower than in some sectors or countries. Spouses play an important role in the business' management, an issue seldom explored in the literature. As a construction sector, it is characterized by complex subcontracting relationships (Mayhew and Quinlan, 1998).

FL have a point of view on sustainability, but it is expressed through their own reference system.

Equipment and material sustainability is associated with robustness, ease of maintenance and versatility. It is associated with quality, and quality is seen as a major part of professional identity. An equipment unused or under repair is costly. During the designing of solutions, FL insisted that parts more exposed to wear should be easy to remove (e.g. wheels on trolleys, cushions and surfaces in contact with the ground and glue). In the case of small tools, it is a matter of balance between the time needed for maintenance (cleaning and upkeep) and the final cost. For example, FL usually buy cheap trowels and discard them to avoid fastidious and time-consuming cleaning. Finally, versatility is seen as a quality that extends the sustainability of equipment. FL are ready to invest in quality equipment if it can be used for different purposes. In the case of the trolley, it was an important request.

The impact of the quality of the material installed was also frequently evoked. FL resent working with low quality material, because it gets easily damaged. Working with material of quality is part of being recognized as a professional; it is a source of pride. This is an important issue for the attraction and recruitment process. Also FL expressed a constant preoccupation with anything that could damage the material (or leave marks): wheels (size, tire hardness, design and shape), winder rolls (number, material), angle of the trolley plate (to avoid friction when unfolding the rolls). Retailers are also very sensitive to this issue since they are responsible for the quality of the finish. This also makes it possible to limit waste (related with competency). FL suggested examining the percentage - and cost - of material wasted, due to damage caused during installation.

Access to a competent work force is seen as a basic condition to ensure a business' sustainability. For manufacturers as well as retailers, lack of competency means damaged material, customer dissatisfaction and increased claims. For FL, it is also associated with the respect they are seeking. Presently, in addition to one year in a trade school, acquisition of full status as journeyman requires 6000 h of officially registered work. The past chain of knowledge transmission within families is no longer enough. The emphasis on university diplomas as a key to success and social consideration has emptied professional schools, as shown in Table 2
                           . Many FL said they felt disregarded, as though they were some kind of failure when choosing this trade. Professional counsellors and social workers are said to suggest trade schools to individuals with life difficulties, without a good understanding of this type of work or motivation, using mainly a financial incentive (a potential for good pay). The rate of retention of newcomers is therefore low, around 20–25%. Prospective FL are not prepared to cope with a physically demanding job. Officials try to fill the gap by recruiting immigrant workers, but the latter do not usually immigrate with this career perspective in mind.

Small employers think it is crucial to find ways to make the work less physically demanding and less hazardous, to become more attractive to increase recruitment and retain workers for as long as possible. Experienced workers are seen as an assurance of quality and are needed to train apprentices. On the other hand, solutions that promote OHS must not compromise work efficacy, efficiency and budgets. Three related determinants were evoked:
                              
                                 (a)
                                 
                                    Equipment and OHS: Solutions presented (see Table 1) were rejected for three main reasons. (i) Body discomfort or pain: For example, systems on casters (e.g., mobile knee support) are very demanding on ankles and feet to maintain stability when working. Chest supports (when working in a kneeling position) were experienced as painful after 1 h of use, the main flaw of the design being it concentrated pressure on the sternum. (ii) Work quality impaired: For example, one solution proposed a trowel mounted on a telescopic pole; it enables the spreading of glue while standing and FL appreciate working in a standing position. This solution was said to be acceptable with carpets, but not for resilient material (small particles would not be detected and would leave bumps with soft coverings). Thus, we worked on different ideas such as sensors, but solutions were complex to implement and not fully convincing for FL. (iii) Lower efficiency: Equipment needs to be brought to the work site and an elevator is not always available. The multiplication of tools and equipment is cumbersome. Moreover, because of the risk of theft on building sites, workers avoid bringing too many tools.


                                    Training and OHS: Competency – and know-how – is seen as a protective factor in OHS. Not knowing one's work is associated with an increased risk of injury, especially when manipulating tools and equipment. Owners said that today, young workers are better trained and more aware of the importance of having adequate equipment. They are also more prone (than older workers) to protect themselves and demand better OHS conditions.


                                    Organizational factors and impact of decisions made by others: The work conditions of FL depend on many influential stakeholders. FL are, most notably, very dependent on those managing the construction site, the other trades and their capacity to understand and consider their needs. As they are more or less one of the last groups to intervene, they must absorb the consequences of any delays (e.g., cluttered space, dust, interference with other trades still there, pressure to go fast). Construction site management has been identified as having a major impact in relation to OHS. They also depend on retailers and manufacturers (e.g., size, weight of rolls).

The intention here is less to describe solutions developed than to show the complexity of solutions needed and the importance of integrating FL throughout the entire process to achieve adequate solutions in a context of sustainable development.

In a survey conducted by the FRSQ (2010) on services needed (n = 96, retailors and FL), the two top services pointed were: ‘professional qualification of FL’ (64%) and ‘representation with government, unions’ (53%). At the question on the activities needed, two choices dominated: sharing of solutions (61%) and valorization of the FL′ trade (54%). Information and training in OHS was picked up only by 20% of respondents. So, three of the items pick-up referred implicitly to the training issue which provides a good example of the complexity of interrelationships between the factors and the actors that need to be involved to develop sustainable solutions.
                           
                              •
                              Ministry of education: It is mandatory to complete a four-year university program in education to teach in schools, even in trade schools. A FL recruited as teacher has 10 years to complete the program. This limits teacher recruitment. The ministry establishes the program structure, its format and duration.

School board: Budgets are established based on the number of students registered. The setting of a pre-admission process - to meet candidates and reorient those unfit for this type of work or having false expectations - is in conflict with the budget issue.

Social network: Social workers and educational counsellors are said to put the focus on financial needs, meaning obtaining a good salary after one year of study. Yet, the list of competencies produced by the education ministry is not enough to decide on a job orientation.

CCQ, unions: The laws regulating the construction sector were made for large building sites. Financial contribution to training is mandatory. Until now, trials to implement a permanent education system have failed for various reasons. But FL have succeeded on the salary issue: for years small owners asked to lower the salary of apprentices to take into account their real level of qualification (hourly rates that are too high affect hiring and training of new FL), and for a progressive salary for journeyman. They won their case in 2014 (journeyman salary now starts at 65% of the full status and progresses with each 2 000 h recorded).

Building Authority: If the attribution of a full companionship certificate is process-controlled, it is not the case for the attribution of a licence to start a business in floor layering. This is currently a point of contention.

Manufacturers: Usually, manufacturers have their own training programs, focussing on their products. Some will make mandatory the acquisition of their certificates, especially when there is little training available. They cooperate well with trade school teachers and furnish most of the material used for practical assignments.

Teachers: They promote the organization of on-the-job training and would like to see the setting of training contracts with small employers, but this is not easy in the context of micro-enterprises.

North American context: The system of trade schools is different from one province to the next and from the USA. The system of trade schools is more developed in Québec. In other provinces, training can last a few weeks. In the USA, most training structures are private and under the supervision of manufacturers. There is pressure to somewhat standardize training to facilitate worker mobility.

In this case, the establishing of a good diagnosis to fix priorities and develop a realistic solution is a difficult task. The current solution in progress is the organization of a forum with stakeholders, deciders and well-informed FL.

The lack of handling equipment adapted to the needs of FL was identified by the FL as one of the top issues. Rolls are stored and transported in a vertical position - the flat surface of the back of a trolley used is inconvenient for the curved surface of rolls - and they must be moved into a horizontal position to be unrolled. When material is more fragile, as in the case of vinyl, workers must control any movement the roll undergoes. Some rolls weigh up to 400 kg and are over 2 m long. Resilient material must also reach a specific temperature before it can be unrolled. Different equipment is used. For smaller rolls, regular trolleys may be used to move the roll and then tilt it onto a small portable reel set on the ground. For larger and heavier rolls, heavy load trollies must be used (and driven down from the truck). A large tipping winder mounted on wheels may be used, but this particular equipment requires enough space to move about. The optimisation of space in the truck is an important issue. FL wanted equipment taking as little space as possible, and above all, that could reduce the amount of handling by decreasing the number of transfer operations, in particular from one piece of equipment to another. They hoped for a safe and effortless tilting system. Everything that made handling easier and safer was seen as concomitant with efficacy and efficiency. During the design process, other health issues were raised such as the electric shocks given by the metallic shafts when unrolling the floor material. FL showed great attention to small details they felt could damage material and produce waste.

The equipment designed provides the following features: roll versatility (it can handle transportation and unwinding of all types of rolls), manoeuvrability (dimensions and manoeuvrability similar to a regular trolley), effortless tilting function (hydraulic jack allows the handling of rolls from quasi-vertical to horizontal position by one worker instead of two); dual position (it can be used on two wheels, and two assisting wheels can be used during transport or deployed to allow a horizontal cart position for more versatile carrying). It is possible to remove the unwinding mechanism and use the trolley as a classical trolley or a cart. The first physical prototype built served to refine the engineering design. Two digital prototypes were delivered subsequently.

Working in a kneeling position is tough for the knees and the application of glue is demanding for the back. Available chest supports are uncomfortable and inhibit upper limb work. New knee protectors on the market are appreciated, but with some reserve. In the course of the discussions about these issues, FL insisted on the importance of supporting the leg and ankle, to reduce stress to the knee (in particular torsional), an aspect never mentioned in literature on FL ergonomics, to our knowledge. All seating systems were rejected as incompatible with their work. However, the idea of introducing short pauses by sitting back onto the thigh was seen as an idea to explore to reduce fatigue. The device developed has two parts. One makes it possible to maintain the ankle a few centimetres from the floor, and the second, to sit on the thigh. With the first prototype, FL agreed with the concept: this was a challenge because FL had rejected the thigh support available on the market. It was decided to design it as an add-on that could be fixed on an existing long knee protector and to make it with aluminium (lightweight and recyclable material). With the second prototype, FL concentrated on the comfort issue and with the next one, on its effect on work performance. Field trials showed us how very sensitive FL were to the question of the control of the body position and its balance, in various tasks and conditions (including clothing). They were sensitive to small variations in dimensions and angles. None of these dimensions are in data banks.

This content has been developed to answer various needs expressed through the meetings (e.g., exchanges of solutions and information, better representation of their work and competency). Several rubrics cover issues linked with equipment sustainability issues raised in section 3.2.1. For example, a rubric is dedicated to the equipment and tools available on the market. FL can vote and comment on them. The aim is to help in eliminating inefficient and badly designed tools. The posted comments could be helpful for designers and manufacturers. Our initial suggestion was a screening of tools with experienced FL to establish a list of recommended - and commented - items. FL clearly stated their opposition to any idea of recommendation: a choice is seen as something personal and contextual. However, they wanted to know the opinions of others. A trading section aims to optimize life cycle. The resource directory proposes other small or micro-enterprises that can offer quality service for the repair, transformation or even development of equipment and tools, with the possibility to vote and comment on the services.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The solutions described in this paper need to be refined. At the present stage of the process, we cannot presume their success and impact. Although MiE were very predominant, the participation of FL at the head of a small-sized business was significant, because they can more easily come away from a building site. So, there is a bias of representation. Results and reflections reported in this paper are also tinted by the context of the intervention, which, on the other hand allowed for elements and rational to emerge that are not necessarily explored in the literature. One first such element that strongly emerged was the reference to the trade more than to the business in itself. It is the sustainability of the trade as source of pride that was basically evoked. It was seen as linked with the upkeep of a healthy workforce and the ability to attract new workers. Anything that could facilitate the work and decrease its physical demands was seen as favouring both. It was also associated with the upkeep and progress of trade competency - and its recognition - and, the ability to provide quality work. Also, one can say that MiE owners share common interests with their employees because they share the same trade. Overall, the perspectives expressed were different from what is found in the literature on the sustainability of human resources or human capital treated through CSR.

In the first section of the discussion, we review the place of OHS as a sustainability factor to highlight its structuring value. In the next section, we situate our results and observations in regards to what is known in the literature, in particular to bring out what may be specific or not to MiE. The last section proposes a reflection on key elements that should be taken into account in the perspective of sustainable development.

The way MiE owners associate OHS to the transversal plane is coherent with the conclusions of Cagno et al. (2014) on SME. Professional recognition and the building of a professional identity are seen as key factors toward: (i) achieving the credibility that would gain them more respect and, (ii) improving their chances of being heard by people who have an impact on their work conditions, including other building trades. There is a hierarchy among the trades and an informal scale of esteem; FL would like to improve their position. Credibility is also a matter of image. Equipment used, competency requirements and control of the profession are all seen as having an impact on their image: it means that not just anybody can do their job. Retailers and manufacturers, as shown by the federation's survey, also support this view, because a job poorly executed is costly. Building a professional identity is also perceived as a way of promoting solidarity, and this in turn could help in avoiding the price-cutting associated with the arrival of new competitors, which affects both employee OHS and the business' health. Price-cutting also makes it impossible to pay adequate wages, and encourages under-the-table dealings. Therefore, MiE owners are enquiring as to some regulation of this, but suited to their needs and context (e.g., progressive hourly rate).

At a second level, FLs associate OHS issues with equipment, material, work conditions on building sites, organisational factors, but also credibility, competency and training. Overall, the recognition of their FL skills, but also of their knowledge of the craft, difficulties or problems and, the opportunity to be heard and to be understood are key issues for them. This means that part of the solution to develop and implement is structural and transversal. In this project, the organization of a forum on training and the development of a website may be seen as two structuring activities directly related to these issues. These are tools that can help the sector to better structure the trade and strengthen cohesion, in a context as shown, where a multitude of organizations are involved. The possibility of helping cement all the actors involved around common interests and to anchor a culture of communication can help create winning conditions to improve conditions in this business. If this strategy succeeds, other trades could develop a similar approach. Hence, this structuring effect has a sustainability value. Therefore, economic and social objectives may be seen as connected, since workers and small employers are mutually dependent on one another in the obtaining of interesting contracts.

Our observations correspond with what is reported for small enterprises: stronger relationship with internal and external stakeholders (Fisher et al., 2009); importance of taking into account the subjectivity and individuality, synergies and closer relationships between people; association of the concept of social capital “with the intangible assets of reputation, trust, legitimacy and consensus” (Battaglia et al., 2010); The benefits evoke greater productivity, less absenteeism or turn over, greater loyalty, etc. (Jenkins, 2006; Solomon, 1992). However, the border employer-employee appears more porous with MiE. It is often a partnership relationship, the “boss” being the FL who is more comfortable with management and the search for contracts. So, the classification criteria for MiE ‘less than 5 employees’ retained in Australia or New Zealand (Collins et al., 2009) may be pertinent in terms of research.

Besides, most attitudes evoked in the literature can be applied to MiE owners: trend to solve problem on the spot with little consideration for the long-term effect (Hasle et al., 2009); lack of sensitivity toward environmental issues, as they think that they have little impact (Cassells and Lewis, 2011); driven more by internal stimuli than external (Van Hemel and Cramer (2002). But this case brings something different to light. These attitudes reflect mainly a perception of powerlessness as a single unit. They are actors in a play they neither write nor stage. Indeed, the only aspects under their control are their efficacy and efficiency, basic conditions of survival. Nevertheless, as shown, FL are sensitive to long-term issues, but they rely on the collective to seek long-term solutions. So, they may need less incentive than social conditions to achieve better sustainability, and develop active solutions.

We think it important to distinguish between two levels of analyses: individual MiE and the collective MiE. It is necessary for understanding their dynamics as a network and with their partners, when developing appropriate strategies. They constitute a corpus. In focussing only on the identification and listing of factors rather than on the understanding of the interrelationships and dynamics, we impair our capacity to provide proper interpretations or right decisions. The factors identified, when reintroduced in surveys, may lead to misleading conclusions. For example, in a survey conducted among SME, the latter picked up a communication problem with the education board as the main reason of their difficulty in recruiting qualified workers: The programs were maladapted, because they do not know their needs (Statistic Canada, 2013). As shown in this study, the training issue is far more complex than a communication problem between the school board and the milieu.

Four main issues are raised in the literature: access to information, networking, the need for intermediaries and innovation.

OHS and SD both face this problem. Various strategies have been proposed in OHS, of which, involving MiE accountants (Hasle et al., 2010; Jensen et al., 2001). This solution addresses the MiE as an individual, rather than as part of a collective. In our case, the prevention mutual counsellor was not only a priceless source of information, but also had the capability to mobilise FL, because of her credibility. It has been well documented in studies in health that people trust first and foremost their local information sources, because they are more confident in their capability to take into account in the decision process the contextual factors, i.e. their singularity (Lortie et al., 2013).

It is seen as an essential means to tackle the information barrier, to create and support a local network of knowledge and competencies, to inform enterprises (Trianni et al., 2013), to reduce the sense of isolation (Samujh, 2011), to coordinate efforts for developing collective answers or actions (Battaglia et al., 2010). We found here useful to distinguish internal (between MiE and their immediate partners) from external (with stakeholders and decision-makers) network needs.
                              
                                 (a)
                                 Internal: The website was developed as a networking tool, to favour the sharing of information between FL, the setting of collective benchmarks and the building of professional identity. While the purpose was not strictly related with an SR issue, it corresponds to Von Weltzien Hoivik's (2011) proposal that links embedding SR as a learning and knowledge creating process. As explained in Section 4.2.4, several rubrics were directly concerned with sustainability aspects. So, it is important to expand networking aims.

External: Interaction with external actors (customers, research institutes, authorities) is seen as a means for increasing the innovation capacity of SME for sustainability-oriented innovation (Klewitz and Hansen, 2014). This study shows that MiE hold a significant amount of knowledge capital in regards to ‘what is needed’ or what is dysfunctional, two knowledge areas often underestimated. They provide a systemic point of view on solutions often missed by experts. If the role of external actors is not well balanced with insiders, strategies and solutions promoted may be inefficient. However, the difficulty resides in the organisation of interactions and the setting of an adequate representation framework. It is particularly true when decision-makers and their relays are implicated. In the case of training, people complained that consultation tables were in fact relay tables where ‘officials’ exposed the framework - sometimes quite narrow - within which contributions would be accepted. The main challenge is to find a way to connect a multitude of actors outside the usual representation scheme. The actual representation systems – such as unions – are based on individuals. Without specific representative frameworks, MiE have little leverage. The organization of representation is a question that would need more attention.

Several authors see them as a key issue (Klewitz et al., 2012; Samujh, 2011; Estensen et al., 2014). Klewitz et al. insist in particular on the role of the public intermediary as an essential push factor to trigger innovation in SME. Norwegians have put in place an interesting system of competency brokers playing that role (Program for Regional R&D and Innovation; VRI). Its role is to assist companies wishing to apply for R&D knowledge to facilitate innovation and value creation. In our experience, it is very difficult for MiEsto develop material solutions without such intermediaries, to translate their knowledge into active solutions. However, a MiE is too small a unit, and this idea must be adapted to the context of a collective rather than individual demand. The role of intermediary or broker in the context of MiE needs to be better understood, developed and supported.

Through this study, we experienced two situations in which the logic of innovation were in conflict. In the development of material solutions, the logic of competition, and its ensuing need for exclusivity as required by industrial production, collided with the culture of OHS, which is collaborative. Improving OHS may have a positive impact on sustainability and economic viability; but when seen as a commercial product, open and collaborative approaches are put in check.

As we saw, the sustainability of equipment was considered as important. This matches with the results of an inquiry conducted with 150 manufacturing firms who, when questioned on their contribution to SD, pointed out that their products were designed to be easy to repair or to last longer (Cassells and Lewis, 2011). However, SD is also associated with material innovation, which aims to make out-dated the previous innovation.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study shows that FL place the stakes of sustainability in terms of their trade, where OHS and competency issues are interrelated. As individuals, they think and manage their business on a short-term basis. As part of a collective, they think on a long-term basis. As a unit, the micro-sized enterprise is effectively an element to examine in helping to understand the factors and attitudes involved in SD issues. However, as shown in studies, in the same way that employer and employees share common interests, MiE also share common interests when they belong to a same sector. They may be seen as an entity and when developing solutions and strategies to improve OHS as well as to foster SD, this characteristic, very specific to the MiE environment, must be taken into account. MiE must be targeted as a system, as a group, rather than as individuals.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was supported by the Institut de Recherche Robert-Sauvé en Santé et Sécurité du Travail 
                  2013-0035, Montréal, Québec.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

