@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Analysis of the resilience of team performance during a nuclear emergency response exercise

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A cognitive task analysis (CTA) performed during a nuclear disaster simulation.


                        
                        
                           
                           The simulation was part of a national emergency response training.


                        
                        
                           
                           We describe sources of resilience and brittleness in the response activities.


                        
                        
                           
                           Understand cognitive activities' dimensions to identify crisis management patterns.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results indicated strengths and weakness in nuclear emergency response exercises.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Nuclear emergency response

Simulation exercises

Resilience

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The current work presents results from a cognitive task analysis (CTA) of a nuclear disaster simulation. Audio-visual records were collected from an emergency room team composed of individuals from 26 different agencies as they responded to multiple scenarios in a simulated nuclear disaster. This simulation was part of a national emergency response training activity for a nuclear power plant located in a developing country. The objectives of this paper are to describe sources of resilience and brittleness in these activities, identify cues of potential improvements for future emergency simulations, and leveraging the resilience of the emergency response system in case of a real disaster. Multiple CTA techniques were used to gain a better understanding of the cognitive dimensions of the activity and to identify team coordination and crisis management patterns that emerged from the simulation exercises.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Recent disasters such as the Columbia loss, the 9.11 terrorist attacks, the Katrina hurricane, and the Fukushima nuclear accident were high-surprise events in which organizations were caught in response situations where previous training, established tactics, or well defined procedures simply do not exist. Under such situations, new failure conditions challenge existing emergency plans, safety systems, and organizations, and achieving high levels of performance in responding to these challenges in high risk and complex systems requires resilience, including the ability to act in situations of surprise (Hollnagel et al., 2006).

Large-scale socio-technical organizations that use risk technologies attempt to enhance their capacity to deal with disasters by practicing emergency response using simulations. Domains in which safety is paramount, like aviation, chemical, and nuclear plants use simulation because simulations of accident or abnormal situations are the only way to prepare people to deal with events/situations that are unlikely to occur in reality. Simulation offers opportunities to design new technologies (Carvalho et al., 2008), to train operators, to test existing procedures (Carvalho and Oliveira, 2009), and in the case of emergency response simulations, to prepare agencies and people to better respond to a real emergency. Some types of simulation can offer high fidelity, even in a controlled environment, to better reproduce rare and critical situations. Such simulations have been widely used to test Nuclear Power Plants' (NPPs) emergency response plans, as part of their licensing requirements.

Simulation training can present opportunities for organizations to work on human factors, such as group dynamics, and to explore how the organization might respond to hitherto unelaborated conditions or surprises. It is still often the case, however, that training and simulation exercises seek principally to show and develop individual competency to deal with prescribed and well defined emergency situations, not addressing human factors and response to surprises specifically (Malakis and Kontogiannis, 2008; Takahashi and Kitamura, 2013).

According to Klein (2001) team coordination is the attempt by multiple entities to act in concert in order to achieve a common goal by carrying out a script/plan they all understand. Good team coordination is paramount for an adequate nuclear emergency response. Large-scale socio-technical organizations might be more resilient if they used the opportunities provided by these exercises and simulations to more effectively capture learning and to facilitate a deeper understanding of the cognitive work and team coordination in the domain (Malakis and Kontogiannis, 2008; Voshell et al., 2008).

A critical aspect of these run-throughs is practicing teamwork and coordination over multiple groups in different facilities as the simulated disaster evolves and cascades (Woods and Hollnagel, 2006). In addition, how well teams work together and the difficulties they encounter in these simulated cases provide information about sources of resilience and brittle points in the emergency response system. The deployment of an Emergency Plan requires complex cognitive and collaborative skills, and a variety of Cognitive Task Analysis (CTA) techniques can be used to extract information about these skills from the resources available (Woods and Hollnagel, 2006; Crandall et al., 2006), and to learn more about the domain challenges, which is our focus in this research.

In Brazil, we are applying CTA techniques to the nuclear incident emergency response exercises to investigate emergency management issues, such as the decision-making of the emergency response coordinator (Voshell et al., 2008). We used the CTA approach to identify sources of resilience and brittleness, analyzing how the team handled the emergency response simulation exercise. Identifying the sources of resilience and brittleness helps provide indicators of the emergency response system's level of resilience and can suggest design directions such that future emergency response simulation exercises help enhance team performance by including group dynamics and exploration of responses to surprises in the exercise plan.

Since the first atomic reactor created by Enrico Fermi in 1942, safety aspects are an important part in the development and operation of Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) (Martin, 2002). The defense-in-depth (D2) safety approach used in NPPs aims to avoid the liberation of fission products to the environment in case of a major nuclear accident (WNA, 2008). Emergency response measures are included under the D2 approach and it must be taken when all physical barriers fail, resulting in the liberation of radioactive materials into the environment. In a nuclear accident scenario, with radioactive release to the environment, emergency measures are taken and people must be evacuated from the vicinity of the plant, as occurred in the recent Fukushima nuclear accident in Japan. Therefore consistent emergency response systems must be included in the overall safety approach of the nuclear power plants, and to deliver a license for NPP operation, government and regulatory authorities would have to assess the plant emergency response systems, as well as they access the physical safety barriers.

Emergency response measures and plans aim to handle the potential damage that a nuclear disaster may cause, and response agencies must be prepared and capable to stabilize an accident, protect life and the environment, and be prepared for command, control and coordination of a response in order to coordinate efforts toward a common goal (FEMA, 2006). One of the most important measures to respond to a nuclear major accident is the External Emergency Plan (EEP), where local governments, agencies and people concerned work together in a previously defined place, outside the Nuclear Power plant, to follow the evolution and consequences of the accident, to classify and distinguish local ranges of accidents and to take measures and procedures to mitigate the consequences of a Nuclear accident for people and for the environment.

The nuclear emergency management regulations in Brazil are similar to the worldwide regulations and the EEP is centered on the notion of Emergency Planning Zones (EPZs), circle areas within 3, 5, 10 and 15 km of the nuclear power plant in which people might be more seriously and immediately affected by direct radiation exposure, shown in Fig. 1
                        . The EEP has different measures according to the severity of accident and different actions according to each EPZ. In case of radiation release the EEP has urgent measures to remove the population from the EPZ-3 (in a radius of 3 km from the NPP), and from NPP-5. The EPZ 10 and 15 are considered environmental control zones, where urgent protection measures (such as population removal) are not planned, and in these zones there is only environmental monitoring. The Civil Defense estimates that there are 300 people in EPZ-3 ad 14,640 people in EPZ-5.

Responsibility for the communication of risk and the formulation of emergency plans in the EPZ is left to the utility company running the nuclear complex, in conjunction with state and local police, fire, and civil defense authorities, and the local Civil Defense is responsible by the EEP conduction. The plans must be approved by the Brazilian Nuclear Regulatory Commission (CNEN). Another important regulation involves classes of Emergency Action Levels (EALs), that is, levels of response to an accident. These levels range from minor events involving no public danger (Unusual Event) to progressively more serious occurrences that may require immediate response actions (Alert, Site Area Emergency and General Emergency). EALs are declared by plant operators and elicit responses by emergency planners, who recommend response actions to people living in an EPZ. Only in case of General Emergency – actual or possible (immediate) indication of radioactive material release – the population of EPZ-3 and eventually of EPZ-5 will be removed from the zones.

@&#METHOD@&#

Our aim in observing the nuclear emergency response simulation exercise reported in this article was the identification of sources of resilience and brittleness in its team coordination activities. Resilience can be very widely defined as the capacity of the system/organization to successfully handle disturbances, including the surprising ones (Woods and Hollnagel, 2006).

Our research method can be described as a case study research that uses CTA techniques in its analysis. Yin (1984) defines the case study research method as an empirical inquiry that investigates an actual phenomenon within its real-life context, when the boundaries between phenomenon and context are not clearly evident, in which multiple sources of evidence are used.

We collected data during the simulation of a nuclear power plant emergency where the External Emergency Plan was employed to test and better prepare agencies and people for a real event. The exercise we observed included both coordination and field activities. Our observation, however, was limited to the coordination activities component carried out within the confines of the Nuclear Emergency Coordination Center. The NPP where the simulation was conducted and where the studies took place is located in ANGRA dos REIS in Brazil, and besides the normal challenges that already exist in emergency response situations, we faced new challenges related to the basic local infrastructure and to the need to organize the interplay of different agencies that normally do not work together. This Nuclear Power plant is located quite close to a high-density population area, and the protection of people living in the neighborhoods and the preservation of the environment are the main goals of the External Emergency Plan.

The EEP was originally developed by the Department of Civil Defense over 10 years ago. This plan has been modified and revised multiple times by the agencies involved to become more complete and consistent. Today the EEP is a guideline to facilitate the integration of each of the 26 agencies' individual Emergency Plans. The EEP is a synthesis of threats, vulnerabilities, scenarios and role assignments of each agency in a real nuclear accident. The 26 agencies in attendance for the simulation are listed in Table 1
                         below.

The asterisks (*) next to participants in Table 1 indicate members of the Nuclear Emergency Response Simulation Exercise Planning Committee, which is responsible for the activities listed in Table 2
                        .

The emergency response simulation we observed is part of a national exercise program that takes place each year and is based on scenarios developed by the Department of Civil Defense to test the response capabilities of the multiple agencies. The simulation starts when the simulation coordinator sends in the first scenario, a warning of a small emergency in the nuclear power plant, to the Emergency Call Center. Following this first message the EEP is employed to gather the representatives from all the agencies together. A conference room previously prepared for the simulation receives the representatives of each agency, as described in the EEP. After everyone gathers, multiple scenarios will be sent to the EEP coordinator, in pre-defined intervals. The simulation observed in this work occurred in 2007 from 8:00 am until 5:00 pm with a small break for lunch. During the exercise development, situations become more complex, starting from local problems up to a nuclear material release into the environment, in the last part of the exercise. All through the different situations that occurred during the simulation, including unplanned events, the participants were aware of activities as realized in the field, and based their decision-making on their awareness of those contexts. Participants' actions had real consequences on the ground, leading to event cascades, requiring further decisions. The presence of real deployed resources contributed to the realism of the simulation.

Data collected came from direct observations and electronic records in audio and video of the participants' interactions during the exercise. The exercise participants, and especially the emergency coordinator, were encouraged by the simulation exercise plan to talk aloud about their actions (when possible) to facilitate the understanding of the thought processes during the analysis phase. This approach generated verbal reports of task performance to allow further thought process analysis (Ericsson and Simon, 1993). The simulation records include almost 4 h of video recordings of interactions between the participants, including problem-solving and decision-making situations. This video was transcribed and translated to English to be analyzed by the research group. To clarify and complete elements that were not clear in the recordings and in the official analysis report of the EEP experts on the EEP simulation were consulted over e-mail.

To examine the cognitive work in the case studied, a Protocol Analysis was used. The Protocol Analysis is a rigorous method for eliciting verbal reports of thought sequences as a valid source of data on thinking (Ericsson and Simon, 1993). Protocol analysis and content analysis (Krippendorff, 1980) are also referred to as a general data analysis procedure, where each statement in the protocol is coded according to a model of reasoning that reflects the goal of the research. This model of reasoning has coding categories that can include expressions of goals, observations, hypotheses and decisions, leading to analytic and representational formats that can reveal important aspects of cognitive process (Crandall et al., 2006; Carvalho et al., 2006).


                        Crandall et al. (2006) defined the CTA analysis and representation phase as a process of exploration and discovery to locate what is important in the data set, and a moment to organize and structure those discoveries in order to communicate them well. In this study, data analysis and representation were conducted by means of a timeline analysis. In this timeline analysis, all the activities of the people in the room involved in the EEP simulation were represented in a chart, to create a “longshot” view of all the simulation activities. To represent the various activities of the teams, categories of actions were created based on separate analyst review. Common categories were then labeled to express analyst agreed upon key moments of the simulation, as well as to simplify the representation for analysis. These categories are listed in Table 3
                        .

The timeline used to represent the simulation activities is built on two axes, with time on the vertical axis and activity subcategories aligned along the horizontal axis. Whenever necessary to allow the representation of different groups engaging separately simultaneously in activities in some given sub-activity category that column's width is multiplied accordingly. The horizontal space allotted to any team engaged in any category of activity is constant. Since simultaneous activity was observed in some activity categories but not in others, some activity category columns are wider than others. The intersection of the minute lines with the activity category columns (subteams) results in regular sized rectangles that were colored in, or not, depending on whether or not that action was observed at that time. The color used to fill the rectangles representing observed actions is a function of the agency participant involved in the action. For example, between 10:30 am and 10:31 am of the simulation, activities involving Whispers, External Communication, and Request for Silence were observed, and therefore rectangles corresponding to actions in each one of those subcategories at 10:30 am were filled in. Due to camera limitations, the recordings did not register the activities of many individuals that participated in the simulation exercise, and consequently the timeline does not represent these individuals' actions either. Only actions of individuals appearing in the videos were represented in the timeline. Fig. 2
                         shows a sample of the structure of the timeline analysis from 10:30 am to 11:00 am.

The timeline used to represent the simulation activities was built on two axes, with the vertical axis representing time and the horizontal axis representing actions. The column widths of actions are not constant. What is constant is the horizontal space reserved to represent teams or participants engaged in the given action. Whenever necessary to allow the representation of different groups engaging separately simultaneously in some given action, the column width of that action was multiplied accordingly. The intersection of the minute lines with the action and (when applicable) team columns results in regular sized rectangles.

Due to camera limitations, the recordings did not register the activities of many individuals that participated in the simulation exercise, and consequently the timeline does not represent these individuals' actions either; only actions of individuals appearing in the videos were represented in the timeline. Each participating agency with observed actions was color coded. The color coding key has been withheld to preserve participants' anonymity.

Depending on whether or not a given action was observed at a some given time, the corresponding rectangle was colored in or not. The color used to fill the rectangles representing observed actions is a function of the agency involved in the action. For example, during the simulation, at 10:30 am actions involving Whispers (Conversations in Small Groups), External Communication, and Request for Silence were observed, and therefore the rectangles corresponding to occurrences of each one of those actions at 10:30 am were filled in Fig. 2.

The simulation exercise's events were numbered sequentially. The numbers that can be seen in some of the action rectangles refer to the initiating event for that sequence of actions, e.g. event 16 is the event that triggered two of the actions used in the example mentioned above, and it followed through to an action at 10:31 am (Explaining Situation). For analysis and comprehension purposes, comments on specific important actions were added to the rectangles that have a red marker on their top right corners. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

After numbering all the simulation events and coding their related actions accordingly, analysis turned to sequences of actions triggered by each event to examine what actions occurred together, in search of action patterns. We ignored pair order because of observation limitations, which in many cases rendered the actual order indeterminate. The occurrences of each action pair were tallied and are presented in Table 4
                        . The numbers at each intersection of this table tell how many times the actions in the intersection's row and column occurred together. The table's lines (and consequently columns) were then reordered so as to bring forward the more frequently occurring ones. This reorganization made it easier to identify some specific patterns of the simulation concerning team organization, information and actions flow.

Agents' recurring actions or repeated behavior sequences, seen in different events or scenarios (actions sharing the same event number in the timeline), were considered patterns. Using the higher tally values in the event pairing tally table discussed above, the more likely candidates for recurring behavior patterns were identified, and then analysis returned to the timeline and the transcript for more precise identification.


                        Fig. 3
                         shows an example of an identified action pattern. This sequence of actions appeared a number of times, associated with different situations during the simulation. The example (event 55) describes team behavior upon receiving a new problem or item of information. In this pattern, the first order of business was to seek common grounding (Klein et al., 2005) and mutual situation awareness (Carvalho et al., 2012) by holding simultaneous discussions in small groups, questioning and explaining the problem throughout the team. This is necessary, since a requirement of collaborative work is that agents' actions be predictable by all other members of the team, and this in turn requires common grounding. Following on the discussion stage, decisions were made and communicated.

The example presented above is but one case. Several different mechanisms and action patterns were identified. Associating events and action patterns was an important step toward understanding the reasoning process of the team. Patterns identified in this context are important, as they can shed light on the decision-making processes employed by the team and according to Naturalistic Decision-Making approach, in critical situations, most decision-making is based on pattern recognition (Klein, 1989; Carvalho et al., 2006).

Another analysis was carried out concerning interactions between people on the team. For that, the distribution of the members of the External Emergency plan was represented schematically by circles in the same formation as their distribution in the External Emergency room. Again, there are some restrictions concerning the capture range of the recording equipment. Arrows of various thicknesses representing the number and direction of interactions among the participants were superimposed on this representation. Fig. 4
                         presents this analysis where individual names are not provided because they are undisclosed. However, there was an analysis based on the role each person had on the simulation and their participation in the simulation. This analysis was important to detect how the distribution of people in the room interfered in the communication among the team, to have a better view of the information flow, to identify overloads and bottlenecks in the simulation and to identify the most important people involved in communication, decision-making activities in the simulation, and also to identify unsurprising or surprising patterns, function based grouping of interactions, and so forth. This is an interesting avenue of investigation but is beyond the scope of this article. It may be the subject of a forthcoming paper depending on associated clearance issues.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The exercise we observed attempted to simulate a nuclear emergency response situation, including both coordination and field activities. Our observation, however, was limited to the coordination activities component carried out within the confines of the Nuclear Emergency Coordination Center.

Our aim was the identification of sources of resilience and brittleness in the team coordination activities during the EEP simulation exercise. The sources of resilience and brittleness identified based on the data analysis are of different natures. Some of them concern the design of the exercise itself (realism, dynamics, simulation development, validity), some concern to the challenges of the nuclear emergency response coordination activities.

There were important efforts from the emergency team coordinator on briefing/debriefing dialogs to achieve a common ground and mutual situation awareness, as seen in Fig. 5
                        , where the “Communication” action category described in Table 1 stands out. According to Klein et al. (2005), agents have three challenges toward achieving interpredictability: (1) acting predictably and being directable, (2) signaling their status and intentions, and (3) interpreting signals that indicate the status and intentions of other team members. Due to the dynamic characteristics of an emergency response, cross check interactions through constant briefing and debriefing are extremely important to achieve a mutual situation awareness and interpredictability. Briefing and debriefing interactions appeared in the timeline analysis as a behavior pattern when new messages arrive from the plant, as exemplified in Figs. 3 and 4. The ability of people in an emergency response control room to revise plans, cross check data, and review previous assessments when evidence arrives and situations change leads to a more consistent and reliable decision-making process and requires briefings for knowledge and comprehension sharing about incidents and events given the diversity of the emergency response team agents' background and expertise.

The diversity of the emergency response team might be a source of resilience. The presence of representatives from 26 different agencies creates diversity in the group and broadens the knowledge base. Due to the variety of response measure possibilities, it is very useful to have people with different backgrounds to achieve a satisfactory solution. As already shown by Hong and Page (2004), if you get a team of people that all have some level of problem-solving skills, not necessarily all being experts in specific issues, but not novices either, the team will outperform a group of best individuals (experts in one subject).

According to Klein (2001) organization is the attempt by multiple entities to act in concert in order to achieve a common goal by carrying out a plan they all understand. We observed some good organization patterns in the emergency response team. In the EEP studied, emergency response team members brought their agencies' plans and scripts for emergency response. For complex system demands, having smaller and modular plans rather than complete complex plans makes more sense, because it makes adaptation of the plan to the situation easier (Klein, 2001).

We also observed reorganization patterns that emerged from the emergency response team activities. When incidents appeared requiring different competences, the agents necessary to understand and make decisions on specific domains gather in small groups to discuss the subject. Fig. 6
                         highlights the dialog concentration in the “Conversation in small groups” and “Explanation of details/specific knowledge” subcategories listed in Table 1. An example of this happened when there was an unexpected real situation arose on the road, and required a real emergency response.

Anti-nuclear activists, affiliated to a well-known global environmental NGO, blocked roads close to the NPP area. To deal with the situation, Road, Civil and Military Police representatives gathered to discuss its status and dynamics and decide a course of action. Each of them then contacted their own agencies to act in concert, and shortly thereafter the demonstration was contained and the exercise resumed. These reorganization mechanisms are sources of emerging marginal value to operations, according to Klein (2001).

Lack of resilience or brittleness is a situation where a system is operating riskier than expected. Identifying sources of brittleness can help anticipate how the system can fail and helps preventing it (Gomes et al., 2008).

In our opinion, the main source of brittleness observed in the simulation was resulted from the design of the exercise, which was quite static, while a nuclear accident is highly complex and dynamic. The emergency response team received a relatively small number of predetermined situations in a predetermined sequence, creating a less complex and challenging environment. Team behavior changed markedly when a group of activists started blocking roads in a surprise real-world situation. Agency participants became noticeably more serious and marginal activities (those between people not directly involved in dealing with the situation) dropped. A “learning laboratory” approach might mitigate this issue, enabling the abstraction of valuable lessons from and better design of these large-scale exercises, as proposed by Burke et al. 2007.

We observed frequent briefings during the simulation. Although agents arrive at various times, depending on their agencies' response times, we did not identify the adoption of any specific briefing mechanisms or support tools to bring latecomers up to speed on the current situation, issues, and decisions under way. This staggered arrival is more frequent during the first hours of the simulation, when agencies contacted are sending their representatives, and during lunchtime, but can be sometimes be seen during the course of the simulation, when an agent needs to be replaced for any reason.

The physical distribution of individuals in the room is extremely important, as proximity and relative positions can affect interactions among team members. In shared workspaces, individuals will organize their own activities and placement in relation to the distribution of others in the room (Engeström and Middleton, 1996). In situations such as nuclear emergency responses, a large team dealing with variable complex problems will have multiple interaction configurations, and there are situations where some combinations of agencies may work better than others. An appropriate workspace organization could also enhance the organization mechanism that already exists in the emergency response team.

Activities of the team coordinator are extremely important to EEP command and control. Indeed, we noted that most activities in the EEP involve team coordinator participation. This situation may result in team coordinator cognitive overload, and constrain the decision-making process (Klein, 2001). Figs. 3–5 show that most of the communication between agents happens through the team coordinator (in red). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

The number of agents and agencies influences team organization and performance. We observed a tendency for participant lack of concentration and dispersive behavior after some hours in the external emergency room. Our indicator was the occurrence of requests for silence from the team. Having a large number of individuals might degrade teamwork, especially if some agents do not have an active participation in the team's decisions and actions. A team can become too large to produce optimal results: additional members only improve team performance as long as team size does not lead to participant disengagement and their contribution exceeds the team's associated coordination cost increases (Klein, 2001).

Agencies bring along their own emergency plans, generating a less complex modular overall emergency plan. A structured integration and coordination plan to identify the function and role of each agency in the nuclear emergency response is required. An analysis of the existing EEP considering the integration of the agencies' plans might help to improve the simulation and increase the system's resilience.

Visual support facilitates understanding context and decision-making when time to respond is short (Schoenwald et al., 2005) as often occurs in emergency situations. In these situations, people can get lost in the details, especially if there is a lack of cognitive support, such as visual wall display panels, tactile tables, or computer resources in general. This cognitive support can provide better context evolution understanding and sharing among all the agents involved in the EEP, maintaining participant situational awareness, avoiding the present situation in which this is done verbally.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In the current study we have used CTA techniques to look for possible sources of resilience and brittleness in a nuclear emergency response situation by analyzing a simulation exercise. Our analysis found sources of resilience and brittleness related to team coordination, simulation dynamics, and crisis response activities producing a deeper understanding of cognition at work in the nuclear emergency domain. Knowing and understanding these sources of resilience and brittleness in a system is useful to better understand how and why activities are successful or unsuccessful, and factors that may compromise system performance. The results obtained through this analysis additionally suggest that areas such as workspace redesign, visual and communication technology support are areas with high potential for improvements in emergency response and its simulation.

To examine the sources of resilience and brittleness in emergency response situations, further studies and research are planned. We believe this further research will support the enhancement of resilience and mitigation of brittleness, or even the transformation of sources of brittleness into sources of resilience, in other emergency response situations and simulations. There are challenges on how to stage such exercises and develop CTA methods so that researchers will be able to learn and abstract from these field observations.

Relevant constraints on this research were the sensitivity of the domain and shortcomings inherent in the material resources available to perform the analysis. The audio and video recordings covered only a small area of the coordination center situation room. Because of this, analysis was restricted to the agents involved in the most important actions in each event. Also, although the recordings covered most of the simulation activities, it did cover them in their entirety.

It is important to note that many of our recommendations for improvement are not related to the emergency response activities, but, rather, are hints of issues to improve the simulation exercise. We hope that our approach examining many exercise challenges from multiple perspectives in this research help future simulation designers and researchers to effectively capture and explore learning opportunities during new simulations, and to support resilient processes for planning and conducting staged world exercises. Planning of emergency exercises needs to be resilient because when one scales up, given the use of distributed groups, spatially separated agents, and multi-hour and multi-day work environments, as required in a complete nuclear emergency simulation, unanticipated disruptions and changes will make sure events do not go as planned, as has already occurred in the exercise we observed.

We conclude by observing that most studies of emergency response simulation in nuclear power plants have been undertaken in developed countries, in which the cultural issues that enable people to follow rules and instructions may be quite different than we have in developing countries. Further studies about nuclear power plant emergency response issues in developing countries are important because such countries are socially, culturally and economically different from developed countries and these differences imply different demands on agents, organizations and the organization among them in the emergency response context.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Council of Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq – Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico), the support of the Rio de Janeiro Research Support Foundation (FAPERJ – Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Rio de Janeiro), and also for the fundamental help from Cel. Roberto Jorge Lucente from the Firefighting Department and Civil Defense of Rio de Janeiro State.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

