@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Soccer players' fitting perception of different upper boot materials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Soccer players' fitting perception of different upper boot materials were assessed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The type of leather of the upper boot influences the fitting perception.


                        
                        
                           
                           The kangaroo leather was perceived as the closest condition to the preferred fitting.


                        
                        
                           
                           The synthetic leather was perceived as the furthest condition to the preferred fitting.


                        
                        
                           
                           These results are relevant to the comfort and fit of players and purchase decision-making.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Football

Soccer

Shoes

Footwear

Comfort

Leather

Upper

Fitting

Perception

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The present study assessed the influence of upper boot materials on fitting perception. Twenty players tested three soccer boots only differing in the upper boot material (natural calf leather, natural kangaroo leather and synthetic leather). Players reported fitting perception and preference on specific foot areas using a perceived fitting scale. Ratings were averaged for every foot area. Repeated measures ANOVA was used to analyze the differences between boots. The kangaroo leather boots were perceived tighter and closer to the preferred fitting in general fitting, metatarsals area and instep area. The synthetic leather boots were perceived as the loosest and as the most distant boot from the preferred fitting in medial front area and instep area. In conclusion, the type of upper boot material influences the fitting perception of soccer players. The kangaroo leather was the material whose fitting was perceived closest to the players fitting preference.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Soccer is the most popular sport in the world (Hennig and Sterzing, 2010; Manning and Levy, 2006; Zarei et al., 2010), and soccer boots play a major role in players’ performance (Hennig and Sterzing, 2010). Comfort has been identified to be one of the most relevant variables for sport shoes design (Lucas-Cuevas et al., 2014; Nigg, 2010) and for soccer players (Hennig and Sterzing, 2014). In this sense, footwear comfort and fitting have been associated not only with injuries (Mündermann et al., 2001) but also with performance in sports (Luo et al., 2009; Nigg et al., 1999). Even though previous studies observed that players are able to cope with a certain amount of discomfort during short motor performance situations, discomfort situations are likely to affect performance if maintained over long periods of time (Sterzing and Hennig, 2008; Sterzing et al., 2009). Thus, comfort perception should be a crucial factor to take into account when purchasing a soccer boot.

Fitting is one of the most important factors in comfort perception (Hawes et al., 1994; Hennig and Sterzing, 2010). Fitting can be understood as the level of matching between the foot and boot shapes (Lam et al., 2011), unveiled by the pressure distribution generated by the boot on the foot (Olaso et al., 2007). In general, soccer players demand a tighter fit, in comparison with other sports like running where shoes provide 1–2 cm of space around the toes (Kunde et al., 2009). Tight fitting is said to provide better ball handling perception (Sterzing et al., 2011) and an even distribution of pressures over the foot dorsum, what has been related to shooting accuracy (Hennig and Sterzing, 2010, 2014). However, if applied over time, excessive pressures on the foot may lead to overuse injuries and foot pain (Chuckpaiwong et al., 2008; Fernández-Seguín et al., 2014; Weist et al., 2004). All these aspects highlight the importance of purchasing a boot that fits properly due to its influence over soccer performance and injury prevention (Sandrey et al., 1996).

The fit of a boot is related to the shoe-last shape and the materials used for its construction (Janisse, 1992). Certain types of leathers (e.g. kangaroo leather) have the ability to yield and accommodate different foot shapes, while still providing a strong resistance to splitting (Lees and Lake, 2003; Werd and Knight, 2010). Moreover, each material has a different break-in period, which is the period where the shoe deforms and molds to the shape of the foot (Goonetilleke et al., 2000). As a result, the different properties of the materials used in shoe construction will ultimately influence fit and comfort perception (Lees and Lake, 2003; Werd and Knight, 2010).

Traditionally, leather has been the most commonly used material in soccer boot design, but during the second half of 20th century, synthetic leathers (a mixture of polymeric material and natural leather) and kangaroo leathers became very popular. Even though each type of leather is used for a different purpose, both synthetic and kangaroo leathers are nowadays widely used in the market. However, regardless of their popularity, no study to date has investigated how the different types of leathers used in boot design may influence the footwear fit perception of soccer players.

Fitting has been identified not only as one of the most important aspects that influence the purchase of a soccer boot (Blackwell et al., 2006; Kaplan and Okur, 2008), but also as one of the factors most relevant to satisfaction before and after the purchase of the boot (Chae et al., 2006). In this sense, even though a given soccer boot is reported to provide great levels of functional properties such as traction or stability, a negative perception of fit would make the player to purchase a different soccer boot. As a result, it is of great interest to investigate the players’ fitting perception during the purchase of a soccer boot. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to analyze the influence of upper boot materials (natural calf leather, natural kangaroo leather and synthetic leather) on the fitting perception of soccer players during the purchase of a soccer boot on an environment simulating a footwear shop.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Twenty regional soccer players (age [23.4 ± 2.2 years], weight [72.9 ± 4.1 kg], height [176.9 ± 4.0 cm], European shoe size [42–43], soccer experience [15.2 ± 3.3 years], and weekly soccer practice [7.5 ± 1.8 h/week]) were recruited for the study. All participants gave written informed consent before participation. The study procedures complied with the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by the University ethics committee.

Three types of soccer boots were used in the present study. The three types of boots were identical (same outsoles, midsoles, insoles) except for the upper boot material: natural calf leather, natural kangaroo leather and synthetic leather. A footwear company (New Millennium Sports S.L., Elche, Spain) manufactured the boots with the same shoe-last for each of the four sizes: 41, 42, 43 and 44 (European shoe size). The soccer players carried out the study using the same shoe size for the three boot conditions. Participants reported their subjective fitting perception on specific foot areas (general, medial front, lateral front, toes, metatarsals, instep and heel). A 5-point Likert scale ranging from very loose (−2) to very tight (+2) was used to assess the subjective fitting perception of the different boot conditions (Fig. 1
                        ). This type of scale has been widely used in previous studies that measured subjective perception in the foot-shoe inter-phase (Au and Goonetilleke, 2007; Lam et al., 2011; Witana et al., 2004).

Prior to the beginning of the prototypes tests, participants reported what it would be their preferred level of fitting for each foot area [Preferred]. Then, they wore for 5 min in an environment simulating a footwear shop (synthetic pavement, artificial illumination, mild-controlled temperature of 23 °C) each of the boot types in a random order and reported their perception of fitting [Perceived]. Participants were allowed to choose the level of tightness of the lace. Participants were not informed about the boot condition they were testing and completed the fitting questionnaire after each boot condition.

Ratings of fitting perception were averaged for each foot area. Similar to previous studies where shoe-last outline was used as a reference value to quantify fitting by calculating the difference between shoe-last and feet outline (Luximon et al., 2003; Witana et al., 2004), “Perceived-Preferred fitting” was used in the present study as a reference value to quantify fitting by measuring the difference between the preferred and the perceived fitting perception by the equation: [Perceived] – [Preferred]. While values close to 0 indicate that the perceived and the preferred perceptions match, negative values of this parameter correspond to a looser subjective perception and positive values correspond to a tighter subjective perception compared to the preferred fitting perception.

The statistics package SPSS 21 (SPSS Statistics, IBM, Chicago, IL, USA) was used for the statistical analysis. ANOVA of repeated measures was used to analyze the differences in perception and perceived-preferred fitting between conditions (Calf vs Kangaroo vs Synthetic), as well as in perception and preference fitting between foot areas (general, medial front, lateral front, toes, metatarsals, instep and heel). Results are presented as mean ± SD. Significance was set at α = 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Significant differences in fitting perception were observed between the three types of soccer boots. The kangaroo leather boots were perceived tighter than the natural calf leather (p < 0.001) and synthetic leather boots (p < 0.001). In addition, the natural calf leather boots were perceived tighter than the synthetic leather boots (p = 0.02). Taking into account the different foot areas analyzed (Fig. 2
                     A), the kangaroo leather boots were perceived tighter than the natural calf leather and synthetic leather boots in general (p < 0.001), metatarsals (p = 0.01 compared to the natural calf leather and p = 0.005 compared to the synthetic leather boots) and instep fitting (p < 0.001). Synthetic leather boots were perceived as the loosest model in the medial front (p = 0.002 compared to kangaroo leather and p = 0.04 compared to natural calf leather) and instep region (p < 0.001 compared to kangaroo leather and p = 0.02 compared to natural calf leather). Non-significant differences between boots were observed in lateral front and toes fitting (p > 0.05).

The perceived fitting of the kangaroo leather boots was the closest to the preferred fitting values (Perceived-Preferred fitting = 0) in general (p < 0.001), metatarsals (p = 0.01 compared to natural calf leather and p = 0.005 compared to synthetic leather) and instep (p < 0.001) (Fig. 2B). The largest differences from the preferred fitting were reported for the perceived fitting of the synthetic leather boots in medial front (p = 0.002 compared to kangaroo leather and p = 0.04 compared to natural calf leather), and instep region (p < 0.001 compared to kangaroo leather and p = 0.02 compared to natural calf leather). No significant differences between boots were observed in lateral front and toes fitting (p > 0.05).

An analysis of the differences in perceived and preferred fitting between foot areas including all three conditions was also performed (Fig. 3
                     ). With respect to the perceived fitting, the instep presented a tighter fitting than the heel area (p = 0.04). No significant differences in preferred fitting were observed between foot areas (p > 0.05). Finally, an analysis of the differences between perceived and preferred fitting in each area was performed. The medial front and the heel presented lower values of perceived fitting compared to the preferred fitting values reported in the same areas (p = 0.002 and p = 0.01, respectively).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The purpose of the present study was to analyze the players’ comfort and fitting perception of soccer boots made of different upper-boot materials (calf leather, kangaroo leather and synthetic leather) in an environment simulating a footwear shop. In general, our results suggest that the kangaroo leather provided a perception of fit closer to the players preference compared to the calf and synthetic leathers. This finding could be explained by the specific mechanical properties of the kangaroo leather, which may allow the boot to adapt better to the foot shape and, as a result, provide better pressure distribution on the foot dorsum (Stephens, 1987).

As shown in Fig. 2A, only two locations were significantly different when comparing the fitting perception between the calf and the synthetic leathers. Specifically, the perceived instep fitting and medial front of the calf leather boots were closer to the preferred fitting compared to the synthetic leather boots (Fig. 2B). As participants were allowed to choose the level of tightness of the shoe lace, differences in instep fitting could be in part resulting from the level of tightness decided by each participant. However, since participants were likely using the same level of tightness among boots, these differences could also be influenced by the properties of the leather itself. On the other hand, the medial front is one of the most exposed areas to pressures due to the width differences between the foot and the shoe-last (Olaso et al., 2007). Consequently, it is reasonable to expect differences between calf and synthetic leathers in that area.

No significant differences between the types of leathers were found in the toes and the lateral front areas (Fig. 2). Regarding the toes area, the high variability in toes shape within the population (Luximon et al., 2003; Yammine, 2014), the different foot lengths that fit within a single shoe size system, and a possible excessive length of the specific shoe-last used in this study could hide the effects of the mechanical properties of the tested leathers on fitting perception. The absence of differences in the lateral front area is surprising since the fifth metatarsal area is one of the most exposed areas to pressure variations due to dynamical fitting (Olaso et al., 2007). However, the wider area comprised by the lateral front area (fifth metatarsal, lateral toes and lateral instep area) could be inducing higher variability in the perception which could hide the significant perceptual differences in the metatarsal area.

Players preferred the soccer boots tighter (Fig. 3B). All the items in the perception of fit questionnaire (except for instep area with the kangaroo leather, which could be related to the elasticity of kangaroo leather combined with the fact that participants were allowed to choose the level of tightness of the lace) were perceived looser compared to the preferred fitting value for each foot area and boot condition. This observation suggests that the shoe-last used to manufacture the soccer boot prototypes of this study was perceived as too big, regardless the upper leather used. However, it is important to take into account that the shoe-last and the shoe size were the same for each player in the three boot conditions, and the differences between them could be attributed to the effect of the upper boot materials.

Soccer boots with better fitting perception could lead to an enhancement in performance and reduced injury rate (Kinchington et al., 2010; Luo et al., 2009; Nigg et al., 1999; Sterzing et al., 2009). Previous studies have observed that poor lower limb comfort was strongly associated with sport injuries (Kinchington et al., 2010). These authors observed that comfort perception was responsive to clinical changes over time, and it could be considered a reliable method to monitor the players’ state. Similar approaches have been used in order to associate comfort perception and performance (Kinchington et al., 2012). In this sense, the level of performance of a player depends on many factors including the level of physical and psychological state or external influences such as the environment or the sport equipment. Based on this assumption, Kinchington et al. (2012) speculated that comfort could also be a determinant of performance in soccer, and observed that performance was compromised when players reported poor levels of comfort. However, high levels of comfort did not necessarily lead to enhanced performance due to the amount of factors that influence performance.

The different break-in periods of the leathers used in the study could be considered a limitation. Since all participants tested the same boots, the last individuals that carried out the study tested the boots that had already been worn by previous participants. However, we believe that this situation still reflects the natural purchase process observed in a footwear shop, where the same shoe is tested by the interested customers until one customer actually purchases it.

Even though some interesting results have been observed during the last years regarding the relationship between comfort, fit, sport performance, and injuries, future studies should continue investigating the influence that perceptual factors such as comfort and fit of equipment have on the actual performance of the athlete and whether positive perception levels can actually protect the athletes from suffering sport injuries. In this sense, further studies analyzing the upper material mechanical properties measured objectively as well as the geometrical attributes of the players’ feet and shoe-last are necessary to extend these conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In conclusion, the materials used in the upper part of the soccer boot influence the players’ perception of fitting. When comparing kangaroo, calf and synthetic leathers, the kangaroo leather is reported as the material that provides the perception of fitting closest to the preferred fitting of the players. However, it is important to take into account that perception levels of fitting depend on the foot area of analysis and on the interaction between the foot and the shoe shape. Although fitting perception is a subjective attribute difficult to assess, negative fitting perception could lead to lower sport performance and increased injury rate. As a result, the selection of a soccer boot that reports the closest perceived fitting to the preferred and ideal fitting should become a priority for soccer players.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

