@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A field study on thermal comfort in an Italian hospital considering differences in gender and age

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Comparison between AMV and PMV values in the hospital taking into account factors as gender and age.


                        
                        
                           
                           Correlation diagrams of PMV and AMV values are concordant for medical staff, discordant for patients.


                        
                        
                           
                           The association between AMV and PMV is stronger for medical staff than for patients.


                        
                        
                           
                           PMV finds its best correlation with AMV values among male medical staff under 65 years of age.


                        
                        
                           
                           Gender and age are factors that must be taken into account in the assessment of thermal comfort in the hospital.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Patients and medical staff

Thermal comfort

Gender and age

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The hospital is a thermal environment where comfort must be calibrated by taking into account two different groups of people, that is, patients and medical staff. The study involves 30 patients and 19 medical staff with a view to verifying if Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) index can accurately predict thermal sensations of both groups also taking into account any potential effects of age and gender. The methodology adopted is based on the comparison between PMV values (calculated according to ISO 7730 after having collected environmental data and estimated personal parameters) and perceptual judgments (Actual Mean Vote, AMV), expressed by the subjects interviewed. Different statistical analyses show that PMV model finds his best correlation with AMV values in a sample of male medical staff under 65 years of age. It has been observed that gender and age are factors that must be taken into account in the assessment of thermal comfort in the hospital due to very weak correlation between AMV and PMV values.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Thermal comfort is a condition of mind that expresses satisfaction with the thermal environment (BS ISO 7730, 1995). It is known that working in comfortable conditions increases both productivity and performance (Parsons, 2003), for this reason thermal comfort represents an important parameter in the building design process. Generally in the assessment of thermal comfort simple situations where one work activity is been performed at one work location are investigated; but there are some cases where people with different activities must coexist in the same thermal conditions and in this context it is difficult to achieve a thermal comfort which is suitable for all. The hospital is an example of thermal environment where comfort must be calibrated by taking into account two different groups of people: on one hand the patients, who generally have a low metabolic rate (Skoog et al., 2005), due to their immobility, that is, lying in bed and, in some cases, an increase of clothing insulation and, on the other, the medical staff, with a higher metabolic rate and a lower clothing insulation when compared to patients.

Other factors that contribute to differentiation between patients and medical staff are:
                        
                           -
                           the presence of pathologies and disabilities which may affect the thermophysiology, thermal sensation and may require the use of drugs for treatments; disabilities may also involve the use of technical aids (wheel chairs) that may also affect thermal comfort (Humphreys et al., 1998);

differences in age. Some hospital wards are populated by the elderly. It is generally considered that the ability to thermoregulate decreases with age (Havenith, 2001). Furthermore they are known to have lower activity levels when compared to younger people, and that is the reason why they require higher ambient temperature to achieve thermal comfort in comparison with young adults at equal clothing levels (van Hoof and Hensen, 2006).

Patients and medical staff are closely connected, in fact the medical staff is required to ensure patients' health and safety for the duration of their stay in the hospital. Heat or cold exposure can compromise the medical staff performance, both in patient heavy manual handling operations and in those activities involving attention and mental focus, such as handling needles or distributing drugs (NSW Guidelines). The assessment of thermal conditions plays an important role in determining which critical settings can compromise medical staff performance.

Ergonomists, engineers, occupational health specialists, or other personnel who are involved in the assessment of thermal comfort, in terms also of deviations from an optimal thermal situation, can predict thermal sensation for the body as a whole by calculating the Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) proposed by Fanger (1970). Fanger derived his comfort equation by exposing college aged students to a steady state condition in a climatic chamber for a 3-h period in winter at sea level with standardized clothing and performing standardized activities. He then expanded his comfort equation into the current PMV model, described in ISO 7730 (2005).

The fact that patients can differ significantly from the sample of college aged students, tested by Fanger, prompted the authors to verify whether PMV model, which is likely to be the most widely used thermal comfort index for assessing moderate indoor thermal environment, is also suitable for patient population, that is a group with different needs and characteristics from those of medical staff, as described above.

It is known that there are issues concerning the reliability and validity of ISO 7730 (Olesen and Parsons, 2002):
                        
                           -
                           reliability is related to the reliability of ISO 8996 (2004) and ISO 9920 in the estimation of personal parameters such as metabolic rate and clothing insulation;

validity involves the issue if PMV can accurately predict the Actual Mean Vote (AMV). Laboratory studies have often supported the validity of ISO 7730 (2005), whereas field studies have not (Olesen and Parsons, 2002). Furthermore, according to de Dear and Brager (1998), the PMV model fails significantly in naturally ventilated buildings. They assert that the heat balance model ignores the psychological dimension of adaptation, a factor that plays an important role in naturally ventilated building (de Dear and Brager, 2002).

Previous studies found in scientific literature, and conducted in hospitals in different countries around the world (Table 1
                     ), investigate mainly aspects which are related to possible differences in thermal sensations between medical staff and patients or to the correlation between PMV and AMV. However they do not focus on differences in gender and age. Previous studies considering these two factors (Tables 2 and 3
                     
                     ) show that the effects of their influence on thermal comfort, at this time require further investigation.

The aim of this study is to verify if PMV can accurately predict thermal perceptual sensations, represented by Actual Mean Vote (AMV), of both medical staff and patients, through an appropriate statistical analysis in order to investigate the potential effects of age and gender.

Data were collected between October and November 2011 in 8 wards of a public hospital located in a central region of Italy. Wards differ by number of occupants per room and exposition but they are all heated by cast iron radiators that do not guarantee an adequate air circulation. Some wards use air conditioning but during the measurements it was kept off.

Data collection was concentrated on one participant at a time. The procedure performed involves interviewing the subject (subjective measurements) and at the same time evaluating the environmental parameters around the subject (objective measurements).

There were 58 subjects interviewed, but PMV index was applicable for only 49 of them. In fact, for 9 of the patients, calculated values of clothing insulation proved to be out of the range fixed in ISO 7730 (2005) for the application of PMV index.


                     Table 4
                      shows subjects involved in the study grouped by wards and divided by gender.

Objective measurements were carried out by collecting environmental data around the subjects interviewed and by estimating their personal parameters (metabolic rate and clothing insulation) in order to calculate the PMV index according to ISO 7730 (2005).

Environmental data were collected by measuring air temperature, globe temperature, air velocity and relative humidity with Lsi – Lastem indoor climate analyzer, named Babuc A. Mean radiant temperature values, shown in Table 5
                           , were calculated by the software of Babuc A according to equation (9) of ISO 7726 (1998).

The activity level, especially for medical staff, was determined by observing the subject during the activity and by using tables of ISO 8996 (2004).

Clothing insulation of standing subjects (medical staff and some patients) was calculated by applying the following equation (number 11 of ISO 9920)
                                 
                                    (1)
                                    
                                       
                                          I
                                          cl
                                       
                                       =
                                       0.161
                                       +
                                       0.835
                                       ×
                                       ∑
                                       
                                          I
                                          clu
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              expressed in clo where I
                              clu is the effective thermal insulation of the individual garments making up the ensemble.

Clothing insulation of patients in bed cannot be determined by applying Eq. (1) because it does not take into account insulation values of bedding system whose effects cannot be neglected. Bedding system means the ensemble of bed, mattress, sheet and blankets. Clothing characteristics of patients and bedding systems were collected and thermal insulation of the ensemble was evaluated by using results of Ling and Deng's (2008) original publication. In their paper Ling and Deng reported results of experiments carried out on a thermal manikin placed in an environmental chamber, in a supine position. Different combinations of bed, mattress, sheet and blankets, with a selection of 2 types of sleepwear, were tested as well as different percentages of body surface area coverage were taken into account. Then total insulation values were measured. In the present study thermal insulation of patients in bed was estimated by coupling the real ensemble of bedding and sleepwear with the most similar combination of Ling and Deng's publication.

In the evaluation of clothing insulation of patients sitting in a chair, the effects on clothing insulation due to posture and chair were neglected because it was noticed that the effect of the posture, which typically produces a decrease of I
                              cl, is compensated by the increase in insulation of the chair.

A questionnaire in compliance with ISO 10551 (1995) has been administered to all subjects in order to collect informations related to the perceived environment. Subjects were requested to express their judgments (AMV) in a 7-point thermal sensation scale answering to the question “how are you feeling now?”. This judgment has been compared with the corresponding PMV value calculated according to ISO 7730 (2005).

All subjects have received a full explanation of the study procedure and subsequently given their consent.

Data analysis was conducted in order to study possible effects of factors such as age and gender on thermal sensations and to verify if PMV can take into account these effects.

Statistical analysis was carried out by using both parametric (i.e. two sample t-test, ANOVA) and non parametric tests (i.e. correlations and measures of association). In this study the use of correlations allow for a measure of the strength and direction of the linear relationship between AMV and PMV and, in some comparisons between sub-samples, correlations add different and useful informations in order to understand if PMV is a good predictor for the samples considered.

The analysis is articulated in two steps:
                           
                              1.
                              Calculation of PMV values for all subjects involved in the study;

Different statistical analysis applied to different samples in order to identify possible effects of factors investigated. Analyses performed are:
                                    
                                       a.
                                       Two-sample t-test and ANOVA test applied to PMV measurements in order to evaluate if the differences between patients and medical staff have statistical significance.

Two-sample t-test applied to AMV and PMV mean values considering the whole sample and sub samples, in order to determine if, with a preliminary analysis, the differences in values for the samples considered are statistically significant (Table 6
                                          );

Correlations and measures of association for PMV and AMV values.

This type of statistical analysis is based on measures of association represented by symmetric indices (such as Kendall's tau-c, Goodman's & Kruskal's Gamma, Spearman's coefficient and Pearson's index). This will allow an understanding of any existing correlation between the two variables considered (AMV and PMV in this study). The values range from −1 (total negative association) to +1 (total positive association). A zero value indicates that there is no association between the two variables. The sign of correlation coefficient indicates the direction of association between two variables: when the coefficient is positive, it indicates that as a variable tends to increase, the value of the other variable increases; the coefficient is negative as a variable decreases and the other increases.

This kind of analysis is applied to the following samples:
                                             
                                                -
                                                Whole sample;

Medical staff and patients;

Females and males;

Female and male medical staff and female patients;

Subjects under and over 65 years of age;

Medical staff and patients under and over 65 years of age;

Female patients under 65 years of age.

Multinomial logistic regression in order to analyze the association between the two measures, considering the PMV as the independent variable and the AMV as the dependent one. For this analysis the following samples were considered:
                                             
                                                -
                                                Medical staff;

Female medical staff;

Patients.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Mean values of environmental parameters, grouped by wards, are summarized in Table 5.

It can be noticed that for most of the wards considered the mean radiant and air temperatures were high considering that data were collected in autumn.


                        Figs. 1 and 2
                        
                         show the comparison between AMV and PMV values between patients and medical staff and the corresponding correlation diagrams. It can be noted that the correlation diagrams of medical staff are concordant, both pointing towards positive values (warm perceptions). In the case of the patients the diagrams are discordant: the AMV correlation diagram remains on the warm side, whereas the PMV one concurrently points towards both directions, that is positive values as well as negative ones (cool perceptions).


                        Figs. 3 and 5
                        
                        
                         show the comparison between patient and medical staff perceptual judgments (AMV values). It can be noted that most of patients' judgments are concentrated in the neutral zone (AMV = 0) whereas those submitted by medical staff move towards warm sensations. PMV distribution seems to confirm this trend for medical staff as shown in Fig. 4, whereas in case of patients PMV addresses the most part of the situations analyzed towards warm votes.


                        Figs. 6 and 7
                        
                         show that patients' judgments are more compressed than medical staff also if differences in age are considered (Figs. 8 and 9
                        
                        ) and that judgments among females tend to be more distributed along the sensation scale.

Shapiro–Wilk test, applied to patients and medical staff, shows that the distributions of the two samples are normal.

The application of two sample t-test and ANOVA test to PMV measurements shows that the differences in PMV values between patients and medical staff are not due to chance and have statistical significance.

The results, summarized in Table 6, show that:
                              
                                 -
                                 AMV mean values are generally higher than the corresponding PMV mean values and this observation is valid not only for the whole sample but also for the sub-samples considered in the table;

PMV values are more concentrated around the mean value of the distribution, in fact, in Table 6, PMV standard deviation values are lower than AMV standard deviation values;

differences between AMV and PMV mean values have statistical significance (p < 0.05) for only 3/8 samples. It is worth noting that two of these samples are represented by the whole sample and by female sample.

This has led the authors to carry out a different statistical analysis using more appropriate measures of association than the two-sample t-test.

Measures of association related to the whole sample show low correlations between AMV and PMV (i.e. Kendall's Tau-c = 0.28, p = 0.003; Gamma = 0.39, p = 0.003) even if they have statistical significance. This has prompted the authors to consider sub-samples in order to understand if there are groups of subjects whose thermal sensations are not adequately described by PMV.

Considering results of the statistical analysis applied to the sub-samples it can be noted that:
                              
                                 -
                                 medical staff sample shows measures of association between AMV and PMV higher than patients and with statistical significance (Table 7
                                    );

the association between AMV and PMV is stronger for males (Kendall's Tau-c = 0.41, p = 0.033; Gamma = 0.83, p = 0.033) than for females (Kendall's Tau-c = 0.24, p = 0.041; Gamma = 0.29, p = 0.041);

only among female medical staff a positive association with statistical significance (Kendall's Tau-c = 0.36, p = 0.018; Gamma = 0.39, p = 0.018) has been found; on the contrary among female patients a negative correlation coefficient has been observed (Kendall's Tau-c = −0.01, p = 0.963; Gamma = −0.014, p = 0.963). Considering only the sample of females under the age of 65 and comparing medical staff with patients, a strong association can be noted for medical staff (Kendall's Tau-c = 0.365, p = 0.018; Gamma = 0.393, p = 0.018) and in contrast a very weak association is noted for patients without statistical significance (Kendall's Tau-c = 0.099, p = 0.879; Gamma = 0.25, p = 0.879);

the association between AMV and PMV is weak and without statistical significance for patients under and over 65 years of age. The association seems to be relevant for medical staff subjects under 65 years of age (Kendall's Tau-c = 0.40, p = 0.005; Gamma = 0.43, p = 0.005);

Multinomial logistic regression analysis carried out, considering AMV as dependent variable and PMV as the independent one, shows that the model with the best explanatory power is that the medical staff sample (Nagelkerke R squared = 0.485 and McFadden R squared = 0.197). On the basis of the results obtained, it is worth emphasizing that the models do not have a strong explanatory power due to the low values of the pseudo indices and to the lack of statistical significance of the parameters of the independent variables estimated.

The limitation of this study is related to the low number of subjects involved in the research in order to have significant samples especially when they are broken down into even smaller sub samples. A more comprehensive study is required with a suitable sample which would allow the issue to be concluded and the final answer to be presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Considering the results of the analysis carried out in this study it can therefore be concluded that:
                        
                           1.
                           Medical staff and patients must be considered as two separate groups with different needs. The analysis of the perceptual judgments (AMV values) shows that patient thermal sensations are more concentrated around the neutrality (AMV = 0) whereas the medical staff tends to move towards warmer sensations;

PMV model does not seem to prove suitable for the patient population. In fact comparing AMV and PMV values between patients and medical staff and the corresponding correlation diagrams, it can be noted that the correlation diagrams of medical staff are concordant, both pointing towards positive values (warm perceptions). In the case of the patients the diagrams are discordant: the AMV correlation diagram remains on the warm side, whereas the PMV one concurrently points towards both directions, that is positive values as well as negative ones (cool perceptions). The fact that PMV is not a good predictor for patients, is strengthened by the measures of associations which show negative values for this sub sample;

The association between AMV and PMV values has proved to be stronger for medical staff than for patients, for males rather than females, for subjects under 65 years of age more so than subjects over 65 years of age. PMV model seems to find its best correlation with AMV values among male medical staff under 65 years of age, in other words among healthy males under 65 years of age. It is worth noting that this sample is the most similar to the college aged student sample tested by Fanger (1970);

Two sample-t test applied to female sample shows that the difference in mean values between AMV and PMV has a statistical significance and this fact is strengthened by the measures of association. Data analysis shows that females tend to feel uncomfortably hot and uncomfortably cold more than males when the conditions of the thermal environment differ from neutrality;

Gender and age are factors that must be taken into account in the assessment of thermal comfort in the hospital; indeed results support that the association between AMV and PMV values is weak among females if compared to males and very weak among subjects over 65 years of age if compared to subjects under the age of 65.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

