@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The influence of active seating on car passengers' perceived comfort and activity levels

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Active seating is a promising concept to interrupt static sitting.


                        
                        
                           
                           Participants felt significantly more challenged, more fit and more refreshed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Heart rate indicated a light intensity, but nevertheless non-sedentary, activity.


                        
                        
                           
                           EMG variability in several muscles increased during active seating.


                        
                        
                           
                           Active seating might stimulate movements and hence help to reduce sedentary behaviour.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Vehicle interior

Passenger comfort

Seating

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  New technologies have led to an increasingly sedentary lifestyle. Sedentary behaviour is characterised by physical inactivity and is associated with several health risks. This excessive sitting does not only take place in the office or at home, but also during daily commute. Therefore, BMW AG developed an active seating system for the back seat of a car, consisting of sensors in the back rest that register upper body movements of the passenger, with which the passenger controls a game. This study evaluated three different aspects of active seating compared to other tasks (reading, working on laptop, and gaming on tablet). First, discomfort and comfort perception were measured in a 30-minute driving test. Discomfort was very low for all activities and participants felt significantly more challenged, more fit and more refreshed during active seating. Second, heart rate was measured, indicating a light intensity, but nevertheless non-sedentary, activity. Third, average and variability in activity of six postural muscles was measured by electromyography (EMG), showing a higher muscle activity and higher muscle variability for active seating compared to other activities. Active seating might stimulate movements, thereby increasing comfort and well-being.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the last decades, the amount of work-related physical activity has decreased considerably in the working population due to economic and industrial innovations, such as the introduction of computers and increased automation. As a result, physical inactivity of workers in many occupations is becoming an increasing problem (Straker and Mathiassen, 2009). This so-called sedentary work is associated with several significant health risks, such as musculoskeletal disorders due to prolonged static muscle exertions (Sjøgaard and Jensen, 2006), and an increased risk of chronic diseases including coronary disorders and type II diabetes due to whole body physical inactivity (USDHHS, 2008). Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that sedentary behaviour is an independent factor in the development of the metabolic syndrome: a combination of high blood pressure, diabetes, increased levels of cholesterol and obesity (Ekblom-Bak et al., 2010).

Moderate-intensity physical activity, which requires a moderate amount of effort and noticeably accelerates the heart rate (WHO, 2012), has been shown to have a positive effect on health disorders like cardiovascular diseases, type II diabetes, colon cancer, depression and anxiety, and on health determinants like body fat, blood pressure, cholesterol levels and bone mineral density (Pollock et al., 1998). Increasing the amount of physical activity during leisure time therefore seems crucial in improving the health of sedentary workers (Holtermann et al., 2012). Several studies (e.g., Siegel et al., 2009; Grieser, 2010; Miyachi et al., 2010) have shown that an activity level of 3–6 Metabolic Equivalents (METs) is possible to achieve with activity-promoting video games such as Wii Fit from Nintendo. In order to reduce sedentary behaviour, stimulating people to move by means of a game seems a promising concept. On a local level, temporal changes in activity have also shown to have positive effects on fatigue development and discomfort. More temporal variability in the electromyography (EMG) amplitude of back muscles (Dieën et al., 2009) and more spatio-temporal variability of the EMG amplitude within the trapezius muscle (Farina et al., 2008) have been shown to be associated with slower development of electromyographic manifestations of fatigue.

In the office environment, several studies have investigated the effects of dynamic workstations. Straker et al. (2009), for example, studied the effects of walking and cycling computer workstations on keyboard and mouse performance, while John et al. (2009) and Funk et al. (2012) studied the effects of a treadmill workstation on health and performance. However, besides work performance, these studies mostly focused on medical implications such as reducing obesity and preventing disorders on long term, while the effects on short term comfort and well-being were not studied.

Because sedentary behaviour does not only occur at home or at the office, but also during the daily commute, car manufacturer BMW AG has developed a new concept, the active seating system. This active seating system consists of sensors in the back rest of the back seat of the car that can capture movements of the upper body and makes it possible for the passenger to control a game with his or her physical movements (Kamp, 2012). The goal of the active seating system is to promote a more active experience, to reduce the amount of static muscle activity and to increase the global level of activity, in order to increase perceived comfort and well-being of car passengers. However, due to the novelty of this system, effects of such a system are unknown, neither its acceptance.

Therefore, the objective of this study is twofold: Is there a difference in perceived discomfort, perceived comfort and activity levels of active seating compared to normal seating on the back seat of a car when performing different activities? Furthermore, we investigated: How is the active seating concept perceived by its users?
                  

@&#METHODS@&#

The study consisted of three experiments. The main study is the driving test (2.3), in which the comfort and discomfort levels and the user-acceptance were evaluated. Due to disturbances of the signals by the engine of the car and the active seating equipment, global levels of physical activity expressed by heart rate (2.4) and local levels of muscle activity (2.5) were obtained from two separate stationary experiments.

A BMW 7-series with the active seating system installed in the back seat was used for the experiments (Fig. 1
                        ). The active seating system was an extension of the light-weight massage system currently installed in BMW cars (Franz et al., 2011) and consisted of two pressure sensors that were able to capture pressure changes exerted by the passenger. These sensors were located approximately at the lower point of the scapula, one on the left and one on the right side of the back rest. By pressing their upper body into the left or right side of the back rest, and thereby activating one or both of the back rest sensors, participants were able to control a video game. This video game was presented to the participant on a tablet pc (iPad; Apple) which was mounted on the headrest of the front seat. For this study, BMW developed a game in which a ball needed to be balanced in the middle of the screen (Fig. 1). The pressure sensors in the back rest captured the movements of the participant which resulted in the ball either moving to the left or to the right of the screen. The game automatically proceeded to the next level when participants balanced the ball in the middle for a certain amount of time, indicated by the squares at the top of the screen which were coloured blue (in web version) as long as the ball was balanced in the middle of the screen.

Three different tasks were selected to perform while sitting on the back seat: reading, working on a laptop (typing), and gaming on a tablet. This selection was based on previous observations of Kamp et al. (2011) and Groenesteijn et al. (2012). Although they observed train passengers, it might be translated to car passengers, as they often are passive travellers as well. Also, a further growth of tasks using small or larger electronic devices is anticipated, the BMW 7-series is a business car, and these three tasks are often performed for a longer time (Groenesteijn et al., 2012). For the driving test and the EMG measurements, all participants performed the test with active seating as well as with one of these three tasks.

Twenty-six healthy participants (14 male, 12 female; mean age 29.4 (SD = 14.5) years; mean weight 71.2 (SD = 13.4) kg; mean height 1.76 (SD = 0.1) m) volunteered to participate in the study. Participants were a mix between students and middle-class working population and had different ethnicities (European, American and Asian). Participants gave their written informed consent prior to the start of the study.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

All participants were measured in two conditions: the active seating condition and a reference task condition. For the task condition, participants were randomly divided into one of three groups: reading a book (n = 9), working on a laptop (n = 8) and gaming on a tablet pc (n = 9). In both situations the same questionnaire was completed and the duration of each condition was 30 min. The active seating game was played for five minutes and alternated with five minutes rest. The other task (reading, working or gaming) was done constantly and only interrupted by completing a short questionnaire.

Two participants were invited at the same time and received an introduction on the study. When sitting in the car, the active seating game was calibrated for the participant in the left rear seat. Calibration was needed to adjust for the different body weights of the participants. A short explanation was given to inform participants where and how they should press into the seat in order to control the game. The participant in the right rear seat was instructed to do one of the following tasks: reading a book, working on a laptop, or playing a game (Angry Birds; Rovio Mobile Ltd.) on a tablet pc (GalaxyTab; Samsung). During the test, one researcher drove the car and another researcher sat in the front row observing the participants and giving them instructions.

After the instructions, the two participants in the rear seats were driven around for 30 min. After these 30 min, the participants changed seats and the research was repeated for the other condition (active seating or selected task). A trip duration of 30 min was chosen, because this is similar to the average length of a one-way commuter trip in the Netherlands (Nielander et al., 2012). The driving track was the same for all participants and consisted mainly of highway as this is probably the circumstance where the active seating system will be used. Traffic was not controlled for, but was similar for all conditions, since timing of the experiments was outside rush hours.

Three aspects were measured during the driving test: perceived discomfort, perceived comfort and acceptability.

Discomfort was measured using the local perceived discomfort (LPD) method (Grinten and Smitt, 1992). A body map consisting of 22 regions was presented to the participant. The participants were asked to rate perceived discomfort in the body regions on a 10-point scale (ranging from 0 = no discomfort to 10 = extreme discomfort, almost maximum) at the start of the driving test (t = 0), after 10 min (t = 10), after 20 min (t = 20), and after 30 min (t = 30). The LPD method was introduced to the participants before the start of the driving test. Local perceived discomfort outcomes were calculated by taking the sum (LPD sum) and maximum (LPD max) scores of the 22 body regions. A multilevel model analysis was used with active seating as a reference condition. Repeated measures were indicated by measurements 1 to 4, corresponding with time intervals t = 0, t = 10, t = 20, and t = 30 (Twisk, 2003). The data were centred to distinguish main effects from interaction effects (Aiken and West, 1991). To model the correlation between conditions and measurements within-subjects, a diagonal matrix was specified. Significance was accepted at p < 0.05.

To evaluate the participants' comfort perception and first impression of the system, a short questionnaire was used. Participants were asked to rate their comfort on a 10-point scale (ranging from 1 = not comfortable at all to 10 = extremely comfortable). They were also asked about their feelings while performing the activity: I feel challenged, I feel irritated, I feel entertained, and their feelings after performing the activity: I feel fit, I feel relaxed, I feel tired, I feel refreshed. These items were rated on a 5-point scale (ranging from 1 = not at all to 5 = extremely) and were adopted from the Chair Evaluation Checklist (Helander and Zhang, 1997). The single rating scales were analysed using a paired-samples t-test (p < 0.05), comparing the active seating condition to the other tasks.

Additional questions on acceptability of the active seating system were: Do you think this is a fun way to stimulate movement, Would you use this system if it was installed in the back seat of your car (and why or why not)?, Where and when do you think this feature is appropriate (and why) (e.g., on the highway, in the city, on your way to work, etc.)?, Did the car dynamics (driving) have an influence on performing the activity?, Do you think these movements are suitable in a car (and why)? The rating scales were analysed, comparing the active seating condition to the other tasks.

Six healthy participants (one male, five females) with a mean age of 31.7 (SD = 8.5) years volunteered to participate in the heart rate measurements. Participants gave their written informed consent prior to the start of the study. The participants of the heart rate study did not participate in the driving test.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

This study was performed in a laboratory setting. A short introduction was given and participants were asked to wear a chest strap with electrodes and a wireless transmitter (WearLink + Bluetooth Heart rate belt LS-14; Polar). The transmitter was connected to a smartphone with a software application installed (Endomondo Sports Tracker) to read the heart rate values in beats per minute (bpm). For the resting heart rate, the lowest heart rate was taken that was measured while the subject was sitting still in the back seat of the car for three minutes. The active seating system was then calibrated and the subject was asked to play the active seating game for three minutes, during which the heart rate was measured.

The lowest heart rate measured while sitting in the back seat of the car was taken as the resting heart rate. The maximum heart rate (MHR) was estimated by means of age using the formula MHR = 208 − 0.7*age (Tanaka et al., 2001). The heart rate reserve (HRR) was calculated by subtracting the resting heart rate from the predicted maximum heart rate. The average heart rate during the last minute of active seating was taken as the average heart rate for the active seating task. The heart rate during active seating was expressed as a percentage of the estimated maximum heart rate (%MHR) and as a percentage of the heart rate reserve (%HRR). The average heart rate index (HR
                           
                              index
                           ) was calculated by dividing the average heart rate during active seating (HR
                           
                              absolute
                           ) by the average resting heart rate (HR
                           
                              rest
                           ). The HR
                           
                              index
                            was used to estimate the number of MET levels by applying the formula METs = 6 × HR
                           
                              index
                            − 5 as suggested by Wicks et al. (2011). The resting heart rate and the heart rate during active seating were compared with a paired-samples t-test (p < 0.05).

To get an indication of the muscle activity during active seating compared to other activities, four students (three males, one female) volunteered to participate in the electromyography study. Their average age was 20.3 (SD = 0.5) years. Their average weight was 73.6 (SD = 4.2) kg and their average height 1.84 (SD = 0.13) m. Participants gave their written informed consent prior to the start of the study. The participants of the EMG measurements did not participate in the driving test nor did they participate in the heart rate measurements.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Muscle activity of upper leg (m. rectus femoris), abdominal (m. obliquus externus abdominis), lower back (m. erector spinae at L2 level), upper back (m. erector spinae at T10 level), shoulder (m. trapezius pars transversa) and neck (m. trapezius pars descendens) muscles (see Fig. 2
                           ) was measured by a porti 16/ASD system (TMS, Enschede, The Netherlands). Bipolar Ag/AgCl (Medicotest, Ambu A/S, Baltorpbakken 13, DK-2750 Ballerup) surface electrodes were positioned according to Hermens et al. (2000), using an inter-electrode distance of 20 mm. A reference electrode was placed on the C7 spinous process. Before the electrodes were applied, the skin was shaved, scrubbed and cleaned with alcohol. EMG signals were band-pass filtered (10–400 Hz) and continuously sampled at a sampling rate of 2000 samples per second. Skin impedance was not measured, but the raw EMG signal was visually inspected to check its quality.

All participants tested the active seating system by playing one game before the EMG electrodes were placed to make them familiar with the movements and goal of the game. After the EMG electrodes were placed, participants were asked to sit in the right rear seat of the test car and to perform the four different tasks for approximately three minutes. All participants had to do all the tasks, and the muscle activity of active seating was compared with the other activities (within-subjects design). During every task, the EMG signal was recorded twice for 10 s. The first recording was done when the participant started the task and the second approximately 10 s after the first measurement.

For each 10 s recording, the mean EMG amplitude was determined for all muscles by averaging the band pass filtered (10–400 Hz) and rectified signal, obtained by taking the absolute value of each sample (ARV). EMG variability was calculated for all muscles and expressed in terms of the median absolute deviation (MAD), as described by Shevlyakov and Vilchevski (2002). As indicated by its name, this estimator is the median of the absolute differences between individual sample values and their common median. This estimator of variability is more robust to outliers than the standard deviation or the coefficient of variation (Chau et al., 2005). The average amplitude as well as the EMG variability was averaged for both 10 s recordings. First, in order to determine if there is an over all effect, both parameters were examined using a one-way ANOVA for repeated measures with condition (active seating, reading, working on a laptop and gaming on a tablet) as independent variable (p < 0.05). Degrees of freedom were adjusted using Greenhouse–Geisser's epsilon to compensate for the effects of possible violations of the sphericity assumption. Subsequently, simple planned contrasts were used to investigate differences between active seating on the one hand and reading, tablet use, and laptop use on the other hand.

@&#RESULTS@&#

During the driving test, local perceived discomfort was very low for both conditions. Participants felt significantly more challenged, more fit and more refreshed during and after active seating. The majority of participants would use this system if installed in the back seat of their car. Detailed results are described below.

The local perceived discomfort ratings were generally very low. After 30 min, the highest maximum discomfort rating of body parts was less than 2 (little discomfort) (Fig. 3
                           ).

Results of the multilevel analysis are shown in Table 1
                           . A significant increase of LPD sum (t = 5.9; p < 0.01) and LPD max (t = 4.7; p < 0.01) across measurement was found for both the active seating condition and the other conditions (tablet, book, laptop). For LPD sum, the tablet and book conditions were significantly different from the active seating condition (p < 0.05), where tablet condition had lowest discomfort. For LPD max, the laptop condition was significantly different from the active seating condition (p < 0.01). No significant interaction effects were found between condition and measurement. Thus, the increase of discomfort across time was not significantly different for active seating compared to the other tasks.

For active seating, participants scored significantly higher on the items I feel challenged, I feel fit, and I feel refreshed than for the other tasks combined, as shown in Fig. 4
                           .

The responses to the questions regarding acceptability of the active seating system are shown in Fig. 5
                           . The majority of participants thought the active seating system is a fun way to stimulate movement (79%), that they would use this system if installed in the back seat of their car (77%), and that these body movements are suitable for use in a car (85%). The car dynamics (driving) had an influence on performing the activity (84%) and was experienced mostly when cornering, in which case the amount of force needed to control the game is different (higher or lower depending on whether it is a left or a right turn). A large majority (81%) thinks the active seating system is mostly suitable for use on the highway (longer journeys). Nine out of 26 participants had additional remarks, six of which mentioned that the game could be more challenging. The following suggestions were given to improve the system: add a competition element to the game (e.g., with the passenger next to you or with other car passengers), add more sensors (e.g., not only pressure sensors but also sound sensors), offer more levels, and create more engaging games. Additionally, three participants mentioned that the system responded a bit slow.

The heart rate during active seating (87.0 bpm) was significantly higher compared to the resting heart rate (71.8 bpm) (p < 0.01). Results are shown in Table 2
                        . The average heart rate during active seating expressed as the percentage of the estimated maximum heart rate was 46.8% (SD = 5.9). The average heart rate during active seating expressed as the percentage of the heart rate reserve was 13.4% (SD = 3.8). The average MET levels during active seating was found to be 2.3 (0.4) METs.

The average EMG amplitude was significantly higher for 4 out of 6 muscles during the active seating condition compared to reading, laptop use and tablet use as shown in Fig. 6
                         and Table 3
                        . In Fig. 7
                        , the average variability in muscle activity of all participants is shown. Again, EMG variability was significantly larger for the m. obliquus externus abdomini, m. erector spinae at T10 level, m. rectus femoris, and m. trapezius pars transversa, as shown in Table 3.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The aim of this study was to evaluate three different aspects of the active seating system. Perceived discomfort and perceived comfort were measured in a 30-minute driving test, whereas heart rate and muscle activity were measured in two other stationary experiments.

Local Perceived Discomfort ratings were very low for both active seating and other tasks (reading, tablet, laptop), indicating that the seats are of such quality that no discomfort occurs within the 30 min of the driving test. A significant increase of total perceived discomfort (LPD sum) and maximum perceived discomfort (LPD max) across measurement was found for all conditions. No significant interaction effects were found between condition and measurement. On the other hand, participants did feel significantly more challenged, more fit and more refreshed while or after using the active seating system according to the comfort perception questionnaire. In line with Zhang et al. (1996), who showed that discomfort is related to physical aspects like pain and stiffness, and that comfort is associated with feelings of relaxation and well-being, it could be concluded that the active system has a positive effect on short term comfort and well-being.

While playing the active seating game, the average %MHR was about 47%. According to Garber et al. (2011), an activity with a heart rate below 57% MHR is classified as very light intensity. The average %HRR during active seating was approximately 13%. It is assumed that physical activity has to be at least moderate intensity, meaning 40%HRR or higher, in order to prevent heart and coronary diseases and type II diabetes (Garber et al., 2011). With the current activity levels, active seating does not qualify for this. The average MET level during active seating was estimated at 2.3 METs. This is comparable to very slow walking (<2 mph) or light cleaning (dusting, straightening up) according to the Ainsworth Compendium of Activities (Ainsworth et al., 2000). For an activity to be classified as non-sedentary, it should be >1.5 METs (Sedentary Behaviour Research Network, 2012). With 2.3 METs, active seating would qualify for this. However, the relationship between METs and heart rate becomes increasingly inaccurate at low levels (near resting/sedentary), so the estimation of 2.3 METs could be under or overestimated (Wicks et al., 2011), which is why we should be cautious in drawing conclusions from this. In addition, the formula used to calculate MET levels has not yet been validated for the prediction errors of individuals.

Although the EMG study was a pilot study with a minimal number of participants, significant differences were found for most of the muscles included. The average EMG levels showed a significantly larger involvement of postural muscles in the abdominal region and upper back. Furthermore, the upper leg muscles showed a trend towards more muscle activity during active seating. Although we can only speculate, dynamic stimulation during active seating might reduce oedema in the lower extremities (Deursen et al., 2000a) and relief spinal distress due to spinal length increase (Deursen et al., 2000b). Furthermore, research has shown that interruptions of sedentary behaviour are only effective in preventing diabetes type II if the postural muscles are active (Hamilton et al., 2008) to absorb glucose and fats from the blood, which was the case in the current study.

The EMG variability was significantly larger for active seating compared to the other tasks. A study by Dieën et al. (2009) showed that more variability in the EMG amplitude of the back extensor muscles resulted in less fatigue development, consistent with an earlier finding that participants with a better ability to alternate activity between parts of the lumbar extensor muscles had a better endurance in isometric back extension (Dieën et al., 1993). Temporal interventions like periodic increases in activity might stimulate motor unit substitution within muscles (Westad et al., 2003) or shifts in activity to other muscle parts (e.g., Falla and Farina, 2007) or muscles with similar biomechanical functions (e.g., Palmerud et al., 1998), thereby counteracting fatigue effects and discomfort. The EMG results indicate that active seating might result in these positive effects. The driving test results only partially confirmed this. Local perceived discomfort was not affected by active seating, whereas the perceived comfort showed significantly higher ratings for active seating.

In conclusion, active seating can be considered a low-intensity physical activity similar to very slow walking. Although active seating might not qualify as a moderate intensity activity that has a positive effect on general health, there is emerging evidence that increasing the amount of low-intensity physical activity can have similar health benefits (Levine et al., 2005; Hamilton et al., 2008). Active seating can interrupt static sitting and reduce sedentary behaviour, indicating a positive effect on comfort and well-being. Participants felt significantly more fit and more refreshed, which is supported by the EMG measurements that showed a significantly larger involvement of postural muscles in the abdominal region and upper back. Increasing the intensity level of active seating might be possible by, for instance, equipping the system with more sensors in different places and designing different games.

One of the drawbacks of this study is that the experiment was split into three tasks. Ideally, one would measure perceived discomfort and comfort at the same time while measuring heart rate and EMG. However, this was not possible due to disturbances of the signals while driving. The EMG signals were influenced by the engine of the car, so EMG measurements could only be performed while stationary, whereas the infrared signal from the heart rate seemed to be disturbed by the active seating system itself. The heart rate measuring system eventually used in this study was a Bluetooth system, which did not have this problem. For the heart rate measurements, it appeared during the driving test that other equipment was necessary, which is why the heart rate had to be measured in another separate study. Furthermore, the heart rate and EMG could have been measured for a longer time and with more participants. However, although the heart rate and EMG measurements were performed with a minimal number of participants, results do show significant differences.

The sales market of BMW is worldwide, hence, cars are sold from Europe to the US to Asia. Therefore, it is difficult to describe a “typical” BMW driver in terms of age and anthropometry. It is even more difficult to describe a typical passenger in the back seat of a BMW. This is also why we tried to include these different ethnicities in this study, as well as different ages and body sizes. Several students participated in this study and for most of them it was probably the first time in a BMW 7-series. This could have influenced their opinion on the active seating system. However, the EMG and heart rate results are less subject to bias, since these are physiological responses.

The active seating system is a promising concept to stimulate passengers to move. The system also offers opportunities for other transportation vehicles, such as aircrafts or trains, to increase the comfort level of their passengers. Especially on long flights or train journeys it can be difficult for passengers to stay fit. This study showed that already after 30 min alternating static sitting with active seating, participants felt significantly more fit and more refreshed. Although 30 min might be relatively short, Sember (1994) concluded that it takes 30 min for discomfort to become sufficient for a behavioural response to occur. More research could be done to see if this effect holds for longer durations as well and what the minimum duration and frequency of playing should be to find sustainable positive effects on comfort and well-being. Another possible application of the active seating system could be the office workplace. Several studies have been investigating the effects of dynamic workstations (John et al., 2009; Straker et al., 2009; Funk et al., 2012) on health and performance, but these workstations often consist of fitness-like equipment such as a treadmill. Integrating pressure sensors in the back rest of an office seat might be less obtrusive, and the gaming element might help motivate office workers to alternate their office tasks with a more active task.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank BMW AG for their financial support and providing the research car, and Dr Matthias Franz in particular for his help in constructing the research. Many thanks as well to Mart Hoogenhout for his assistance in conducting the research and collecting the data.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

