@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effects of obesity, age, and relative workload levels on handgrip endurance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The impacts of obesity and age on handgrip endurance across relative workload levels were examined.


                        
                        
                           
                           Obesity was associated with increased fatigability and perception of effort in younger adults.


                        
                        
                           
                           Current prediction models overestimate endurance times for the younger obese adults.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

BMI

Fatigue

Aging

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The purpose of the study was to examine obesity and age effects on handgrip endurance across a range of relative workload levels. Forty-five non-obese and obese younger and older females performed fatiguing handgrip exercises at 20, 40, 60, and 80% of relative handgrip strength. The younger obese group demonstrated ∼7% greater strength, 32% shorter endurance times, and ∼34% faster rate of strength loss, accompanied by heightened perception of effort, than the younger non-obese group. However, these obesity-related differences were not observed in the older age group. Moreover, there were no interactions between relative workload levels, obesity, and age on any of the fatigue measures. Findings obtained here suggest that work-rest schedules computed from existing force endurance prediction models may not be protective of the younger obese working population.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

With the increased prevalence of obesity (defined as having a body mass index (BMI) ≥30 kg/m2), particularly in the U.S. workforce, the ergonomic consequences of obesity have gained increasing attention in the literature. Obesity is correlated with increased lost workdays from workplace injuries and other health conditions (Finkelstein et al., 2010; Østbye et al., 2007). In the most obese, those with BMI >40 kg/m2, distal upper extremity injuries occur twice as often (Pollack et al., 2007). Changes in job demands, from added segment masses, and in worker capacities may alter risk of injury with obesity. In addition, there are implications for task performance and fatigue development, important workplace outcomes.

Obesity is associated with slower movement during manual handling and controlled hand-based tasks (Berrigan et al., 2006; Tetteh et al., 2009) (Berrigan et al., 2006; Tetteh et al., 2009) and poorer performance during handgrip and fine motor control tasks (D'Hondt et al., 2008; Mehta and Shortz, 2014). A growing number of studies have examined obesity-related changes in muscle strength (Cavuoto and Nussbaum, 2013b; Hulens et al., 2001; Maffiuletti et al., 2007), however little is known on its effect on endurance and fatigue. When performing sustained contractions, decreased capillary density and lower blood flow to the muscle, observed with obesity (Kern et al., 1999), may lead to a faster onset of muscle fatigue (Newcomer et al., 2001), which can result in decreased muscle capacity (Looze et al., 2009; Visser and Dieen, 2006).


                     Eksioglu (2011) reported an inverse relationship between BMI and endurance time during sustained isometric grip contractions at 30% of maximum strength. Similarly, trunk endurance was shown to be reduced during a modified Sørensen back endurance test (Fogelholm et al., 2006; Kankaanpää et al., 1998), although the results from the latter may have been affected by higher load levels caused by the additional body mass of obesity. For both of these studies, correlation between body mass and endurance was a secondary outcome, since neither was focused on determining obesity-related differences in fatigue resistance and only included a small sample of overweight and obese participants. This prior work was also limited to a single exertion level for each task. It is unclear to what extent fatigue resistance of the upper extremity is impaired in overweight and obese individuals, and whether this relationship is workload and muscle dependent.

In ergonomics practice, maximum holding time (endurance time) during a sustained isometric contraction is a commonly used measure for fatigue development. Dating back to the presentation of Rohmert's curve in 1960, it has been used to understand work demands and define work-rest schedules for the prevention of work-related injury (El ahrache & Imbeau, 2009; El ahrache et al., 2006; Frey Law and Avin, 2010; Gnaneswaran et al., 2013; Rohmert, 1962, 1973). Models of the relationship between the relative demand of the task and endurance time are used as an indicator of fatigue resistance and the rate of fatigue development (Dieen and Vrielink, 1994; Ma et al., 2009). Updated versions of the force-endurance model have been presented over the past 50 years, with data to account for differences by muscle and age group. For instance, aging has been shown to result in longer endurance times and increased fatigue resistance for static tasks (Avin and Frey Law, 2011). However, to date none of the studies have systematically considered individual differences based on level of both obesity and age across a range of workloads. Given that reduced capacity with obesity may result in shorter endurance times and faster fatigue development, and that these changes may vary with age, the purpose of this study is to evaluate the main and interactive effects of age and obesity on handgrip strength and endurance for multiple levels of relative workload. It was hypothesized that the interaction between age and obesity would impact fatigue development, particularly in the older obese group, and that this relationship would be workload-dependent.

@&#METHODS@&#

The current study was conducted across two sites, using the same experimental protocols and equipment to avoid methodological and equipment-related discrepancies. Twenty six females from the local community in Buffalo, NY and twenty two females in College Station, TX were recruited from the local community into four groups: non–obese young (18.5 ≤ BMI < 25 kg/m2, 20–35 years), non–obese older (18.5 ≤ BMI < 25 kg/m2, >50 years), obese young (BMI >30 kg/m2, 20–35 years), and obese older (BMI >30 kg/m2, >50 years). Demographic characteristics of the study participants are shown in Table 1
                        , pooled across both sites. Only females were recruited for this study to minimize gender-related variability in obesity characterization and muscle performance (i.e., strength and endurance). Exclusion criteria included any musculoskeletal disorders that would impair the ability to perform the experiments. In addition, the participants were not involved in high levels of aerobic or resistance training that may have affected their grip strength or endurance. Participants completed an informed consent procedure approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the University at Buffalo and Texas A&M University.

Participants completed four experimental sessions that consisted of handgrip strength and endurance testing. At the start of the first session, demographic information, health history, and anthropometric measurements were taken. Participants performed a series of warm–up exercises with a stress ball for 2 min and were also provided practice with the grip dynamometer. After sufficient rest, a minimum of three maximum voluntary contractions (MVCs) were measured at the beginning of each session. Participants were seated upright with their upper arm at their side. A digital grip dynamometer (Hoggan microFET 4, Salt Lake City, UT, USA) was held in the dominant hand and the participant maintained a standardized grip testing posture with their elbow bent at 90° with the non–dominant arm resting on the lap (Fig. 1
                        A). The maximum strength value obtained from the MVCs during the first session was used to determine the target load levels for each participant's endurance tasks.

Following strength measurement and sufficient rest, handgrip endurance was assessed. Target relative loads of 20, 40, 60, or 80% MVC were used to cover the range of possible exertion levels observed in the workplace and to facilitate comparison with previous endurance data (Rohmert, 1962). Participants completed the endurance task at one target load per session. The presentation order of the tasks was randomized within each group and sessions were separated by at least 48 h each. Participants were instructed to maintain the target workload for as long as they were able and were provided real–time visual feedback of their generated force against their target force (Fig. 1B). Every 30 s during the task, participants were asked to provide ratings of perceived exertion (RPE) using the modified Borg CR-10 scale, where the scale ranged from 0 “Nothing at all” to 10 “Extremely strong, almost maximum”. The endurance task ended when either the participant indicated she could no longer continue or her exerted force dropped >10% below the required effort level for more than 5 s. Immediately following the endurance task, participants completed a post-task MVC. In general strength loss (calculated as percent MVC decrease from initial MVC) provides a direct measure of localized muscle fatigue (Vøllestad, 1997) to evaluate if tasks are fatiguing. However the tasks in the present study were intended to induce fatigue, thus strength loss was expected to remain comparable between groups. Therefore, rate of strength loss, calculated as the ratio of strength loss to endurance time, was employed to assess age- and obesity-specific differences in the progression of fatigue development. Similarly, RPE rate was calculated as the ratio of maximum RPE to endurance time.

Separate mixed-factor analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were used to assess the main and interactive effects of obesity level (non-obese or obese), age (young or older), and workload (20, 40, 60, or 80% MVC) on endurance time, rate of strength loss, and RPE rates. Parametric model assumptions were assessed and log transformations of endurance time, rate of strength loss, and RPE rates were used to achieve homoscedasticity. Relationships between endurance time and workload were analyzed using non-linear regression based on visual inspection of the data. Power functions, in the form of 
                           
                              Time
                              =
                              
                                 b
                                 0
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       (
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                %
                                                MVC
                                             
                                             /
                                             
                                                100
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       )
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       b
                                       1
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                         were fit for each individual (Frey Law and Avin, 2010). Separate ANOVAs were used to examine obesity and age differences in the derived model parameters. The level of significance was set at p < 0.05 for all analyses. Significant interaction effects were examined using Tukey's HSD post hoc analysis as needed. Potential site-based systematic biases were examined by including ‘site’ as a factor in the statistical analyses.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The younger group had 10% higher handgrip strength (F
                     (1,40) = 3.98; p = 0.057) than the older group (269.86 (59.1) N). While a main effect of obesity on handgrip strength was not observed (p = 0.7424), a significant age × obesity interaction (F
                     (1,40) = 4.14; p = 0.043) was observed on handgrip strength, with the younger obese group demonstrating greater strength than the younger non-obese group (Fig. 2
                     ). No obesity-related difference in strength was observed in the older group.

As expected, endurance time decreased significantly with increasing workload levels (F
                     (3,121) = 324.07; p < 0.001; Fig. 3
                     ). There was a significant age × obesity interaction (F
                     (1,40) = 5.01; p = 0.031; Fig. 3), with lower endurance times observed in the obese younger group compared to the non-obese younger group. No obesity-related differences in endurance times were observed in the older group. Fitting endurance data to relative workload levels using power functions (Fig. 4
                     ) for each individual and averaged over the age and obesity groups revealed significant main effects of obesity (F
                     (1,38) = 8.88; p = 0.005) and age (F
                     (1,38) = 4.66; p = 0.037) on model parameter b
                     0 (Fig. 5
                     ). In addition, age had a significant main effect on model parameter b
                     1 (F
                     (1,38) = 4.61; p = 0.038; Fig. 5). Data from three older participants (2 non-obese and 1 obese, resulting in 10 in each of those two groups) were excluded from the model fitting analysis since the b
                     1 values were outliers.

On average, participants' post-endurance MVC was ∼37 (14)% of their initial strength. Rate of strength loss was significantly affected by workload (F
                     (3,121) = 126.48; p < 0.001) and age × obesity interaction (F
                     (1,40) = 6.73; p < 0.013). The younger obese group demonstrated faster rate of strength loss compared to the younger non-obese and older obese groups (Fig. 5).

Increasing workload levels were associated with greater RPE rates (F
                     (3,114) = 262.91; p < 0.001). Moreover, a significant age × obesity interaction on RPE rates (F
                     (1,38) = 4.81; p = 0.035; Fig. 6
                     ) indicated that the obese group reported greater RPE rates than non-obese group. However, this difference was observed only in the younger age group.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Consistent with existing evidence on age-related decline in muscle strength, we observed ∼10% reduced absolute strength in older adults compared to their younger counterparts (Faulkner et al., 1995; Hakkinen, 1995). Additionally, we observed obesity-related increase (∼7%) in handgrip strength, however this was only found in the younger group. This finding is consistent with previous evidence of a positive correlation between body mass and handgrip strength in younger individuals (Cavuoto and Nussbaum, 2013b; Eksioglu, 2011). Obesity-related changes in muscle structure and or chronic adaption to support additional body mass have been previously attributed to the increased absolute strength seen in obese individuals (Maffiuletti et al., 2013). Contrary to our expectations, handgrip strength was comparable across non-obese and obese older adults. Owing to factors such as physical activity level, or muscle group being tested, evidence of obesity-related strength differences in adults aged 65 years or older has been mixed, with some studies reporting reduced absolute muscle strength in elderly obese subjects (Villareal et al., 2004) while others reporting no differences in strength in older, obese adults when compared to older, non-obese adults (Rolland et al., 2004). For example, Rolland et al. (2004) reported obesity-related differences in strength in active older adults but observed comparable strengths in sedentary non-obese and obese older adults, similar to that seen in the current study with sedentary participants.

As hypothesized, increasing workload levels were associated with decreases in endurance times, and faster rate of strength decline and perceived exertion. It was hypothesized that the interaction between age and obesity would impact fatigue development, particularly in the older obese group. However the findings indicated that the younger obese group had shorter endurance, faster rate of strength loss and increased perception of exertion than the younger obese and the older non-obese and obese groups. Previous studies investigating obesity effects on muscle fatigue have reported similar reductions in endurance times and/or rate of strength loss in younger individuals (Cavuoto and Nussbaum, 2013a; Maffiuletti et al., 2007). Increased fatigability in obese adults has been attributed, at least in part, to obesity-related shifts in increased proportion of fast twitch (fatigable) and lower muscle capillarity (Kern et al., 1999; Tanner et al., 2002). However, Maffiuletti et al. (2007) implicated central, rather than peripheral factors, to fatigue development in obese adults. They reported that while young obese adults demonstrated greater voluntary quadriceps fatigability than non-obese adults, during a stimulated fatiguing protocol the peripheral mechanisms of fatigue were not influenced by obesity. It is suggested that impaired muscle activation, perception of discomfort, and/or motivation, might have a greater contribution to fatigue development than peripheral factors. Indeed, several studies, along with the RPE findings observed in the current study, have demonstrated that obese individuals report greater discomfort during physical exertion than their lean counterparts (Cavuoto and Nussbaum, 2013a, 2013b; Mehta, 2014). Interestingly, a recent study also demonstrated that obesity-related differences in neural processes in the prefrontal cortex associated with hand/arm muscle activation are linked to impaired coordination (Mehta and Shortz, 2014). Thus, it is possible that upstream processes, such as neural activation and/or motivation, are impacted by obesity and can increase muscle fatigability in obese adults.

Both aging and obesity have shown to independently contribute to impaired musculoskeletal function; moreover Vincent et al. (2012) suggested that changes in muscle fiber type, hormonal level decline, inflammation, and body composition can potentially exacerbate neuromuscular impairments in older obese individuals. However the current study did not observe greater fatigability in the older, obese adults. It should be noted that the mean (SD) age of the older group (pooled across both obesity groups) in this study was 60.3 (11.3) years and that the mean age of the older obese group was greater than the older non-obese group (Table 1). Despite the differences in the age range, obesity-specific differences were observed only in the younger group. Thus it is likely that the impact of obesity on age-related decline in musculoskeletal function is detrimental at older age range, i.e., greater than 75 years (Villareal et al., 2004). Moreover it is possible that the relationships between age, obesity, and fatigue are influenced by gender and task-related factors such as contraction mode, intensity, or muscle group employed, thus future work that compares task- specific fatigue development in older non-obese and obese males and females is warranted.

In order to understand the impact of the aforementioned results, the model parameters from the power functions for each group were compared to the results of a recent meta-analysis of the previously developed endurance models (Frey Law and Avin, 2010). From their analysis of data from non-obese adults, the best fit parameters for grip endurance were b
                     0 = 33.55 and b
                     1 = −1.61 (Frey Law and Avin, 2010). Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) were calculated to compare the model parameters derived in the current study with these values. For the younger non-obese, older non-obese, and older obese groups the ICC values were >0.9 (ICC = 0.98, 0.95, and 0.94, respectively). With the younger obese group the ICC = 0.78. A lower ICC value indicates a greater mismatch between the predicted endurance times for the two models. This suggests that models based on the previously available data may not accurately predict endurance times for younger obese individuals. When applying these models to workplace design, this can lead to inaccurate prediction of expected endurance and subsequently of rest allowances, potentially resulting in increased fatigue for this group.

The study has several limitations that warrant some discussion. First, the study defined obesity as having BMI greater than 30 kg/m2 (CDC, 2012). While BMI may be confounded by factors such as high muscularity (Gonzalez et al., 2000), it is associated with obesity-related morbidity and mortality (Must et al., 1999), and is a practical measure of obesity in the workplace. Second, the current study employed a sustained handgrip endurance task in controlled static posture. Although intermittent static/dynamic contractions are more relevant than sustained, most occupational tasks contain work components requiring static exertions. Third, given gender differences in muscle strength and fatigue, the current study focused solely on female participants to minimize variability in strength and endurance time measurements. Fourth, the experimental task utilized a voluntary fatigue protocol, i.e., participants performed the task until voluntary exhaustion. Thus, differences in motivation between sessions, individuals, age/obesity groups, and sites may have affected endurance times. Indeed, the present study found greater variability in endurance times at the lower workload levels that may be attributed to central rather than peripheral factors. Central fatigue is influenced by intrinsic factors such as motivation, boredom, or mental fatigue (Boksem et al., 2006; Chaudhuri and Behan, 2000; Mehta and Agnew, 2012; Mehta and Parasuraman, 2014). Nonetheless, voluntary contractions are most relevant to typical occupational activities, and thus serve as more realistic information on the physical abilities and limitations of workers. Future work should involve a larger sample of both males and females, across multiple levels of BMI and age ranges. Finally, because fatigue is task-dependent, investigating the impact of age and obesity interactions on muscle fatigue development across tasks employing different muscle groups or contraction modes may provide more generalizable outcomes than that observed in the current study.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Obesity was associated with greater handgrip strength, shorter endurance, faster rate of strength loss, and increased perception of exertion in younger females, while no such differences were observed in older females. Additional investigations targeting both males and females performing more realistic work tasks are needed to examine interactions between age and obesity on muscle capacity. Even so, findings obtained here suggest that work-rest schedules computed from existing force endurance prediction models may not be protective of the younger obese working population. Workplace task design and evaluation procedures as well as fatigue prevention strategies need to accommodate capabilities of the changing worker demographics.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

