@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Assessment of a simple obstacle detection device for the visually impaired

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Obstacle detection is a major problem to be solved to ensure safe navigation for the visually impaired.


                        
                        
                           
                           Static obstacles that are not located on the ground are hardly detected by white cane.


                        
                        
                           
                           The obstacle detector developed might increase mobility performance and was well accepted by visually impaired participants.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Visually impaired

Obstacle detection

Travel aid

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A simple obstacle detection device, based upon an automobile parking sensor, was assessed as a mobility aid for the visually impaired. A questionnaire survey for mobility needs was performed at the start of this study. After the detector was developed, five blindfolded sighted and 15 visually impaired participants were invited to conduct travel experiments under three test conditions: (1) using a white cane only, (2) using the obstacle detector only and (3) using both devices. A post-experiment interview regarding the usefulness of the obstacle detector for the visually impaired participants was performed. The results showed that the obstacle detector could augment mobility performance with the white cane. The obstacle detection device should be used in conjunction with the white cane to achieve the best mobility speed and body protection.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Mobility refers to one's ability to identify the relation between their position and the objects in the environment and then move independently, safely and efficiently (Kuyk et al., 2010). The most obvious problem faced by blind persons is moving around in their environment without bumping into unexpected obstacles (Molton et al., 1998). Obstacle detection is thus one of the major problems to be solved to ensure safe navigation. The white cane is the most popular and traditional navigation aid for the visually impaired (Molton et al., 1998; Snaith et al., 1998; Dakopoulos and Bourbakis, 2010) in spite of modern technology-based devices (Clark-Carter et al., 1986; Schellingerhout et al., 2001). The white cane is the simplest, cheapest and most reliable device thus far. It can be generally applied to detect static obstacles on the ground, uneven surfaces, holes and stairs (Cardin et al., 2007). However, the reach of the cane is limited (Yasumuro et al., 2003) and obstacles not located on the ground are hardly detected.

A number of electronic travel aids (ETAs) for the visually impaired have been developed for navigation and obstacle detection/avoidance. Dakopoulos and Bourbakis (2010) presented a comparative survey among portable/wearable obstacle detection/avoidance systems for the visually impaired. Cardin et al. (2007) also reviewed several obstacle detection devices developed in the literature.

The common ETA features based upon new technologies in the literature may conclude that information was gathered from the environment using sonar, laser scanner or stereo camera vision. The user was generally informed through auditory and/or tactile sense (Cardin et al., 2007; Dakopoulos and Bourbakis, 2010). Other features and disadvantages of ETAs are briefly summarized as follows. The signal processing of many novel ETAs usually required complicated computer algorithms to provide more complete information about nearby obstacles (Cardin et al., 2007; Sainarayanan et al., 2007). The sensors in some ETAs could only detect obstacles on the ground just like the white cane. Other ETAs had more functional body protection capabilities (e.g., shoulder protection, Cardin et al., 2007). Some ETAs were small, light and handheld, e.g., Miniguide (Phillips, 1998), while other ETAs were bulky, e.g., Navbelt (Shoval et al., 1994) and GuideCane (Ulrich and Borenstein, 2001), making them difficult to hold or carry when needed. Although some aids were portable, they still required manual operation (e.g. Ghiani et al., 2009), making co-incident use of conventional aids difficult or impossible (e.g., white canes). One or more cameras in some ETAs required mounting on headgear (Sainarayanan et al., 2007) or the frame of eyeglasses for obstacle capture (Meers and Ward, 2005 cited in Dakopoulos and Bourbakis, 2010). Such devices may be not accepted by some visually impaired individuals because they may feel cumbersome or embarrassed to wear in public places. Some ETAs required extensive training periods (Snaith et al., 1998). The relatively high cost of ETAs available in the market is a discouraging feature.

To fill the detection gaps in the white cane and overcome the disadvantages of ETAs, a compact size, lightweight, low-cost and simple detection feedback obstacle detection device was developed and explored in this study. The prototype of this detector was developed and evaluated using blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants in travel experiments. This study hypothesized that different travel aid devices would alter walking efficiency and obstacle detection for visually impaired persons. The aims of this study were to compare ETA walking efficiency and obstacle detection capability using both blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants under three test conditions.

@&#METHOD@&#

At the start of obstacle detector development a survey of visually impaired students was conducted to determine their mobility needs in daily life. Participants were interviewed individually using a constructed questionnaire. The data were then recorded by researchers. The first part of the questionnaire contained the participant's personal data which included name, gender, age, educational level, blind or visually impaired condition, peripheral (side) vision, awareness of light, colour vision and any other impairment. The second part asked for travel experiences including daily activities, use of travel aids and obstacle collision experiences in the environment. Several discussions were held with teachers, who were blind and teaching in the school, to modify the questions before the interview was performed. The purpose of this study was clearly explained to the participants prior to the interview. Informed consent to participate was obtained from the participants in this study.

Thirty-one participants were junior high and senior high students from a school for the visually impaired in Central Taiwan. The students had received at least six-month training in orientation and mobility before joining this study. During the interview one student was determined to have a learning disability, and thus, was eliminated from the study. A total of 30 valid participants included 15 junior high school students (aged 13–15, 9 males and 6 females) and 15 senior high school students (aged 16–19, 9 males and 6 females). As self-reported during the interview, 25 students (83.3%) said they were blind and 5 classified themselves as having low vision, 27 (90.0%) with congenital impairment and 3 with acquired impairment.

All interviewed participants lived at school during the weekdays and could choose to return home or stay at school during weekends and holidays. This study (including a survey and an obstacle detection experiment) was approved by the Institutional Review Board for Ergonomics Experiment of Chaoyang University of Technology.

The obstacle detector developed in this study was based upon an automobile parking sensor, consisting of 3 main modules; a sensing module with transmitting and receiving functions, a processing module and a warning module. Table 1
                            shows the dimensions and photos of the ultrasonic obstacle detector modules. The detector architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1
                           . The detection system works by sending out ultrasonic pulses that are reflected back to the sensor by obstacles within the sensor detection envelope. The reflected signals are processed by the processing module, which in turn activates the warning buzzer to alert the user that there is an obstacle in the travel path.

The three detector modules were commercial electronic parts packed as a set used for obstacle detection while car-parking. The default distance sensitivity setting of the sensor was adjusted to a lower level for this study. Another detection system modification was made for the detector power connection. A 12 V dry battery was sufficient for detector use by an individual. A 12 V battery with 2Ah capacity was used to supply the experiment with sufficient operational time during a day. The obstacle detector was small and lightweight, as shown in Table 1. One sensing module was mounted on the participant's body with the other two modules placed in a small bag on a belt worn on the waist or in a pocket. Two sensors were attached to the participant's chest and waist, respectively, during the experiment. The reason for this arrangement was to test if the detector could effectively detect obstacles not located on the ground.

The sensor detection envelope was investigated in the laboratory before the detector was assessed in the field. A high flat wooden board (height 245.4 cm, width 32.5 cm) and three university students were employed to move around as targets for detection envelope measurements. The mean age of these students was 27.0 yr/SD 2.6 yr; mean body height 165.6 cm/SD 4.6 cm; and mean body weight 60.3 kg/SD 10.8 kg. The test direction was varied every 5° from the mid–saggital plane to the right and left sides. Each angle for each target was tested twice. Another test for detection distance was performed at the university campus after the laboratory test. The obstacles on the campus included the iron railings outside a building and in an athletic field, the net in a volleyball court, the bonnet of sedans and the stairways. An individual (stature 163.3 cm and body weight 68.4 kg) was asked to wear a sensor on his chest (120.4 cm) in the test. A parking lot gate arm (7.5 cm in width) was also tested in a parking lot by the individual with a sensor worn on his waist.

Two experimental stages were performed for obstacle detection evaluation in this study. Five blindfolded sighted participants (4 males and 1 female) who were graduate students at the university were recruited to detect obstacles in a simulated environment. Fifteen visually impaired participants (10 males and 5 females) were then invited to travel a real world mobility route. The visually impaired participants included 5 junior high school students, 6 senior high school students and 4 teachers from a visually impaired school in Central Taiwan. These participants were totally blind with no residual vision. Thirteen suffered from congenital visual impairment. All visually impaired participants had received at least six-month training in orientation and mobility prior to this study. Table 2
                            shows the participants' personal data and anthropometric measurements.

A corridor 30 m long outside the laboratory at the university was used as a simulated route for the first experimental stage. Nine obstacles existed in the corridor, including 5 purposefully placed obstacles (1 bicycle, 2 chairs, and 2 overhanging cardboard boxes) arranged in the middle of the corridor and 4 natural obstacles (2 shoe cabinets and 2 shelves) situated against the corridor walls. The positions of the purposefully placed obstacles were changed for each test and each participant. No arrival time was recorded at each checkpoint (i.e., the obstacle location) in this experimental stage and only the total time for each test was recorded.

The route around the school campus travelled by visually impaired participants was used for the second-stage test. The route shown in Fig. 2
                            was determined based upon the concern for the participant's transportation safety when the experiment was proposed and discussed with the school staff. Eight obstacles were placed in the 138 m long route. The purposefully placed obstacles consisted of 2 bicycles/motorcycles and 1 hanging cardboard box. Their locations were varied for each test condition and each participant. Five natural obstacles existed in the path, including a plant terrace, a tall tree, a pedestrian overpass, a side-door and a tilted tree. Ten checkpoints in the path, shown in Fig. 2, consisted of 3 locations on the pedestrian overpass and 7 locations at the other obstacles. The arrival time to each of these 10 checkpoints in the path was recorded for each test condition and each participant.

Three experimental test conditions were completed by both blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants: (1) using a white cane only, (2) using the obstacle detector only and (3) using both devices together. The test conditions were selected at random for each participant in the experiment.

A collision prevention strategy regarding participant safety during the experiment was stated as follows. A collision risk assessment was conducted to ensure the safety of participants before the experiment was performed. A pilot test was performed by an experimenter with and without a blindfold in order to observe the possible collisions before and after the collision prevention was discussed and improved. The possible parts of obstacles that might be collided with by the participant's body during the experiment were wrapped with foam instead of asking the participant to wear personal protective equipment such as helmet and gloves. This was done because observing the participant's behaviours after obstacle collision was one of the major study purposes. Several instructions were given to the participants before the experiment: (a) Participants had the possibility of body collision with obstacles on the footpath during the experiment. Such obstacles were wrapped with foam and might exist at ground, waist or head level. (b) Although measures to minimize the risk for injury had been taken, participants could still suffer light impact with obstacles when collisions occurred during the experiment. (c) An experimenter would follow the participant on the path during the experiment to protect the participant from any injury. When an orientation loss took place or before a harmful collision occurred the experimenter would guide the participant with verbal warnings or/and hand(s). (d) Participants had the option to withdraw from the experiment any time.

A clear explanation of the experimental objectives and procedures was given to ensure no difficulties in operating the experimental aids by the participants. A brief training period for both blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants was provided to ensure enough practice and familiarity with the tests before actual data were collected. A written consent from each participant was obtained and the anthropometric data were measured. For test conditions 2 and 3 (i.e., a detector included), two sensing modules were worn on each participant's chest and waist to detect possible collisions by the head or waist. Both finish time and collision frequency of three test conditions for each participant were recorded to determine whether different test conditions resulted in differences in walking efficiency and mobility safety. A warning sound was delivered to the participants by a buzzer. An experimenter followed the participant on the footpath, could hear the warning sound and record the participant's behaviour during the experiment. Post-experiment interviews regarding the usefulness of the travel aids were carried out after the participant had completed all three test conditions.

Finish time (FT) was defined as the time required for one participant to complete one test condition. Collision frequency (CF) was considered only when participants collided unintentionally with the obstacles. If the participants walked into and made contact with an obstacle on the route with their white cane or when an alarm sounded and the participant recognized that an obstacle lay ahead in test conditions 2 and 3, tentative actions were usually taken by participants to try to determine the characteristics of the obstacles. Such behaviour would be considered an intentional collision and was not counted in CF in this study.

Finish time and collision frequency under three different test conditions from 5 blindfolded sighted and 15 visually impaired participants were obtained in the experiment. Data were analysed using one-way ANOVA using SPSS 10.0 for Windows. When the main effect was significant, a post hoc analysis using Duncan's new multiple range test was applied to evaluate differences among test conditions. All significance levels were set at alpha = 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The questionnaire results showed that 90.0% of the participants often used a white cane when going out alone. Ninety percent of the visually impaired did not use white canes in familiar environments such as school or home. The places visited most frequently included stores (73%), relatives'/friends' homes (50%), and restaurants (30%). Fig. 3
                         shows four obstacle types that the participants often collided with while navigating. Both the automobile/motorcycle (70%) and piled item/protrusion (63%) obtained the highest obstacle collision percentage. Fig. 4
                         illustrates the body parts that were most often collided with obstacles and expected to avoid obstacle-colliding. All participants expressed that they had never used electronic travel aids before but would like to try if available. The low cost, convenient aids were of greatest interest for all participants.


                           Fig. 5
                            shows the sensor detection envelopes obtained from two tests using a high flat wooden board and three persons as targets in the laboratory. The farthest and shortest detection distances were about 228 cm and 43 cm when the sensor was placed right ahead of the wooden board (i.e., 0° in the figure) and at ±50° to the mid–sagittal plane of the person. The sensor did not detect the wooden board or three persons at angle ranges beyond 50°. The detection distance measured at the university campus after the laboratory test ranged from 72.5 to 152.3 cm for different obstacles, including iron railings, volleyball net, sedan bonnet and stairways. A parking lot gate arm that protruded about the individual's waist height (105 cm) could be detected.


                           Figs. 6 and 7
                           
                            show the finish time (FT) and collision frequency (CF) means obtained from 5 blindfolded sighted and 15 visually impaired participants under the three test conditions. The shortest finish time was found using the white cane plus detector test condition for both blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants. The maximum differences in FT among the visually impaired participants were 235.4 s using the white cane only, 213.4 s using the detector only, and 156.9 s using both aids together. The FT values varied markedly among the visually impaired participants under the same test condition, however, such results were not found among the blindfolded sighted participants. Table 3
                            shows the collision frequency and the obstacles collided with by both 5 blindfolded sighted and 15 visually impaired participants under the three test conditions. The body parts that collided with the obstacles are also shown in the Table. The white cane only usually failed to detect obstacles above the ground for both blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants, especially obstacles at head level. When the obstacle detector sensors were placed on the upper parts of the participant's body the CF values were reduced. No CF values were obtained under the white cane plus detector condition for both blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants. The statistical analysis results revealed that both finish time and collision frequency for the visually impaired participants showed significant differences among the three test conditions (F(2, 42) = 6.935, p = .002, and F(2, 42) = 63.7, p = .000). The Duncan's groupings for both FT and CF were then obtained by test condition (α = .05) and present in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. Among the three test conditions, the test using both devices produced the smallest FT. The test with the white cane only produced the largest CF among the three conditions.

All blindfolded sighted participants stated that they did not feel confident in detecting obstacles while using the detector only. For the other two test conditions they felt more confident because the white cane was included. However, they all reported positive when the detector was used in the experiment and agreed that the detector was useful in detecting obstacles not located on the ground. The post-experiment interview results for the visually impaired participants are listed in Table 4
                           . Eleven participants (73.4%) were satisfied or very satisfied with current detector prototype, and 12 (80.0%) were satisfied or very satisfied with the prototype weight. Thirteen participants (86.7%) expressed that the travel aid was really helpful to their mobility and their confidence in mobility could be enhanced (80.0%). In response to questions about their preference for the devices used in this experiment, all participants preferred to rely upon the white cane due to its reliability when only one device could be chosen. However, using both devices would be their best choice if the obstacle detector was available for use.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The questionnaire inquired into the participant's vision status (total blindness and low vision), light perception and colour vision. The visually impaired participants recruited for the experiment were totally blind with no residual vision. The participants' vision status was not reconfirmed with eye examinations. Their answers to these questions were kept confidential. However, there might be bias in the study survey results.

The participants were allowed to choose more than one answer (item) in the questionnaire regarding the obstacle types that they often collided with. Seventy percent of the visually impaired participants, shown in Fig. 3, expressed that automobile/motorcycle was the most common obstacle that they often collided with. Automobiles or motorcycles are allowed to be parked on the roadside in Taiwan. Occasionally automobiles or motorcycles are illegally parked on the sidewalk. Visually impaired persons therefore may easily meet and collide with them while walking in the street. The participants were allowed to answer with more than one body part that often collided with obstacles. The result shown in Fig. 4 indicated that head collisions (57%) occurred almost as often as leg collisions (60%). However, there are far fewer head level obstacles than leg level obstacles in a natural environment. This might be explained as follows. A head collision is a serious event and the participant was more likely to remember head collision incidences than other body part collision incidences. The high rate of reported head collisions might simply reflect the long-lasting memory of painful head collisions instead of the true frequency of head collision incidences. Therefore, the highest desire was to avoid head collisions, which seemed to be a reasonable assessment, with the highest percentage (50%) among body parts.

All participants agreed that the white cane could be used to detect static obstacles on the ground and protect the lower body parts but protection gaps did exist. The white cane was insufficient to protect the head, hands and waist while walking. Head collision was the participant's strongest desire to avoid. Additionally, the cost and ease-of-use of travel aids were also a great concern. This motivated the development of a low cost electronic detector with a warning for obstacles near the head and waist of the visually impaired.

The limitations of this survey were that the sample size was small, the participants were young and their travel environment was restricted mostly to a school campus or several limited sites that they frequently visited. Future surveys must collect larger samples with a wide range of ages and visual impairment for further statistical analysis.

The longest finish time (FT) was found in the test condition using only a detector for both blindfolded sighted and visually impaired. All blindfolded sighted and visually impaired participants had no previous experience using a detector and were observed to walk forward slowly and carefully when using only the detector during the experiment. It was also found that the mobility speed varied markedly among participants. An individual's walking habit partly accounted for the speed difference.

The shortest FT appeared in the condition where both devices were used together. The body protection (for head, waist/hands, and legs) was also enhanced and the collision frequency (CF) decreased. The mobility performance and body protection using both devices used together were the highest in all test conditions. Using a detector only protected the user's body parts better than the white cane but was worse in mobility speed. The experimental results verified the study hypotheses. This is consistent with the results of Snaith et al. (1998) and Cardin et al. (2007) that the white cane is a major mobility aid and other aids can assist with the cane's deficiency. The developed detector did augment the white cane. Participants walking with both devices together would obtain more information about obstacles ahead and their confidence in mobility might be increased. This finding could be observed from the post-experiment interview results, in which all participants expressed positive comments for the presence of the detector. It should be noted that the benefit of using the cane and the detector together only occurred in finish time, not in obstacle collision. There was no significant difference in obstacle collision between the detector alone condition and the white cane plus detector condition.

Visually impaired participants received mobility and orientation training prior to this study. They could more easily adopt coping strategies and obtain more confidence with their mobility needs. It was observed that they showed good navigation behaviour during the experiment. However, the study results showed that visually impaired participants gained greater finish times. The difference in finish time between visually impaired and blindfolded sighted participants might result from the travel routes selected for the experiment. The route around the school campus navigated by visually impaired participants was to some extent complicated. There were 3 turning points, 1 pedestrian overpass, 1 plant terrace and 1 side-door on the route. This route was longer than that travelled by the blindfolded sighted participants. Visually impaired participants sometimes deviated from the planned path during the experiment and the actual travel distance became larger when an orientation loss took place. However, path deviation and orientation loss were found in only a few instances for blindfolded sighted participants because the test route was straight, flat and shorter. Additionally, the blindfolded sighted participants usually waited at laboratory for the experiment and basically knew the route and the obstacles before they were blindfolded. Therefore, blindfolded sighted participants would have much shorter finish times. The preliminary test for the travel aid detection function (i.e., white cane and detector), observed from blindfolded sighted participants, was the purpose for the first experimental stage. Observing visually impaired participants' behaviour during the experiment was the purpose of the second stage. The navigation performance comparison between these two groups was not the original experiment design in this study.

The detector developed in this study could not differentiate the characteristics of obstacles. The warning sound simply raised the alertness level of the participant and prompted the participant to take cautious actions. It was observed that the participants always moved with their hand(s) raised forward and upward when the buzzer sounded under test conditions 2 and 3 (i.e., a detector included). They also swung their white cane vigorously when an obstacle was detected by the white cane. They adopted these actions to determine what and where the obstacles were. They then lowered their head or stooped down to avoid head collisions, side-stepped away from an obstacle on the ground with hands touching or/and with the white cane swinging. A loss of orientation usually occurred for most participants after they collided with an obstacle during the experiment. Visually impaired persons should decrease their walking speed to avoid an accidental collision. Additionally, they should be trained how to solve the orientation loss problem while collisions happen during navigation.

The warning signal for the obstacles ahead was the only information provided by the detector. This has been generally sufficient in most situations for the visually impaired to take action and avoid possible collisions. The developed device was small in size and lightweight. One or more sensing modules can be easily worn or attached to user body sites such as the head, chest, waist, hand or other body part to detect obstacles. One advantage of the current detection system is that it is hands free.

At the travel aid development stage pilot trials were performed to test the detection system capabilities. The warning signal frequently sounded in trials with the original detection system (i.e., without any sensor modification). It was observed that objects located a little farther on the side of the road and within the detection envelope might be detected by the sensor. However, such objects did not obstruct the users' movement. The sensor default distance sensitivity setting was adjusted to a lower level. The detection system then worked reasonably. This sensor adjustment avoided false alarms while walking and successfully met the obstacle detection demands of this study.

The distance envelope obtained with the test using a wooden board as the target was larger than that used by the sample individuals (Fig. 5). This result was fair because more reflected signals were received from the flat board by the ultrasonic sensor due to its smooth surface. A certain amount of reflected signals occurred from an individual, however, these signals became scattered and could not be received by the detector. This decreased the effective detection distance. Furthermore, the detection distance varied for different obstacles tested at the university campus after the laboratory test. It was found that the sensor distance envelope could be affected by several factors such as the body movement while walking, the individual's clothing, the body sites where sensors were attached and the obstacle features (e.g., dimensions, appearance, and surface roughness). Users should be aware that the sensor detection distance is target and direction dependent.

The visually impaired participants were not told or did not ask about the nature and number of obstacles appearing on the route as well as whether the same route was used for all three tests during the experiment. Three test conditions were completed in random order by each participant and the locations of the purposefully placed obstacles were varied in each condition. The experimental results could be used to reasonably explore the usefulness and make a comparison analysis of the tested devices. However, a familiar test environment might lead to insufficient generalizability of the FT and CF results.

Eight obstacles were scattered over a 138-m path with no two obstacles within the detection envelop at the same time in this study. However, the participants were not told that there was only one obstacle when the warning sounded. They always behaved as described above when an obstacle was detected. In a realistic environment the warning sound might be continuous. If this occurs it is suggested that the user turn the detector off and use a white cane or other suitable travel aid instead. This might be the limitation of using this detector.

The experimental results presented positive responses to the detector. However, detector improvement is still needed. To enhance user convenience the detection device system should be designed with a user-friendly interface and wireless function. A vibro-tactile feedback and earphone function should also be provided to ensure the warning signals are received by users who are deaf/blind or in a noisy environment. Furthermore, a global positioning system (GPS) may be taken into account in detection system development to provide location information for the visually impaired in outdoor navigation.

The current developed detector provides only information that a detected obstacle is in front and nearby. If the actual position of the obstacle (i.e., appearing on the left side, right side, upper level, or lower level of the user) can be provided the user may more easily take correct action to avoid obstacle collision. Future work should be done regarding this suggestion: (1) the feasibility of manufacturing such a detector prototype/product, (2) experiments conducted for detection performance and (3) a training course for the user.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A compact, lightweight, simple detection feedback, easy-to-use, low-cost obstacle detection device for the visually impaired was developed in this study. The results showed that the developed detector could augment the user's performance with a white cane. To achieve the best mobility performance and body protection effect, the obstacle detection device should be used in conjunction with the white cane.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors wish to thank the National Taichung Special Education School for the Visually Impaired for their support and the participants for their time and patience in completing the questionnaire survey and the experiment.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

