@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Influence of different shoulder-elbow configurations on steering precision and steering velocity in automotive context

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Influence of posture on driving precision and steering velocity was investigated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Arm posture influences steering precision and steering velocity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Steering precision and velocity are significantly increased in mid-positions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Driver safety can be enhanced by implementing these data in the design process.


                        
                        
                           
                           Subjective comfort rating confirmed experimental results.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Optimum driving posture

Steering precision

Steering velocity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Ergonomic design requirements are needed to develop optimum vehicle interfaces for the driver. The majority of the current specifications consider only anthropometric conditions and subjective evaluations of comfort. This paper examines specific biomechanical aspects to improve the current ergonomic requirements. Therefore, a research which involved 40 subjects was carried out to obtain more knowledge in the field of steering movement while driving a car. Five different shoulder-elbow joint configurations were analyzed using a driving simulator to find optimum posture for driving in respect of steering precision and steering velocity. Therefore, a 20 s precision test and a test to assess maximum steering velocity over a range of 90° steering motion have been conducted. The results show that driving precision, as well as maximum steering velocity, are significantly increased in mid-positions (elbow angles of 95° and 120°) compared to more flexed (70°) or extended (145° and 160°) postures. We conclude that driver safety can be enhanced by implementing these data in the automotive design process because faster and highly precise steering can be important during evasive actions and in accident situations. In addition, subjective comfort rating, analyzed with questionnaires, confirmed experimental results.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Every fifth employee in the world commutes more than 90 min per day. 64% of people prefer the car, while in the USA even 85% of people use an automobile to go to work (Schiffner and Kersten-Reichherzer, 2010). The car is also an important means of transportation during leisure time (Zenk et al., 2007). Based on that, research is being done to look for the optimal posture for driving. In the automotive industry the optimum posture was worked out primarily with subjective comfort ratings (Babirat et al., 1998; Bubb, 1992; Hanson et al., 2006; Kyung and Nussbaum, 2009; Lay and Fisher, 1940; Oudenhuijzen et al., 2004; Park et al., 2000, 1999; Porter and Gyi, 1998; Schmidt et al., 2014; Seidl, 1994). Therefore, the main aim of these investigations was to determine the optimum position for comfort. Unfortunately, these results cover a relatively large area of positioning in respect of specific joint angles. The recommendations for elbow flexion and shoulder elevation in the sagittal plane (joint angle definitions according to Wu et al., 2005) for example range from 85° to 167° and 1°–75°, respectively (Hanson et al., 2006; Kyung and Nussbaum, 2009; Park et al., 2000, 1999; Porter and Gyi, 1998; Seidl, 1994) and are shown in Figs. 7 and 8 (elbow 180° refers to fully extended arm, shoulder elevation 0° refers to neutral position, Fig. 1
                     ). In addition, it is difficult to compare most of these studies as they vary so considerably in their methodological study design, basic joint angle definition and reference coordinate system (Schmidt et al., 2014). Furthermore, there are restrictions concerning the construction of the car such as the space to get in and out as well as the roof of the car. These facts also influence the results of the subjective comfort studies. Thus, this optimum subjective comfort position is possibly not the optimal one for the driving task. Hence, due to the various subjective research approaches it is hard to filter out precise information and suggestions for constructers as well as users.

By contrast, studies with objective biomechanical methods are rarely found. Existing studies deal with the position of the backrest, seat inclination and lumbar support to find the ideal pressure distribution, intervertebral disc pressure or lowest muscle activation (Andersson et al., 1974; Hosea et al., 1986; Zenk, 2009). The findings were primarily discussed in the context of beneficial effects on health. Furthermore, to the authors' knowledge, there is not much research based on biomechanical recommendations for the positioning of the arms or the legs during driving concerning current active safety-related aspects. While “passive safety” might be part of positioning in respect of minimum injury in case of a crash, “active safety” should enhance the drivers' ability to gain maximum control of the vehicle in order to avoid critical situations. Concerning the passive safety it is recommended to bent the arms since in an outstretched position they cannot absorb impact in case of an accident (Gerstl and Schwartz, 2008). At the same time, the distance between shoulder and hand must not be too small. A distance of at least 20–25 cm is needed because otherwise risk of injury exists in the case the airbag deploys (Roccia et al., 1999; Segui-Gomez et al., 1998). Additionally, it is recommended that the shoulder blade and the back must be in contact with the backrest to optimize power transmission, which is thought to be best when steering wheel is pushed and not pulled (Gerstl and Schwartz, 2008). Therefore, support of the backrest is needed to get maximum counter bearing and to increase the stability of the torso.

In the field of sport science the five motor abilities form the basis of scientific analysis of general sport activities and human movements: coordination, endurance, flexibility, speed, and strength (Haibach et al., 2011; Howley and Thompson, 2012). Keeping biomechanical aspects in mind, these motor abilities were also considered to be relevant for an optimum driving posture. At first the optimum position of the arms was sought concerning the steering wheel operation. Because of the technical support (e.g. power assisted steering) strength, endurance, and flexibility seem to be no limiting factors. However, to be able to react to unexpected situations occurring in traffic, coordinative as well as speed abilities of the driver are important.

Therefore, the steering precision and the velocity of the steering movement were suggested to be important for an objective estimation of the posture for safety reasons. The optimum posture would enable the highest steering precision and the fastest steering velocity. This results in an improved safety, for example at evasive maneuvers.

The aim of this study was to provide first reliable experimental data concerning precision and speed of the steering movement in relation to upper body posture, more precisely to shoulder-elbow joint angle configuration. The research question was, if the posture has a measurable influence on these safety aspects in a controlled laboratory environment. Additionally, subjective comfort rating was collected to have the possibility to correlate the measured data with the existing literature.

@&#METHODS@&#

A total of 40 volunteers (7 women and 33 men; 35 ± 9 years) without any musculoskeletal disorders participated in this study. They were all required to possess a valid driving license for at least 5 years. In order to standardize the steering joint angle configurations of all subjects, only persons with a certain trunk length (935 mm–945 mm), measured by means of 3 d body scans (Vitus XXL, Human Solutions, Germany), were allowed to take part in this study.

The laboratory investigation was carried out by using a mock-up (Fig. 2
                        ) which was connected to a driving simulator. The visualization of the steering motion was realized using a measurement steering wheel, a feedback software, and a projector with a screen in front of the participant. The steering motion of the driver was presented as a line on the screen (Fig. 3
                        ).

Standardized subject positioning in the mock-up was accomplished by individually adjusting the steering wheel and the driver seat, which represent specific characteristics of a sedan. The seat was adjusted in its basic construction position (seat inclination: 15°, backrest inclination: 25°). The sitting position was defined as a function of elbow flexion at five specific angles (70°, 95°, 120°, 145°, 160°) where 180° refers to full extension (Fig. 1). Hence, a larger distance between the steering wheel and the shoulder results in an extension in the elbow joint and an elevation in the shoulder joint. A goniometer was used to assess the relation of shoulder and elbow joint. The position was always measured on the subjects' left arm.

The steering motion was recorded by a measurement steering wheel (Vetas II, GIF, Germany), which records rotational changes of the steering wheel position with an accuracy of <0.2°. All data was collected at a sample rate of 1000 Hz. To determine steering precision, a 20 s course was predefined, which the subjects had to follow via feedback software as accurately as possible. For the steering velocity, the subjects had to turn the steering wheel as fast as possible through 90° to the left and to the right, starting at a neutral steering position (0°). After each steering precision and steering velocity test, subjects were asked about their subjective comfort feeling in order to allow for a comparison between subjective and objective data. They had to evaluate their posture according to their personal feelings. There were four possible configurations: good, rather good, rather bad, and bad.

The steering wheel transmits the angular data of the steering wheel's actual position. These analog data (AD to DC converter, DT-9818, Data Translation, USA) were smoothed with a moving average (20 ms) and used for visual feedback of the subjects' steering motion. At the same time, these data was used to analyze the steering precision and the steering velocity.

First, the subjects were familiarized with the mock-up and the simulation feedback. In order to achieve this, the subjects had to drive a one minute test course until they got used to the mock-up, the steering wheel and the feedback software. This test course included easy steering motions to the right and to the left with varying amplitudes (±90°) and velocities up to 35°/s.

As soon as the subjects accustomed to the steering wheel and the feedback system they trained the test course for the precision test to avoid a learning effect. Therefore the course was driven at least ten times. Huemer and Vollrath (2012) discovered a strong learning effect within the first five times and still an improvement until the tenth attempt at another driving simulator test. Furthermore, an individual learning curve for each subjects was observed and if necessary the training phase was extended until no further improvement was visible.

For the test session a total of 15 trials (5 angle-configurations, 3 trials each) of the test course were carried out in a random order. The course for the investigation of steering precision had a 20 s duration and included different steering angles (±90°) and steering velocities (up to 195°/s). The course included ten changes of direction (Fig. 3). The first part (13.5 s) was easier with three direction changes and steering velocities up to 135°/s. The second part (6.5 s) had 7 direction changes and steering velocities up to 195°/s.

The steering velocity was investigated with the second test. Starting at the neutral steering position, subjects had to perform a steering motion of 90°, rest 2 s in this end position and then steer back to the neutral position as fast as possible. This was done three times to the left and the right, each at five analyzed elbow angles in a random test protocol. At the end of each attempt subjects were asked about their comfort feeling in this position in order to compare subjective opinion with biomechanical objective data.

To determine whether the subjects' postures were comparable at each elbow angle, the shoulder elevation in the sagittal plane was measured with an electrogoniometer between the torso and the upper arm, as shown in Fig. 1.

The steering angle data were processed with a moving average (20 ms) using commercial software (Pro-Active, Prophysics AG). Steering precision was defined as the difference between the predefined course and the driven course. Therefore, all absolute differences between the predefined and actual angle position were calculated for each frame. Precision was then quantified as an average deviation of the total trial of respective attempts, further examined according to difficulty of part one (easy) and part two (difficult).

The steering velocity was calculated based on the angle–time curve of the steering motion through 90° to the left and to the right. The steering velocity was investigated in two different ways: On the one hand, the trial with the highest steering speed achieved by the subject was examined and on the other hand, the trial with the highest mean speed over a range of 70° (10°–80°) to the left and to the right was analyzed.

In order to find a biomechanical optimum, individual best trials of precision and velocity tasks of each angle configuration were used for further statistical analysis. Accidents, however, normally occur during the worst performance, rather than the best. For this reason, the worst performance was additionally analyzed. The worst steering precision was defined as the trial with the individual maximum mean difference between the predefined and the driven course of the complete test course and the two parts. Accordingly, the trial with the lowest maximum and mean steering velocity served for analysis of worst performance in steering speed.

The subjective evaluations of posture according to the personal feeling were collected from the subjects and their mean values were calculated for each posture.

The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was performed to examine, if the data was normally distributed. Single and two factor repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), Greenhouse-Geisser correction, and Bonferroni–Holm post hoc comparisons were used to identify significant differences of steering precision and steering velocity between the different elbow angles and to identify the differences between the two parts of the steering precision test. As one posture in the first part of the precision test was not normally distributed, this data, as well as data of the subjective evaluation, was analyzed using Friedmann and Wilcoxon test statistics. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 21.0 and the alpha level was set to p ≤ 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Since subjects were selected according to specific trunk length, shoulder angles did not influence shoulder-elbow joint configurations. The standard deviation of the shoulder angle was less than 4° at each posture (Table 1
                     ). Therefore, we believe that changes in precision and velocity are directly related to changes in shoulder-elbow joint configurations.


                        Fig. 4
                         shows the results of the steering precision of the entire course for the time duration of 20 s. The elbow angles of 95° and 120° display the smallest difference between the predefined course and the driven one. The results show significant differences (p ≤ 0.001) between the elbow angle of 70° and 95°, 70° and 120°, 95° and 145°, 95° and 160°, 120° and 145° and 120° and 160°. For a more detailed analysis, the test course was divided into two parts.

The first 13.5 s are significantly different from the last 6.5 s at all five postures (p ≤ 0.001). As in the whole test course, there are significant differences (p ≤ 0.001) between elbow angles of 70° and 95°, 70° and 120°, 95° and 145°, 95° and 160°, 120° and 145° and 120° and 160°.

The last 6.5 s of the test course were analyzed additionally because it was the most difficult part of the course with 7 direction changes. We found significant differences between elbow angles of 70° and 95° (p ≤ 0.001), 95° and 160°, 70° and 120° (p ≤ 0.01) and 95° and 145° (p ≤ 0.05). The detailed results are presented in Table 2
                        .


                        Table 2 shows the results of the worst performance, too. The results are similar to the best results. Elbow angles of 95° and 120° are again the best. For the complete test course and for the first 13.5 s exist significant differences (p ≤ 0.001) between elbow angles of 70° and 95°, 70° and 120°, 95° and 145°, 95° and 160°, 120° and 145° and 120° and 160°. The worst performance for the last 6.5 s of the test course differ significantly between the elbow angles of 70° and 95°, 70° and 120°, 95° and 145°, 95° and 160°(p ≤ 0.01), 120° and 145° and 120° and 160° (p ≤ 0.05).

The results of best performance are always superior to values of worst performance and differ significantly (p ≤ 0.001) at respective positions.

Maximum speed was achieved at elbow angles of 95° and 120° (Fig. 5
                           ). Significant differences (p ≤ 0.001) are prevalent between elbow angles of 70° and 95°, 70° and 120°, 95° and 160° and 120° and 160°. Significant differences with p ≤ 0.01 exist between 70° and 145°, 95° and 145° and between 120° and 145°.

Mean steering velocity through 70° to the right and to the left:

Posture with elbow angles of 120° and 95° have the highest mean velocity (Fig. 5). There are significant differences (p ≤ 0.001) between 70° and 95°, 70° and 120°, 95° and 160°, and 120° and 160°. Significant differences with p ≤ 0.01 were found between 70° and 145° and 95° and 145° and the difference between 120° and 145° is significant with a difference of p ≤ 0.05. The detailed findings are listed in Table 3
                           .

Worst performance:


                           Table 3 shows the differences of the worst maximum and mean steering velocities. Again elbow angles of 95° and 120° are the best. We found significant differences of the maximum and mean steering velocity between the elbow angles of 70° and 95°, 70° and 120°, 95° and 160°, 120° and 160° (p ≤ 0.001), 95° and 145° (p ≤ 0.01) and 120° and 145° (p ≤ 0.05).

The results with the best and the worst performance (maximum und mean steering velocity) differ significantly (p ≤ 0.001) from each other at every examined posture.

The subjective ratings of the test subjects (Fig. 6
                        ) show similar results as the objective aspects mentioned above. 50% of the test subjects graded the elbow angle of 95° with the best rating and 47.5% of the subjects rated the elbow angle of 120° with “good”. By contrast, no test person rated one of the other angles with “good”.

No significant differences exist between 70° and 145°, nor between the two “best-rated” elbow angles of 95° and 120°. All other angles show significant differences among each other. Between 70° and 160° the significance level is p ≤ 0.01, at all other angles the significance level is p ≤ 0.001.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Our results suggest that an optimum posture for the automotive steering motion can be defined from a biomechanical point of view. Five different postures were investigated and the sitting position was defined as a function of elbow flexion. Shoulder angles were measured to control the multi-joint posture. The standard deviation of the shoulder angles at respective precisely defined elbow angles was less than 4° at each posture and thus is thought to be negligible. Therefore results of this study are directly related to defined joint-angle configurations and controlled to not be affected by inter-subject variability.

The results show that positions with elbow angles of 95° and 120° are preferable compared to 70°, 145° and 160° in terms of active driving safety. At these postures the steering precision was found to be best. These results were consistent when focusing on the entire course as well as in case of separation in a first “easy” and a second “difficult” part of the experiment. Importantly, the findings were independent of analysis of best or worst scenarios. Although absolute precision is significantly affected by the context of best and worst performance, the same angle-configuration led to best relative performance. The same behavior could be found for the steering velocity, which was always at its highest (relative) level at identified optimum angles, independent of type of analysis (best, mean or worst trial).

Due to used methodology of apparently rough steps of analyzed joint angles there is still a lack of knowledge concerning local minimum of the precision test or maximum of the velocity test between the elbow angles of 95° and 120°. However, qualitatively the results are well conformable with muscle physiological constraints according to force-length relationships (Huxley, 1957) of single joint muscle action and a local optimum (or plateau) can be defined. We therefore speculate that the data of precision and velocity tests highly correlate to strength curves of steering movements.

According to Pick (2004) the steering wheel manipulation consists of forward elevation and downwards depression of arm and shoulder (ISB recommendations: elevation of shoulder and flexion/extension of elbow). Depending on steering direction, mainly involved muscles are the m. triceps brachii, the m. biceps brachii, the m. deltoideus and the m. pectoralis major (Abbink et al., 2011; Jonsson and Jonsson, 1975a, 1975b, 1976; Liu et al., 2012; Pick and Cole, 2006).

Accordingly, elbow flexors and extensors would be at very short and long muscle length in the more flexed (70°) or extended (145° and 160°) postures of our study, respectively. In literature, the optimum muscle length of the m. biceps brachii is reported to be in the range of the best results of this study (Doheny et al., 2008; Leedham and Dowling, 1995; Philippou et al., 2004; Tsunoda et al., 1993; Winters and Kleweno, 1993). Similarly, the optimum muscle length for the m. triceps brachii (Doheny et al., 2008; Turpin et al., 1994) is in the area of optimum precision and velocity as tested here. However, it should be noted that these results are based on single joint static conditions with maximum voluntary contraction. Furthermore, most studies do not report distinct optimum joint angles but rather optimum ranges from 90° to 126° and 70°–110° for elbow flexors and extensors, respectively (Doheny et al., 2008; Leedham and Dowling, 1995; Philippou et al., 2004; Tsunoda et al., 1993; Winters and Kleweno, 1993).

Additionally, real life steering motion is a complex submaximal movement and steering torques normally do not exceed 5 Nm (Liu et al., 2012). This can be realized with a variety of activated muscles, coordination and technique. Furthermore Pick and Cole (2007, 2008) showed that antagonistic muscles are active during steering. It was shown that the driver uses the muscle co-contraction as a control strategy for the steering movement (Pick, 2004). It is generally assumed that the co-contraction plays an important role in the stabilization and the control of movements (Hogan, 1984; Pick and Cole, 2007). Hence, it would be interesting to conduct further research to learn more about the backgrounds and causes of the results of this study. Furthermore, it seems that the influence of the posture on the steering precision increases with greater difficulty. The difference between the good and the worse postures get more evident in the second, more difficult part of conducted trials. Further investigations should focus on the posture in the range of 95°–120° in more detail and an increase in the level of difficulty of the precision test might allow more detailed separation of optimum joint-angle configurations.

When comparing the results of the objective measurements with the subjective evaluation of the subjects, one can see that there is a good accordance. None of the test subjects evaluated the posture with the elbow angle of 70°, 145°, and 160° with the rating “good”. In contrast, the posture with the elbow angle of 95° and 120° were rated with “good” by 50% and 47.5% of the test subjects. Comparing the results with the subjective data in literature it can be seen that some areas of optimum or preferred posture (Kyung and Nussbaum, 2009; Porter and Gyi, 1998) are in the range of best level of steering precision or steering velocity (Figs. 7 and 8
                     
                     ). But this area in literature is more extensive than the optimum range of this study. Therefore, it is important to complete subjective comfort studies with objective data.

From a more practical point of view, these results can have a direct influence on safety when driving a car. Computational simulations reveal relationships of steering velocity, driving speed and type of vehicle. As an example, the highest and lowest mean steering velocity as measured in this study, were simulated for a sedan. The differences are already noticeable at moderate driving velocities. When driving at 50 km/h, an evasive movement of 0.5 m to the side takes a distance of 7.78 m and 7.57 m in driving direction for 700°/s and 825°/s steering velocities, respectively. That means that posture has a direct influence, as there's a difference of 0.21 m driving distance for 0.5 m evasion depending on the possibility to perform faster (elbow angle of 120°) or slower (elbow angle of 70°) steering movements (Fig. 9
                     ).

For this reason, posture has a measurable influence on safety while driving a car. However, in order to make a more precise recommendation of optimum posture, it would be useful to investigate the posture in the range of 95°–120° in more detail.

According to these safety relevant issues, besides anthropometrical considerations and comfort, the position of the driver in relation to seat and steering wheel should be optimized by means of biomechanical and physiological facts of the human being. This should include all percentiles of humans with varying proportions, and construction of cars should allow to adjust the seat to the optimum position which is needed for safety. Additionally, it would be interesting to investigate other human joints and other models of cars to learn more about the effect of posture on biomechanical driving aspects.

A major limitation for generalization of our results is based on the fact that all the participants in this study were recruited according to homogeneous torso length. For this reason recommendations need to be handled with care and further verification according to various anthropometric constitutions is required. Additionally, shoulder joint was only described in the sagittal plane (shoulder elevation) thereby massively simplifying shoulder degrees of freedom (plane of elevation, elevation angle, and axial rotation; ISB recommendation, Wu et al., 2005). Shoulder width as well as steering wheel diameter are further factors that contribute to in car positioning according to 3 d shoulder-elbow configurations and should be integrated in future investigations. Nevertheless, this study is a first approach to objectively demonstrate the influence of posture on biomechanical aspects of driving.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study investigated the influence of different elbow flexion angles while driving concentrating on the aspects of steering velocity and the precision of the steering motion. Five different postures were examined and the measurements have shown that the arm position has an objective measurable influence on these two aspects. Further studies need to be done to reveal more detailed information about the influences of the posture on biomechanical aspects. At this stage of research, optimum elbow angles in terms of steering velocity and precision can be found in the range of 95°–120° flexion. Faster and highly precise steering can be important during evasive actions and in accident situations. With this knowledge, the development of automated, individual seat adjustment, the control of the seating position, or active protection systems can be promoted.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

The authors wish to thank the BMW Group for the support provided for this study. In addition, the authors thank Dipl.-Des. Peer-Oliver Wagner for supporting this research.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

