@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Work exposure and vigilance decrements in closed circuit television surveillance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Detection rates for inconspicuous events in real time surveillance are low.


                        
                        
                           
                           Surveillance background contributes to differences in detection.


                        
                        
                           
                           The nature of previous visual analysis experience contributes to detection levels.


                        
                        
                           
                           The type of sample influences the results of ecologically valid vigilance tasks.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Closed circuit television

Vigilance decrement

Operator performance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The aim of this study was to examine operator effectiveness in terms of detection rates and potential vigilance decrements in a proactive or real time CCTV surveillance task. The study was conducted in two stages. During stage one, 42 operators who were employed full-time in CCTV surveillance observed a 90-min video and were required to detect four types of target behaviours. No vigilance decrement was found for this sample as a whole. Stage two involved collecting additional data from 31 novices and dividing the existing operators into two sub-samples, consisting of generalists and specialists depending on the type of surveillance they performed at work (total N = 73). Fifty percent of target behaviours were detected and false alarms were high. Vigilance decrements were found for novices and generalists, but specialists maintained their performance for the first hour and then increased it. Results are discussed in terms of surveillance background, work exposure, transfer of learning, selection, training and motivation and the impact of these on vigilance and CCTV performance.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Closed circuit television (CCTV) is used extensively as a tool for the remote monitoring of public safety and the protection of critical infrastructure in many countries, such as the United Kingdom, Europe, United States of America (USA), Australia, and South Africa. It is used throughout society including town and shopping centres, industrial and commercial settings, transport systems, and prisons (Neil et al., 2007). The use of CCTV has increased substantially in the USA since 9/11 and the threat of terrorism, and has been accompanied by subsidisation from the USA government (Cameron et al., 2008). In the UK, the House of Lords (2009) cite estimates that during the 1990's approximately 78% of the Home Office crime prevention budget was spent on installing CCTV, and they indicate that some £500 million of public money was invested in CCTV in the decade up to 2006. Yet researchers have obtained mixed findings regarding CCTV effectiveness (Greenberg and Roush, 2009; Keval and Sasse, 2006; Wells et al., 2006; Welsh and Farrington, 2002). It has been suggested that on balance, evaluations of CCTV effectiveness indicate that the value added by CCTV may not be commensurate with the finances invested or expectations regarding results (Squires, 2010), although CCTV does assist in reducing crime and other significant events on a daily basis (Donald, 2008a,b).

Many of the studies on CCTV effectiveness have focused on aspects such as technological system requirements (van Voorthuijsen et al., 2005), public perceptions (Cameron et al., 2008), and changes in crime rates after the implementation of CCTV (Wells et al., 2006). While these aspects are important, less research attention has been devoted to the monitoring and detection process performed by CCTV surveillance operators (henceforth referred to as ‘operators’). Operator performance is crucial in that the operator's ability to detect significant events has a direct influence on the system's effectiveness, particularly in proactive, real-time surveillance. If an operator fails to detect a significant event, appropriate responses (e.g. alerting emergency services) are not triggered, and people or property are placed at risk. This indicates the need for a more in-depth understanding of operator performance. This study aims to examine operator effectiveness in terms of detection rates and potential vigilance decrements in a real time CCTV surveillance task.

The overall purpose of the operator's job is to monitor, detect and respond to significant events that threaten the safety of people or property. This requires vigilance and the maintenance of attention for periods ranging from one to twelve hours (Donald, 2001). In vigilance intensive tasks, two processes influence performance – the overall level of vigilance and the vigilance decrement (Davies and Parasuraman, 1982). The overall level of vigilance is a steady state that operators bring to the task and is indicated by overall detection rates. The vigilance decrement refers to a decrease in performance over time (Parasuraman, 1984) and generally occurs from 20 to 35 min (Sawin and Scerbo, 1995) after engaging in the task. If the overall level of vigilance is very low, “vigilance performance is likely to be poor throughout the task, irrespective of whether performance declines with time on task” (Parasuraman, 1984, p. 253). Operators with a steady but low overall level of vigilance are likely to miss a larger proportion of significant events than people with high overall vigilance levels. However, the total number of significant events detected is also influenced by the vigilance decrement, which may be experienced by people with either high or low overall levels of vigilance. Anecdotal evidence suggests that operator attention drifts after 15 min (Security Park, 2001), but this has not been examined in relation to detection performance and it is not clear whether this applies to all operators. Although there is the potential for vigilance decrements in work requiring vigilance, inconsistent results regarding the existence of vigilance decrements have been found in complex tasks (Adams et al., 1961) and tasks that are similar to those performed in real world settings (Hollenbeck et al., 1995; Molloy and Parasuraman, 1996; Moray and Haudegond, 1998; Pigeau et al., 1995). In view of variations in the information processing requirements of different vigilance intensive jobs and the numerous factors that affect vigilance performance, this is not surprising. However, it is important to understand whether decrements are likely to occur in specific types of work, as this has implications for system and job design, selection, and training. In the case of CCTV it has implications for the provision of effective service delivery in respect of public and organisational safety and security.

CCTV systems typically consist of numerous cameras, monitoring and recording systems, and control room operations. Operators may observe displays ranging from a couple of spot monitors to banks of multiplex displays, with each monitor possibly showing scenes from a number of cameras. Operators generally observe anything from 2 to 30 camera scenes, yielding multiple sources of data. The use of multiple sources of data is not unique to CCTV. However, with CCTV, significant events often cannot be detected at a glance due to the complexity and dynamic nature of the scenes being analysed and the visual inconspicuity of many significant events. The scenes are frequently cluttered, consist of 2-dimensional representations of 3-dimensional scenes, and include events and objects that are hidden or partially obscured. Consequently, detection is not merely a perceptual process but involves a high degree of interpretation and visual analysis (Donald, 2008a,b). This is particularly relevant to situations where people deliberately obscure objects and situations from the camera's view to avoid detection – a feature that is shared by contexts such as military surveillance. Consequently many significant events in CCTV are visually inconspicuous and are unlikely to draw attention unless the operator understands their significance.

Existing research on CCTV surveillance has reported mixed findings regarding overall detection rates and vigilance decrements. The studies have used different experimental conditions (e.g. settings, camera configurations, significant events with varying degrees of visual conspicuity, samples, and time periods during which monitoring was required) that could account for some of the inconsistencies in results. In a study with 16 television displays and footage of prison scenes with very little movement, detection rates varied from 85% to 97%, depending on experimental conditions (Tickner et al., 1972). The significant events were conspicuous and involved two suspicious behaviours (running, and looking excessively at perimeters such as walls). A follow-up study with similar prison scenes but showing a lot of movement found that the range of detection rates decreased considerably in some instances (32%–100% across experimental conditions) (Tickner and Poulton, 1973). Perfect detection rates were achieved only when one display was observed at a time. The comparatively lower detection rates were consistent with a study of a traffic scene with lots of movement (Tickner and Poulton, 1968). Based on these studies, it was concluded that continuous activity distracts participants.

A comparably high detection rate of 91% was obtained in a study where simulated city centre incidents had to be identified, such as the theft of a handbag (van Voorthuijsen et al., 2005). When participants were required to detect a person carrying a visually conspicuous open umbrella in scenes where no other umbrellas were present, an 85% detection rate was reported which declined to 54% as the number of monitors was increased to nine (Wallace et al., n.d.). This contrasted with the 25% detection rate obtained by operators who were required to identify transient, dynamic, inconspicuous incidents of theft in an industrial setting on a single display (Andrew et al., 2003). Incidents were made up of a number of suspicious behaviours, each of which was of short duration (no more than a few seconds). Lower detection rates were also found in a study involving the identification of particular individuals in simulated CCTV footage over 25 min, where correct detections varied from 15% when identification was based on memory, to 30% when observers could make comparisons with a still-frame image (Davies and Thasen, 2000). False alarm rates were high under both conditions (60% and 65% respectively). In both Andrew et al.'s (2003) and Davies and Thasen's (2000) studies, focal attention and detailed visual analysis were required for correct detection. CCTV research involving more complex and dynamic scenes contrasts with the studies by Tickner and Poulton (1968, 1973, 1975), Tickner and colleagues (1972), van Voorthuijsen et al. (2005), and Wallace et al. (n.d.) where much higher detection rates were obtained with more visually conspicuous significant events of longer duration.

Regarding vigilance decrements, Tickner and Poulton (1973) found significant decrements in the two-hour CCTV task but not in the one-hour condition. However, no decrements were found in a three-hour traffic surveillance task (Tickner and Poulton, 1968) and a four-hour task involving the identification of particular individuals and actions in a street scene (Tickner and Poulton, 1975). The condition where vigilance decrements were found used scenes depicting only occasional movement. Tickner and Poulton (1975) concluded that vigilance decrements occur when there is little to observe. Andrew et al. (2003) did not find a statistically significant decrement in their three-hour study. Andrew et al.'s (2003) finding regarding the absence of a decrement is somewhat surprising as the complex information processing requirements of CCTV surveillance are similar to those of tasks where vigilance decrements typically occur (Donald, 2008a,b; Howard et al., 2009). However, it has been shown that the effects of practice can compensate for waning vigilance (Washburn et al., 2004). This suggests that in Andrew et al.'s (2003) study, the experience and work exposure of the participants could have prevented a decrement from occurring. All participants in their study were surveillance operators who worked in the same processing plant context from which the video was derived.

The mixed results obtained in studies regarding vigilance decrements in CCTV surveillance suggest that a number of factors could be influencing performance over time, including for example, the types of samples, incidents, footage and task characteristics involved (Donald, 2010). In the current study we propose that the types of CCTV surveillance which operators are accustomed to performing could contribute to the vigilance decrement. This is based on evidence that task characteristics influence vigilance decrements (Parasuraman, 1984). We identified two types of CCTV surveillance functions through observation of the tasks performed by operators and discussion with operators and managers. This resulted in the identification of ‘generalist’ and ‘specialist’ surveillance and we refer to participants as ‘generalists’ and ‘specialists.’

Generalist surveillance took place within a multifunctional role within a control room. Besides surveillance, it included alarm monitoring, access control, ongoing communication including call taking, and responses to parties on the ground such as police officers or security. Although monitoring was an important part of the generalists' role, there was fairly heavy reliance on external cues (e.g., alarms, requests to monitor certain targets) that facilitated knowing which cameras to monitor and where to look. This assisted them in perceiving and interpreting significant events. Operator surveillance involves a lot of dichotomous detection where decisions are required regarding the presence or absence of significant events. Generalists’ attention was therefore frequently divided between these multiple tasks and monitoring, and they were not accustomed to deploying focused attention to the cameras for long periods of time without interruption by other activities.

Operators performing specialist surveillance were primarily focused on monitoring and detection, and communication was usually initiated from their side in response to observed conditions. They performed extensive dedicated or focused surveillance activities where they were responsible for identifying suspects through associated crime behaviour, made extensive use of behavioural indicators, observed people for long durations, and audited procedures and processes. They received few external stimuli to guide their monitoring of cameras and relied far more on visual analysis and monitoring to detect significant events. Their role required focused attention over long periods of time, with few interruptions by other tasks. These activities occur routinely in high risk company operations such as casinos and precious goods handling, but would require police authorisation as dedicated surveillance in UK town centres in terms of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act. As with generalists, specialists were required to make decisions regarding the presence or absence of significant events. However, these events were generally more inconspicuous, difficult to detect and required more interpretation in order to make the decision. For example, in generalist surveillance, significant events tended to involve larger movements (e.g., a person crawling under a fence) that were easier to detect than the small, inconspicuous and transient movements involved in specialist surveillance (e.g., quickly flicking a small diamond to another location while sweeping with a broom). The researchers speculated that subtle differences in the types of surveillance tasks conducted by participants could influence vigilance decrements.

The categorisation of operators into specialists and generalists allowed for the examination of the vigilance decrement in relation to different samples. We extended the use of different samples to include novices with no previous exposure to the CCTV surveillance task.

The current research is most similar to Andrew et al.'s (2003) study in that both use footage of theft in heavy industry; inconspicuous, transient significant events where perpetrators frequently try to camouflage or make detection more difficult, require one camera to be monitored at a time, and show continuous movement in most clips. However, the two studies are different in terms of the definition of significant events and instructions to participants. Andrew et al.'s (2003) study required participants to detect incidents of theft. Incidents typically consisted of a number of suspicious behaviours that preceded the theft, such as perpetrators getting into position. Several minutes or seconds passed between the suspicious behaviours, during which time people performed normal work activities. Some incidents involved a number of people whose actions unfolded over several minutes. Participants were told to report incidents of theft, but were not informed as to how theft could occur. This is likely to have influenced participants' attention sets for incidents. As all participants worked in the types of processing plant that was filmed in the video, participants probably applied the attention sets and knowledge of theft in this same context to the research task. The task required high levels of interpretation and situation awareness regarding the specific type of processing plant filmed in the video. In the Andrew et al. (2003) study, participants were given a break after each thirty-minute period, whereas no breaks were given during the ninety-minute video of this study. It is possible that breaks allowed for attention resources to be replenished and prevented the vigilance decrement from occurring.

The research questions for this study were:
                        
                           •
                           What is the detection rate and level of false alarms for transient, dynamic, inconspicuous target behaviours associated with theft in heavy industry, when one camera view with almost continuous movement is observed?

Is there a vigilance decrement over a ninety-minute period for the above type of footage?

Does past experience with the specific task impact on detection levels and the vigilance decrement?

@&#METHODS@&#

The study initially focused on experienced CCTV surveillance operators (Stage 1). Stage 2 included the original operators and 31 novices. Data were then analysed in terms of three strata, with operators categorised as “generalists” and “specialists” depending on the type of surveillance task which they were accustomed to performing at work (as defined in the introduction), and novices forming a separate sub-sample. The same research design, procedures, materials and types of analyses were used for the two stages.

The sample for the pilot study on clips with target behaviours consisted of six people. Participants were faculty members who participated voluntarily, aged between 25 and 58. For a second pilot study on clips without target behaviours, participants were three people with expertise in CCTV surveillance in a similar processing industry.

The Stage 1 sample consisted of 42 (32 male) operators employed full-time in CCTV surveillance. Operators were drawn from six organisations in the hospitality and gaming, town centre surveillance, academic, and mining sectors in South Africa. All had normal or corrected to normal vision. Non-probability purposive sampling was used and participation in the research was voluntary. Participants' ages ranged from 21 to 53, with a mean of 36.48 years and standard deviation of 8.2 years. Almost two-thirds (62%) had five or fewer years' experience with CCTV surveillance, and only 7% had more than ten years' experience. Participants were representative of the cultural variations present within the country. The setting for the task was a processing plant. As no participants had worked in such a processing plant previously, none had an advantage in terms of situation awareness specific to the context of the video used in the study.

The Stage 2 sample consisted of 31 student novices who were new to the task of CCTV surveillance. Combining their data with those of Stage 1, this resulted in a total sample of 73. This created a stratified sample consisting of 31 novices, 13 generalist operators, and 29 specialist operators. The allocation of participants to specialist or generalist sub-samples was not based on performance evaluations in their work settings, but on the sort of surveillance conducted at their employing organisation.

Certain biographical characteristics differed for generalist and specialist operators. The mean length of experience with CCTV surveillance for generalists was 2.83 years and for specialists was 5.85 years (t = −2.73, p < 0.05). Specialists had a wider range of experience levels (SD = 4.62) than generalists (SD = 2.44). Generalists and specialists also differed in terms of their education levels. While most (66.67%) generalists had less than a grade 12, most specialists (71.05%) had a grade 12. Generalists and specialists had similar ages.

The novice sub-sample was obtained through convenience sampling. Novices' ages ranged from 20 to 28, with a mean of 21.55 years and a standard deviation of 1.48 years. In addition to their lack of experience with CCTV surveillance, the novice sub-sample was younger, better educated, and included a greater proportion of females than the operator sample. No incentives were offered but the students were given letters stating that they had participated in the study.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Standardised, video-taped instructions included explanations and demonstrations of the target behaviours and were followed by practice sessions of 12 min, during which time participants could ask questions and replay clips. For ethical and practical reasons, participants were told how long the video would last. Once the trial started, the video could not be replayed and no breaks were given. Participants responded verbally when they detected specific target behaviours and trained research assistants logged responses and their time of occurrence, recording hits, misses and false alarms. Prior approval for the research was obtained from the university's ethics committee. The same procedure was used for stages 1 and 2.

The task consisted of watching a 90-min video of CCTV surveillance footage and verbally reporting the detection of four types of target behaviours. All clips were situated in a processing plant and represented realistic work activities such as sweeping and shovelling spillage, inspecting machines, hosing areas, filling containers, and employees talking to each other. The scenes showed from one to three people working with or near heavy machinery. Most clips contained continuous movement, but five clips showed no movement for periods up to 2 min. The number of people and continual movement were seen as being typical of the scenes depicted by cameras in this type of environment. Some clips were real and others were simulations acted by professional actors in a processing plant. However, simulated clips were realistic in all respects and could not be visually distinguished from real clips. Unlike traditional laboratory vigilance research where simple stimuli are used and their detection difficulty levels can be assumed to be similar, significant events on CCTV differ greatly in conspicuity, duration, and detection difficulty. Therefore it was important to ensure that time phases in the video were equivalent in terms of factors such as visual complexity and detection difficulty levels.

The video was developed through two pilot studies aimed at selecting clips with a suitable range of difficulty levels, removing clips where behaviours were ambiguous or high numbers of false alarms occurred, and ensuring that the thirty-minute phases were equivalent in terms of detection difficulty levels. It was decided that visible, specific target behaviours consisting of a single action and associated with incidents would be the significant events.

The final set of significant events consisted of four types of target behaviours: picking up a small object; kicking the object to another location; flicking the object to another location with a broom; and swivelling the ankle with the intention of grinding the object into the underside of a boot in order to walk away with the object. The target behaviours were all associated with theft that could occur in a range of CCTV environments. During the first pilot study, participants rated the clips that contained target behaviours in terms of their detection difficulty levels (1 = extremely easy, 5 = extremely difficult). This was necessary to ensure an even spread of clips with different detection difficulty levels in the final video. The target behaviours were inconspicuous but noticeable, and of short duration, lasting from one to four seconds. The outcome of this pilot study was a list of suitable clips with target behaviours that were categorised by type of target behaviour, difficulty rating, area of the processing plant, and number of people included in the scene. The detection difficulty ratings were averaged and were used in the allocation of target behaviour clips to time phases in the video for pilot study 2.

The aim of pilot study 2 was to identify video clips containing behaviours that were likely to be incorrectly perceived as target behaviours and those that yielded high numbers of false alarms. Where false alarms were noted at the same time by two or more raters, the clip was eliminated or edited to remove ambiguous behaviours. Where only one rater reported a false alarm, the other two raters observed the clip again, and through discussion, reached consensus on whether the behaviour was likely to create a false alarm in the final study. Pilot study 2 was also aimed at ensuring that suitable video clips were used in the video for the main study, that there would be equivalence across time phases in terms of detection difficulty in the final video, and that instructions to participants were appropriate. Three videos of thirty minutes were prepared for this pilot study. Clips where all participants detected the target behaviour were considered too easy and were eliminated for the final video. Conversely, target behaviour clips with low detection rates needed to be spread more evenly between the time phases for the main study. Pilot study 2 was an essential step in creating an appropriate continuous video with appropriate numbers of target behaviours for the final study.

The final video consisted of a mixture of clips with target behaviours and others without target behaviours. For the purpose of analysis, the video was divided into thirty-minute phases, with each phase containing six instances of target behaviours, resulting in a total of eighteen target behaviours. Each phase included a mixture of comparable target behaviours that were easy and difficult to detect. Although the target behaviours were transient, they were all visible to the researchers and experts in the field who were involved in developing the video.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

In order to analyse the differences across the three thirty-minute time phases, repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted at Stage 1 using target behaviours (TB) and false alarms (FA) as the dependent variables. At Stage 2, repeated measures analysis of covariance (ANCOVAs) were conducted using CCTV experience, age and education level as covariates using target behaviours, false alarms, and groups as the dependent variables. Training could not be included as a covariate due to the wide range of content in training courses attended, which meant that the courses were not equivalent. As a measure of the effectiveness of vigilance, researchers often turn to Signal Detection Theory (SDT) as a way of balancing correct responses against false alarms (Tanner and Swets, 1954). A common measure within SDT is d′ (d-prime, or sensitivity), which assesses the operator's ability to distinguish target behaviours from false alarms. However, it was noted that d′ produces an infinite result if either the target behaviours or false alarms are zero (a common occurrence when target behaviours are either very difficult or very easy for certain operators to detect). Pollack and Norman (1964) introduced a non-parametric equivalent to d′ known as A′ (A-prime). A number of authors have noted errors in the calculation of A′ and its most recent formulation. Zhang and Mueller's (2005) calculation of A, was used in this study. The proportion of false alarms was calculated by dividing each phase into thirty second intervals and determining the number of false alarms across the thirty second time intervals where target behaviours were not present. The proportion of target behaviours and false alarms were then used to calculate A. Repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVAs) and ANCOVAs were used to calculate difference across phases and groups.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Operators detected a mean of 55% of target behaviours over the ninety-minute video (Table 1
                        ). The large standard deviation (3.23) indicates high variance in detection rates. Additional scrutiny of the data revealed that only 12% of operators detected over 75% of target behaviours, and nobody detected all target behaviours. Fourteen percent of operators detected a third or fewer target behaviours. Therefore a substantial proportion of target behaviours was missed.

The mean number of FAs reported for the whole video (15.76) and the standard deviation (11.92) were high. Combined with low target behaviour detection rates, the high level of false alarms further reduced detection accuracy.

Repeated measures ANCOVAs using a mixed model and the Kenward–Roger (1997) method for thirty-minute periods found that phase was not significant for TBs (F(2, 68.95) = 1.12, n.s.), indicating that the means for TBs detected were similar over time. Age was a significant covariate for TBs (F(1, 37) = 10.95, p < 0.05) but there were no significant covariates for FAs. Therefore repeated measures ANOVAs were performed on FAs. These indicated that FAs were significantly different for different phases (F(2, 76.4) = 7.69, p < 0.05). The means for FAs for the first phase were significantly different from the second (t = 3.92, p ≤ 0.05) and third (t = 2.70, p < 0.05) phases. However, the mean FAs were similar for the second and third phases (t = −0.40, n.s.). Examination of the means indicates that FAs decreased from the first to second phase, after which they were fairly stable. There were no significant differences in A between the phases (F(2, 36) = 1.32, p > 0.05) although age was a significant covariate for A (F(1, 37) = 5.11, p < 0.05).

To identify factors that confounded the results in stage 1, biographical factors were examined. A significant inverse correlation was obtained between the total number of TBs detected and age (r = −0.45, p < 0.05), but not for duration of CCTV experience or education level. ANOVAs were significant on ethnicity where the total number of TBs detected was the dependent variable (F(2, 39) = 4.69, p < 0.05), but not for type of surveillance conducted at work (live, review only, or a combination of these) or type of training received (technical, surveillance skills, or both). A t-test indicated that gender was not significant for the total number of detections. No significant results were obtained for any biographical factors on FAs or TBs.

Using the sub-samples of generalists and specialists, the biographical variables were analysed again to identify differences between these sub-samples. As described earlier, a possible distinction between generalists and specialists based on their past task experience, could explain some of the variance in target behaviour detection. Therefore in stage 2, generalists and specialists were treated as different strata in the sample, providing an alternative way of looking at the data.

The stage 2 sample as a whole detected a mean of 50% of TBs (Table 2
                        ). No participants detected all TBs and only five operators (11.9%) detected 75% or more target behaviours. FAs were high and had large standard deviations.

Repeated measures ANCOVAs were conducted on TBs between the thirty-minute periods for different surveillance backgrounds (novice, generalist or specialist). Age was the only significant covariate (F(1, 69.6) = 5.96, p < 0.05).

ANCOVAs found that the type of surveillance background (F(2, 68.9) = 3.58, p < 0.05) was significant in terms of TB detection rates. Differences in least squares means for TBs detected were significantly different for novices and specialists (t(69.4) = −2.38, p < 0.05) but similar for the other groups.

Surveillance background accounted for differences in FAs (F(2, 65.9) = 16.52, p < 0.05). This applied to novices (t = 4.21, p < 0.05), generalists (t = 9.27, p < 0.05), and specialists (t = 8.34, p < 0.05). Comparisons of the mean number of FAs between the surveillance backgrounds were all significant (novices and generalists, t = −5.65, p < 0.05; generalists and specialists, t = 3.28, p < 0.05; novices and specialists, t = −3.07, p < 0.05). Inspection of the means indicates that novices reported the smallest number of FAs (mean = 6.71), specialists an intermediate number (mean = 13.52), and generalists the most (mean = 20.77).

Taken together, the results demonstrate that specialists performed best, novices performed at an intermediate level, and generalists performed worst on the task. The findings support the hypothesis that the level of detection performance varies between participants with different surveillance backgrounds.

The repeated measures ANCOVAs (Table 3
                        ) indicated that there were significant differences in TB detection over time (F(2, 134) = 11.72, p < 0.05) and that this interacted significantly with surveillance background (F(4, 136) = 2,79, p < 0.05), but not with length of experience.

These results are presented in more detail in Table 4
                        . The differences in least squares means indicate that overall, specialists and novices detected significantly different numbers of TBs. In addition, detection rates differed significantly between the first and second, and second and third phases for the overall sample.

Participants from different surveillance backgrounds demonstrated different patterns of performance over time (Table 4). Novices and generalists showed significant decreases in detection rates between the first and second thirty-minute periods, after which their performance stabilised (the slight increase in their detections between the second and third thirty-minute periods was non-significant). Contrary to this, specialists maintained their performance for the first hour (the slight decrease was non-significant) and then significantly increased their detections between the second and third thirty-minute periods (see Fig. 1
                        ).

The differences in A between time phases and surveillance backgrounds were examined using ANCOVAs. Phase (F(2, 67) = 4.36, p < 0.05) and surveillance background (F(2, 68) = 4.196, p < 0.05) were significant for A, but not the interaction between Phase and surveillance background (F(4, 136) = 1.67, p > 0.05).

None of the covariates was significant for A. These were length of experience with CCTV surveillance (F(1, 64) = 0.001, p > 0.05), age (F(1, 64) = 2.5, p > 0.05), and education (F(1, 64) = 0.54, p > 0.05).

Post-hoc tests indicated that there was a significant difference in A between generalists and specialists (mean difference = −0.08, p < 0.05), but not between the other surveillance backgrounds.

Paired t-tests on A for the thirty-minute phases found similar trends for novices and generalists, but different results for specialists (Table 5
                        ). Both novices (t(29) = 2.53, p < 0.05) and generalists (t(12) = 2.25, p < 0.05) showed significant decreases in A after the first thirty minutes, while specialists maintained their performance for the first hour. During the last thirty minutes, the small increases in A demonstrated by novices and generalists were not significant. Contrasting with this, specialists showed a significant increase in A during the last thirty-minute phase (t(28) = −2.34, p < 0.05).

The trends regarding A between the phases for each sub-sample are depicted in Fig. 2
                        . To summarise, specialists performed best overall, maintaining their performance for the first hour and then increasing to their highest level of performance in the last thirty minutes. Generalists showed the poorest performance, with a significant decrease in A after the first thirty minutes. Similarly to generalists, the novices' A scores decreased after thirty minutes.

The directions and significance of the differences between phases indicate that a linear, uni-directional vigilance decrement was not obtained in all cases. While novices and generalists showed a vigilance decrement, this was not evident for specialists. In addition, a statistically significant performance increment was evident for specialists.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Differences were found between the two stages of the research. In stage 1, where the sample consisted of operators treated as a single sample, no statistically significant vigilance decrements or increments were found over the ninety-minute period. This is consistent with some studies of complex vigilance tasks that are similar to real world jobs (e.g., Molloy and Parasuraman, 1996; Moray and Haudegond, 1998; Tickner and Poulton, 1975). However, in view of the mixed findings regarding vigilance decrements in complex tasks, we examined the potential reasons for this and alternative explanations.

First, we analysed biographical variables that could have contributed to the result. Age was a significant covariate, but no other biographical factors contributed to detection. Age seemed insufficient in accounting for the lack of changes in performance over time. Although a number of alternative explanations are possible (see Donald, 2010), we focused on the type of CCTV surveillance that participants were accustomed to performing. Examination of background information revealed that the organisations in the sample included two types of CCTV surveillance operations. The generalist context relied heavily on auditory alarms to indicate significant events, and the specialist context required far more intensive visual analysis and sustained attention and monitoring. This led to the proposition that differences in surveillance background might be masking changes in detection performance over time. In order to explore this possibility and deal with the high variance in stage 1, the operator sample was divided into generalists and specialists, and additional data from novices were obtained.

In stage 2, different results were obtained for the sub-samples from different surveillance backgrounds. Taken together, the detection rates, false alarms and A statistics indicated that specialists performed best overall, followed by novices and then generalists. Although novices had lower overall detection rates than generalists, they reported fewer false alarms and therefore their A scores were higher than those of generalists. One possible explanation for the differences between the sub-samples resides in their surveillance backgrounds. Generalists were used to using external cues, such as alarms, to guide their attention to specific cameras and areas. In the absence of these cues, they seem to have difficulty deploying and sustaining their attention appropriately in order to detect significant events. This contrasted with the superior performance of specialists who were accustomed to sustaining attention for long periods of time and performing detailed visual analysis of scenes without the assistance of external cues. Although the novices had not performed CCTV surveillance before, they were students and were used to sustaining their attention during lectures, reading and other activities required when studying.

In addition to differences in detection rates, a vigilance decrement was found for novices and generalists after thirty minutes. This contrasted with specialists whose performance remained stable for the first hour, after which it increased. This finding can be tentatively explained by a number of factors. It is possible that the type of surveillance background that operators perform influences their transfer of learning and ability to detect significant events in different contexts. Specialists were more accustomed than generalists and novices to performing visual analysis on CCTV and to searching for inconspicuous and transient events. As a result, they are likely to have developed better visual analysis skills than generalists and novices. These skills were applied to the detection task used in the study. Therefore transfer of learning from the work to the research context is likely to have assisted specialists. Because the task in this research was more similar to the tasks performed at work by specialists than generalists, it would have used fewer attentional resources than generalists, whereas attentional resources of generalists and novices were depleted more quickly. By contrast, the specialists used fewer attentional resources and were able to harness these and achieve a performance increment in the last thirty minutes. This is consistent with resource theories of attention (Wickens, 2002). In addition, specialists were used to sustaining their attention for long periods of time during visual analysis.

An alternative explanation is that generalists and specialists had been appointed as CCTV surveillance operators based on different selection criteria, resulting in different skill levels in these groups. In addition, the training received by generalists and specialists differed (novices had not received previous training). This highlights the importance of selection and training which are likely to have a direct effect on operator performance and CCTV effectiveness. It is important to select individuals who demonstrate the underlying ability to detect inconspicuous events, who are able to sustain their attention for lengthy periods, and transfer learning to novel significant events that might occur in the future. Training that focuses on the detection process (what to look for) as well as operating the CCTV system at a technical level is important. In addition to selection and training, biographical characteristics could have confounded the results for generalists and specialists. These sub-samples differed on their length of experience with CCTV and education levels. However, these differences were not significant covariates with the output variables (i.e. TBs detected, FAs and A).

It is possible that the specialists' increase in performance during the last thirty minutes reflected the end spurt effect as described by Bergum and Lehr (1963), whereby participants increase performance towards the end of the task. The specialists' capacity to increase performance after 60 min, whether due to sustained attention or the end spurt effect, demonstrates that in some instances, operators are able to deliberately overcome issues related to arousal, fatigue and alertness. This implies that the effects of fatigue and other processes described in vigilance theories are to some extent reversible. Future research is recommended regarding the mechanisms involved in creating the end-spurt effect and the reasons why it occurred in specialists but not other sub-samples to the same extent.

The similar vigilance dynamics for novices and generalists suggest that people with little or no exposure to (or training in) particular vigilance tasks are likely to be more vulnerable to the vigilance decrement compared with people with relevant and extensive work exposure. However, this is contrary to a number of vigilance studies that found a steady vigilance decrement for both novice personnel and experienced personnel (Baker, 1962; Mackworth, 1970; Pigeau et al., 1995; Schmidke, 1976). In these previous studies, both novices and experts were employed to perform the task used in the relevant study. This differs from the current research where novices were not operators and were drawn from a different population from operators with different expectancies, motivation, and skills. These differences in motivation could have confounded the results of the current study, but they do not explain the different trends for generalists and specialists.

The findings of the current research suggest that the nature of the sample is a significant and frequently overlooked factor in relation to the vigilance decrement. Closer examination of the studies with complex tasks referred to above, indicates that a number used student samples despite using tasks or simulations that were similar to those encountered in the real world (e.g. Hollenbeck et al., 1995; Molloy and Parasuraman, 1996; Pigeau et al., 1995). The current research found a distinct difference in the vigilance dynamics between participants (novices and generalists) with no or less experience, training, and exposure to the type of surveillance task performed in the study, and specialists with more experience, training, and exposure to this type of task. This suggests that previous work exposure is an important variable to consider when selecting a sample for some research using real world type tasks.

The notion that the vigilance decrement may not be as prevalent as implied in much vigilance research, suggests that Parasuraman's (1987) call for a shift in the focus of research towards the overall level of vigilance and related attention processes is still relevant. This is supported by the low overall detection rates achieved in this study (50%), and the high false alarm rate which further reduced detection accuracy. The detection rate for the CCTV surveillance task used in this research was lower than those reported in studies where the significant events were known and visually salient (e.g., Tickner and Poulton, 1968, 1973; Tickner et al., 1972; van Voorthuijsen et al., 2005; Wallace et al., n.d.), but higher than Andrew et al.'s (2003) study where the significant events were inconspicuous and transient, and participants were not told what constituted a significant event.

As target inconspicuity (Bauer et al., 1996; Itti and Koch, 2000) and duration (Tickner and Poulton, 1973) increase detection difficulty, the detection task in this study is considered to be more difficult than in Tickner and Poulton (1968, 1973, 1975), Tickner and colleagues (1972), van Voorthuijsen et al.'s (2005) and Wallace et al.'s (n.d.) studies. However, consultation with experts (pilot study 2) confirmed that the types of scenes and TBs were representative of the scenes and significant events encountered inside industrial processing plants. The low detection rate in this study suggests that expectations regarding CCTV detection rates require careful evaluation. A one hundred percent detection rate is unrealistic, even for top performers and those with extensive experience and training in CCTV surveillance. If this is the case, it is inevitable that significant events are missed in operational contexts, although the proportion of missed significant events will vary according to the type of surveillance performed, the nature of significant events, and the skills and experience of operators. This finding indicates that it may be necessary to re-evaluate what is feasible in human detection and CCTV environments and the conditions that support and enhance detection. This would include examining the implications of having to view multiple displays, and implications of the nature of the viewed environment and detection tasks on the likely performance success. These are important findings because they confirm that a greater emphasis should be placed on the operator's role in CCTV effectiveness and interventions aimed at improving detection rates.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The changes in the vigilance decrement across the initial sample group, and subsequent different work exposure groups, show that the vigilance effect is not consistent across people, or indeed across time. Variations in group performance, and that of individuals within groups, mean that one cannot automatically expect a decrement, or a particular type of decrement, to occur for all those involved in CCTV surveillance. This is likely to extend to other real world visual analysis intensive viewing tasks. Further, the capacity of the specialist group to raise performance in the final 30 min period compared to the middle 30 min shows that there are some people who can maintain performance in real life settings for extended periods that are well beyond the 20–35 min periods indicated by Sawin and Scerbo (1995). The impact of the viewing task and environment may also be an important element of vigilance that requires more extensive consideration in vigilance research.

These results appear to confirm the suggestions made in a number of studies that operator performance in CCTV is less than ideal (Donald and Andrew, 2003; Donald et al., 2007; Edkins and Pollock, 1997; Keval and Sasse, 2006; Wells et al., 2006), although the standards for ‘satisfactory’ detection have not been defined. Previous research has found mixed results for CCTV effectiveness (Greenberg and Roush, 2009; Keval and Sasse, 2006; Wells et al., 2006; Welsh and Farrington, 2002). However, none of these studies examined actual detection rates. Where the effectiveness of the overall CCTV system has been unsatisfactory, researchers have attributed this to a number of factors, many of which relate to the broader context in which the CCTV system operates, and not necessarily to operator performance (e.g., Cameron et al., 2008). By contrast, the current research focuses specifically on operator performance and demonstrates that operator detection performance is likely to be a significant contributor in situations where CCTV effectiveness is unsatisfactory.

Differences between generalist and specialist CCTV contexts suggest that CCTV surveillance is not a unitary function and that the nature of the work and related demands on operators vary across contexts. This is an important distinction as it represents the first step in developing a typology of CCTV surveillance jobs and the cognitive processes involved. Previous research has assumed that all CCTV surveillance contexts are similar in terms of demands on operators. Differences between contexts have implications for theory and practice. The identification of CCTV contexts allows for future research to be specific in terms of the contexts to which the research is intended to apply. It also has implications for the selection, training and development of operators. Existing typologies of vigilance tasks (e.g., Parasuraman and Davies, 1977; Donald, 2008a,b) could be used as a starting point for a typology for CCTV surveillance tasks.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

