@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A longitudinal investigation of work environment stressors on the performance and wellbeing of office workers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We measure responses to indoor environmental quality in real office workers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Environmental stress reduces work performance by 2.4–5.8% in most situations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stressors reduce motivation, and increased tiredness and distractibility.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stressors reduce not only cognitive performance, but the rate of work.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stress factors appear to be additive, not multiplicative.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Thermal comfort

Light

Noise annoyance

Work performance

Wellbeing

Stress

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study uses a longitudinal within-subjects design to investigate the effects of inadequate Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) on work performance and wellbeing in a sample of 114 office workers over a period of 8 months. Participants completed a total of 2261 online surveys measuring perceived thermal comfort, lighting comfort and noise annoyance, measures of work performance, and individual state factors underlying performance and wellbeing. Characterising inadequate aspects of IEQ as environmental stressors, these stress factors can significantly reduce self-reported work performance and objectively measured cognitive performance by between 2.4% and 5.8% in most situations, and by up to 14.8% in rare cases. Environmental stressors act indirectly on work performance by reducing state variables, motivation, tiredness, and distractibility, which support high-functioning work performance. Exposure to environmental stress appears to erode individuals' resilience, or ability to cope with additional task demands. These results indicate that environmental stress reduces not only the cognitive capacity for work, but the rate of work (i.e. by reducing motivation). Increasing the number of individual stress factors is associated with a near linear reduction in work performance indicating that environmental stress factors are additive, not multiplicative. Environmental stressors reduce occupant wellbeing (mood, headaches, and feeling ‘off’) causing indirect reductions in work performance. Improving IEQ will likely produce small but pervasive increases in productivity.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A growing body of evidence shows that inadequate Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) can cause illness, adversely affect wellbeing and reduce worker productivity (Broadbent, 1971; Clausen and Wyon, 2008; Cui et al., 2013; Hygge and Knez, 2001; Lan et al., 2010; Witterseh et al., 2004). Fisk and Rosenfeld (1997) estimate that improving IEQ may improve productivity by between .5% and 5%. While the costs of regulating IEQ are significant (Kwon et al., 2011), the annual cost of employee salaries are approximately 100 times that of annual building costs (rent and maintenance) (Fisk and Rosenfeld, 1997). Fisk (2000) estimates that in the United States, the direct annual cost of inadequate IEQ on lost productivity, excluding illness, is between $20 and $160 billion dollars. According to Lan et al. (2014), the effect of IEQ on productivity is not considered in building design. To improve building design, building scientists require a sophisticated understanding of building occupant/building environment interaction in order to accurately predict how changes in building design and IEQ regulation are likely to affect occupants. Specifically, we do not understand how inadequate IEQ affects work performance and how individuals adapt and compensate for discomfort and stress. Recent studies have shown the benefit of improved IEQ on worker performance in actual offices (Agha-Hossein et al., 2013; Budaiwi, 2007). Small productivity gains are likely to be profitable for most organisations and provide better quality of life for building occupants (Dai et al., 2014; Fisk, 2000; Lan et al., 2011).

Ergonomists have long considered factors including, temperature, noise and lighting, to be environmental stressors (Broadbent, 1971). Uncomfortable or inadequate workspaces appear to redirect an individual's resources away from work performance, placing additional stresses on cognitive reserves, attention, and/or concentration. For example, early research showed that increasing the temperature (from 22.8 to 30.6 °C) caused thermal stress that reduced performance by 5% (Viteles and Smith, 1946). Later studies show that thermal stress increases task demands and places an additional load on cognitive reserves; performance degrades when the load exceeds the reserve (Hocking et al., 2001). Similarly, Matsangas et al. (2014) exposed individuals to low-frequency motion, causing mild motion sickness, another form of stress. While individuals initially report mild motion sickness, performance was unaffected. After further exposure, the ability to compensate for the additional stress decreased, consequently causing a reduction in performance. Mild motion sickness can also occur in office environments located in tall buildings, caused by wind-induced building motion (Lamb et al., 2014). Other studies have shown that increasing effort to counter thermal discomfort and maintain performance can cause a reduction in motivation and also cause low mood (Lan et al., 2010). Similarly, increases in humidity can adversely affect performance (Shi et al., 2013; Tsutsumi et al., 2007). Changing light levels can also adversely affect eye fatigue, distraction, and causing difficulty perceiving letters and annoyance (Kim and Kim, 2007).

While the effect of individual stressors have been studied, few studies have investigated the combined effects of multiple stressors (Clausen and Wyon, 2008; Dai et al., 2014), particularly the combined influence of thermal comfort, noise annoyance, and lighting comfort. Where they have been studied (Clausen and Wyon, 2008; Hygge and Knez, 2001; Witterseh et al., 2004), the results are inconclusive and are contradictory (Liebl et al., 2012). The range of methods used and individual study constraints complicate the interpretation of these studies. The current research investigates how environmental stress factors interact, and their effect on work performance in a real office environment.


                     Fisk (2000) notes three main limitations of experimental studies that attempt to address real-world work performance. One, experimental studies likely overestimate work performance reductions, using the example that a 50% in test accuracy is unlikely to cause a 50% reduction in worker performance. Two, typically measured cognitive tasks (e.g. reaction time), do not accurately reflect the types of work carried out in offices. Three, experimental studies manipulate stress factors over an unrealistically large range than found in most actual buildings. In addition to these limitations, experimental studies typically recruit younger participants (often university volunteers) who may not be representative of office workers, likely to be older and more experienced than the average university student. A number of factors concomitant with age, such as attitudes, tolerance and expectations, may affect the response to environmental stress factors. Experimental studies almost always employ cognitive tests and standard performance measures that participants have no inherent investment in, in contrast to the workplace where individuals are likely to be intrinsically or extrinsically motivated to maintain a high level of performance. Therefore actual office workers may be more resilient to moderate challenges of environmental stress. Further, stress factors in an experimental environment may have a differential effect on performance. A novel “stress” such as an arbitrary noise may be a mild inconvenience in an experiment, but an irregular but frequently experienced noise at work (e.g. loud air conditioning) may have a large impact on work performance. Finally, experimental studies typically expose participants to short durations of stress, often around 2 h or less, significantly less than office workers who may experience up to 8 h of environmental stress during an average work day. Stress of a low intensity for a long duration may have equal or greater impact than a high intensity stress for a short period. The obvious method to overcome these limitations is to examine the effect of a realistic set of environmental stressors that occur in real office buildings.

The interaction between an individual and their environment is complex. Humans are not passive systems where a change in the physical environment produces a response of a given magnitude. Instead, humans respond physiologically (e.g. release sweat to decrease temperature) and psychologically (e.g. increase effort in response to a challenge) to changes in the environment (Parsons, 2000). Psychologists categorise individual characteristics into two components. Stable characteristics are called “traits” (e.g. introversion/extroversion), and dynamic characteristics, are called “states” (e.g. motivation, mood) (Chaplin et al., 1988). States may be a form of resilience; a capacity to achieve a positive outcome despite challenges (Luthar and Cicchetti, 2000). Individual states may explain the response to environments stresses. Cui et al. (2013) show that motivation decreases during thermal stress, and that reductions in motivation provide a better explanation for reductions in performance than direct effects of thermal stress. Understanding the role of individual states in the relationship between environmental stressors and the adverse effects on wellbeing and work performance may facilitate the development of a more sophisticated understanding of the individual/environment interaction. Individual differences in the sensitivity to changes in environmental stressors complicates the person/environment interaction; individuals differ, for example, in their sensitivity to sound and temperature (Clausen and Wyon, 2008; Parsons, 2000). Further, females tend to show greater dissatisfaction with IEQ than males (Kim et al., 2013). The literature on individual adaptation to environmental stressors, and the effect those adaptations on productivity is limited.

The current study addresses the limitations of previous experimental studies and examines the effect of environmental stress factors on real office workers in their actual office environment. We focus on the effects of reported stress-induced discomfort on work performance and well-being in a large sample across a wide variety of office settings and environmental conditions, rather than address the objectively measured conditions that cause discomfort. Participants completed online surveys measuring work performance, well-being, and environmental stress factors including, perceived thermal comfort, lighting comfort and noise annoyance, over a period of 8 months. The study addresses four main aims: one, qualify the effects of environmental stress factors on work performance and wellbeing; two, assess the cumulative effects of environmental stress factors; three, investigate the role of ‘state’ variables as potential mediators between environmental stressors and work performance; and, four, investigate how individuals might compensate for environmental stressors.

@&#METHOD@&#

The current study recruited participants from a large-scale ground level survey examining the occupant response to wind-induced building motion (Lamb et al., 2013). The study recruited additional participants from the work colleagues of the initial participants. Participants gave their informed consent and received an incentive of $200 (NZD). 114 participants completed a total of 2261 surveys across a period of 231 study days (8 months) in Wellington, New Zealand. On average, each participant completed 19.8 surveys (min = 7; max = 27). The sample overrepresented female participants (71.9%, N = 82). Participants reported a mean age of 39.5 years (SD = 10.9) and were of primarily a “professional” occupation (69.5%, N = 73), followed by “administration” (24.8%, N = 26). Participants reported that they worked in one of 66 different buildings in Wellington. Sample sizes varied with a median of 2 participants per building (min = 1; max = 15). Participants worked on a median of the 8th floor (min = 0 (ground floor); max = 28) in buildings with a median height of 12 floors (min = 2; max = 29). The vast majority of Wellington buildings are reinforced concrete and are air conditioned.

The current study analyses a subset of data from a larger survey examining changes in work performance, comfort and wellbeing over time in response to changes in the work environment, initially used to assess the impact of wind-induced building motion on occupants (Lamb et al., 2014). The 55-item online survey contained seven sections, each presented on a separate web page, in a randomised order. The following section described the items used in the current study.

Participants rated thermal comfort on a 7-point ASHRAE scale (ASHRAE, 1966) (1 = ‘cold’, 2 = ‘cool’, 3 = ‘slightly cool’, 4 = ‘neutral’, 5 = ‘slightly warm’, 6 = ‘warm’, 7 = ‘hot’). Light levels were rated on a similar 7-point scale (1 = ‘much too dark’, 2 = ‘too dark’, 3 = ‘comfortably dark’, 4 = ‘comfortable’, 5 = ‘comfortably bright’, 6 = ‘too bright’, 7 = ‘much too bright’). Noise annoyance was rated from 0 = ‘not at all’ to 10 = ‘extremely’ (Fields et al., 2001).

The measurement of work performance is complex (Ryan and Tipu, 2009) and self-reported measures of work performance are often the only practically available measure of work performance (Pransky et al., 2006). An 11-point scale measured work performance relative to perceived average work performance (0 = ‘much less productive than average’, 5 = ‘about average’, 10 = ‘much more productive than average’).

The Stroop Test (1935) asks participants to report the colour of a target word, not the word itself, e.g. a target word “red” presented in “blue”, requires the correct answer of “blue”. Participants completed 26 trials with an inter-trial period of 700 ms.

Participants judged their level of distraction from work, i.e. losing concentration, non-work communication (email, phone calls, texts), talking to colleagues, daydreaming, taking short breaks on the internet, on an 11-point scale anchored at, 0 = ‘very distracted’, 5 = ‘occasionally distracted’, 10 = ‘not at all distracted’.

The Karolinska Sleepiness Scale measured tiredness (Akerstedt and Gillberg, 1990), on a 9-point scale was anchored at 1 = ‘extremely alert’, 3 = ‘alert’, 5 = ‘neither alert nor sleepy’, 7 = ‘sleepy – but no difficulty remaining awake’, 9 = ‘extremely sleepy – fighting sleep’. One item measured mood on an 11-point scale anchored at, 0 = ‘unhappy’, 5 = Not sure/neutral, 10 = ‘happy’. One item measured general motivation on an 11-point scale from, 0 = ‘very unmotivated’, 10 = ‘very motivated’. Participants reported any headaches or feeling ‘off’ (‘yes’ or ‘no’). If participants answered ‘yes’ to any item, they were also asked to rate the severity of that symptom on an 11 point scale anchored at, 0 = ‘very mild symptoms’, 5 = ‘moderate symptoms’, 10 = ‘very severe symptoms’. One item asked if participants had taken any of the following medications: analgesics (painkillers), motion sickness tablets and/or cold/flu pills.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants received an email with a link to the survey between 2:30 and 3:00 pm, ensuring they had exposure to the office environment for an average of 6–7 h. Participants were asked to respond to survey items in regard to their experiences during the day they completed the survey. The instructions required participants to wait until the next survey if they were not in their office building, or were too busy to complete the survey. Survey invitations were simultaneously sent to all participants on a semi-random schedule, spread evenly across low, medium and high wind speeds in order to assess the effects of wind-induced building motion, see Lamb et al. (2014) for more detail. For the current study, this method ensured that the sample included a range of external environmental conditions. On average, participants received one survey invitation every two weeks. The study concluded when participants completed approximately 25 surveys or when the survey period elapsed. The survey presented items presented across 6 different pages, presented in random order to minimise the likelihood of earlier items affecting responses on later pages. The majority of participants completed the survey within 2–3 h receiving the email invitation (88.9%, N = 2009).

The analysis uses Multi-level Modelling (MLM) to control for the non-random characteristics of data collection. The main independent measures include noise annoyance, thermal comfort and lighting comfort. MLMs assume a linear relationship between independent and dependent measures, which do not typically occur in comfort-based analyses that often observe u-shaped function. Therefore, the analyses collapse response options into categorical variables to allow comparison between “comfort” and “environmental stress” within MLMs (and also because some of the sample sizes for each option were too small to include as a categorical variable in an MLM). We rescaled each of the three main response sets into a 3-point categorical scale. “Comfortable” was recoded as a 2, and the higher and lower ends of the scale were recoded as “1” and “3”, respectively (e.g. for temperature, responses 1 to 2 = “1”, 3 to 5 = “2”, 6 to 7 = “3”). The main dependent measures are work performance and wellbeing.

The analysis examines the individual influences of thermal comfort, light levels and noise annoyance, on three-point categorical scales. We calculated the collective influence of the three stressors as the sum of the three stress factors based on the following recoding. Thermal comfort, lighting and noise annoyance outside the range judged comfortable were recoded into “comfortable” and recoded as “0” (no stress), and response options at the higher and lower ends of the scales were recoded as “1” (stress), discomfort at either end of the continuum can be stressful. “Environmental Stress” (ES) is the sum influence of thermal comfort, light levels and noise annoyance.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A MLM revealed significant main effects of noise annoyance, F (2, 1899.6) = 5.3, p < .01, and lighting, F (2, 1044.6) = 3.8, p < .05, on work performance. On average, participants reported spending 75% of their time at their desk, indicating these stressors were mostly experienced in their normal workspace. Thermal comfort did not significantly affect work performance, F (2, 1887.9) = .30, n.s. No interactions were significant. Work performance was highest when participants judged lighting to be “comfortable”. Participants judged their work performance to be significantly lower when their work environment was too bright or too dark, shown in Fig. 1
                        . Environments judged too bright and too dark did not significantly differ from each other. A work environment judged too dark caused a larger decrease in work performance (effect size: Cohen's d = .27) than an environment judged too bright (d = .07). Effect sizes are a measure of the magnitude of an observed difference. Cohen's d indicates the size of a difference between two means relative to variability in the groups, e.g. a Cohen's d of .5 indicates a moderate size effect equivalent to half a standard deviation. “Extreme noise annoyance” significantly reduced work performance (d = .13), but not “moderate annoyance”.

We used a series of multinomial logistic regression models to test whether age or gender influenced the likelihood of reporting any type of ES. Age or gender did not significantly affect the likelihood of reporting discomfort due to temperature, light or noise. However, this should be interpreted with caution as our sample was biased towards females, therefore there may not have been an adequate sample of males to detect any significant differences.

ES caused a significant decrease in work performance, F (1, 1777.9) = 9.3, p < .01. Panel D in Fig. 1 shows that work performance decreases as the number of environmental stressors increases. Neither age, F (1, 105.0) = .69, n.s., or gender, F (1, 107.0) = 1.3, n.s., significantly affected the likelihood of reporting higher ES scores. The figures include confidence intervals as indicator of variability, however, the study uses a within-subject design, therefore significant differences can occur between groups despite overlapping error bars (Cumming and Finch, 2005).

For ES, the effect size of the reductions in work performance were small. Compared with no reported stress factors, one stress factor had a negligible effect on performance (Cohen's d = .06). Two stress factors caused a larger decrease (d = .14), and three factors larger still (d = .40). While small, reported stress factors were common, one stress factor was reported in 42% of all surveys, two in 15% of surveys, and three in 1.5% of surveys.

The decrease in work performance from 0 to two stress factors is near linear. Given the small sample size, and therefore wider confidence intervals for 3 stress factors, it is unclear whether the third stress factor causes a relatively greater performance decrease. The results indicate that increasing the number of stress factors is, on average, additive rather than multiplicative.

To investigate the potential for mediating factors to explain the reduction in work performance, an MLM examined the influence of ES on factors that may explain changes in work performance. Including motivation, tiredness, and distractibility, in the model from the previous analysis, the predictive capacity of the model improved, indicated by a lower Schwarz's Bayesian Criterion (7728.7–6620.2). Low motivation, tiredness and feeling distracted from work all led to significantly lower work performance, shown in Table 1
                        . The inclusion of these additional performance factors caused the previously significant main effect of ES to become non-significant. This indicates that motivation, tiredness and distractibility explain the variation previous explained by ES. To confirm the relationship, individual MLMs examined the effect of ES on tiredness, motivation and distractibility. Indeed, increases in ES causes significantly lower motivation, higher tiredness, and greater distractibility, shown in Table 1. These analyses show that ES indirectly affects work performance through decreased motivation, elevated tiredness and increased distractibility.

We calculated a single performance measure incorporating both reaction time and the proportion of correct responses to control for any speed/accuracy trade-off. Both reaction time and accuracy were standardised into z-scores (individual score – M/SD), giving both distributions a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. We reverse scored reaction time, so higher scores indicated better performance to match accuracy scores. We summed reaction time and accuracy z-scores to produce a combined speed/accuracy measure, where higher scores indicate improved performance. An MLM examined speed/accuracy scores across ES, showing a significant main effect of ES, F (1, 1874.0) = 5.5, p < .05, est. = −.09 (SE = .04). Overall, speed/accuracy decreases with increases in ES, shown in Fig. 2
                        . However, three stress factors produced comparable Stroop performance to only one stress factor. While Stroop performance improved over time, showing a training effect, F (1, 2126.1) = 137.2, p < .001, est. = .04 (SE = .004), the distribution of reported stressors was even across the period of testing, so a clustering of multiple stress factors near the ending of testing cannot explain higher than expected performance for three stressors. The high variability caused by the low sample size for three stress factors (N = 29) may be responsible for the higher than expected Stroop performance.

Noise annoyance, F (2, 1931.0) = 22.2, p < .001, light, F (2, 1944.4) = 3.3, p < .05, and thermal comfort, F (2, 2243.7) = 3.2, p < .05, significantly affected mood. Participants reported the most positive mood during comfort (M = 6.49, SE = .09), than excessive light (M = 6.17, SE = .17) or inadequate light (M = 5.84, SE = .40). Mood decreases as noise annoyance increases. Mood was highest with no annoyance (M = 6.56, SE = .10), then decreases with moderate annoyance (M = 6.39, SE = .11), then decreases further with extreme annoyance (M = 5.41, SE = .18). Mood was comparable whether comfortable (M = 6.46, SE = .10) or too hot (M = 6.50, SE = .13), but was significantly lower when too cold (M = 6.07, SE = .18).

Increased ES caused a significantly greater incidence (and severity) of headaches (est. = .19, SE = .05), F (1, 1868.7) = 16.2, p < .001, of feeling ‘off’ (est. = .14, SE = .05), F (1, 1728.3) = 7.03, p < .01, and lower mood (est. = −.21, SE = .06), F (1, 1921.5) = 13.9, p < .01. When added to the work performance model, motivation, tiredness and distraction retained their significance, but neither headaches, F (1, 1874.6) = .9, n.s., feeling ‘off’, F (1, 1896.8) = 2.3, n.s., or mood F (1, 1854.8) = 13.9, n.s., had significant effects on work performance. However, headaches, F (1, 2226.9) = 4.9, p < .05, feeling ‘off’, F (1, 2207.6) = 44.9, p < .001, and mood, F (1, 2204.7) = 444.2, p < .001, all significantly causing reductions in an index of performance factors (motivation, tiredness, and distraction combined). Performance on the Stroop Test was significantly affected by both feeling ‘Off’, F (1, 2141.5) = 16.9, p < .001 (est. = −.06, SE = .01), and mood, F (1, 2180.0) = 5.1, p < .05, est. = .03, SE = .01, but not by headaches, F (1, 2161.9) = 3.9, n.s.
                     

A binary logistic regression with mixed effects showed that ES was a significant predictor of the percentage of participants reporting analgesic use, (β = 1.5, p < .05). Fig. 3
                         shows the unadjusted proportion of participants who report analgesic use across ES. As the number of environmental stressors increase, the use of analgesic medication increases from 8.6% to 31%, a 22.4% increase.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The current study uses a longitudinal within-subjects design to investigate the effects of adverse aspects of IEQ, characterised as environmental stress (ES), on the wellbeing and work performance of office workers in real buildings. ES is associated with a significant reduction in work performance. However, ES did not directly affect performance, instead it affects individual state factors that support normal work performance including motivation, alertness, and focus, which then cause subsequent reductions in work performance. ES also adversely affects wellbeing, independent of state-based factors that reduce work performance.

Environmental stress, including thermal discomfort, noise annoyance, and lighting discomfort, is associated with a significant reduction in self-reported work performance. The size of the reduction depends upon the number of stressors, and is associated with a small to moderate reductions of work performance of .06–.40 standard deviations, respectively. Participants reported above average performance when they report no stressors, but as the number of stressors increases, performance reduces to levels that approximate “average” performance. Expressed as percentages, one stress factor is associated with an average performance reduction of 2.4%. Two stress factors are associated with a reduction of 5.4%, and three factors, 14.8%. While a small reduction, participants reported one stress factor in 42% of all surveys. Two stress factors were less common, occurring in 15% of the surveys, and three stressors was rare, at 1.5%. Overall, participants reported at least one environmental stress in 58.5% of surveys.

These results show that environmental stress factors are consistently associated with a small erosion of work performance. The overall performance reduction associated with one or two stressors is consistent with other studies estimating performance reductions of .5–5% (Fisk and Rosenfeld, 1997; Viteles and Smith, 1946). Participants rarely reported three stress factors, but these are associated with a significantly larger decrease in performance (14.8%). This indicates that under highly stressful conditions the performance reduction can be large, but due to the small sample size for 3 stress factors, the result is less reliable than the performance reduction associated with one or two stressors. Overall, speed/accuracy decreases with increases in ES, supporting participants' reports of reduced work performance. Lan et al. (2011) also observed thermal discomfort induced reductions in Stroop performance. Objective and subjective measures of performance show that ES reduces work performance.

Noise annoyance was associated with a significant reduction in work performance, consistent with existing research (Hancock and Pierce, 1985; Hygge and Knez, 2001). Noise annoyance may have been associated with lower performance here, in contrast with experimental studies (Witterseh et al., 2004), because the source of noise differed categorically from those used in experimental studies or because participants are differentially motivated in field studies. Lighting also was associated with reduced performance consistent with other research (Hygge and Knez, 2001).

Inappropriate lighting caused the largest reduction in performance. We are unable to attribute this to poor artificial light, glare, inadequate natural light, inappropriate computer screen settings or quality, or some other cause. Future research may consider including more items exploring the causes of inadequate lighting in real office environments.

Thermal comfort had no significant effect on work performance, possibly because in realistic environments, building occupants are able to regulate thermal comfort to some extent by adding or removing layers of clothing (Chen and Chang, 2012). While Lan et al. (2011) found thermal discomfort caused reductions in work performance, they prevented participants from adding or removing layers of clothing, likely exacerbating an effect that may be reduced though individual adaptation. Future research might examine the extent to which individual temperature regulation can offset performance reductions. While experimental studies have to control all potential sources of error, some constraints may limit applicability to the real world applications.

Individual environmental stress factors did not interact to produce greater reductions in performance than occurred in isolation, and work performance appears to reduce in a near-linear fashion as the number of environmental stress factor increases. We observed no interactions between stressors. This suggests that one stress factor may lead to a performance reduction of a given magnitude (based on the type and severity of the stress), and the addition of an additional stress further reduces performance, but the effects do not combine to be more than the sum of their individual contributions, at least not within the range of IEQ we observed. This is in agreement with Hancock and Pierce (1985) who found that temperature and noise independently affect performance. For the stressors examined in the current study, and under the range of stress observed, stressors appear to be additive. Given the additive nature of environmental stressors, stress models of performance better explain the relationship between IEQ and performance than arousal models (Broadbent, 1971), which have received criticism (Hygge and Knez, 2001).

This study measured a number of individual states that can influence work performance, including motivation, tiredness and distraction. Environmental stress does not appear to have a direct effect on work performance. Direct effects of environmental stress factors would include factors that physically interfere with the ability to perform, e.g. dim lighting making reading difficult or cold temperatures that reduce dexterity. Instead, the results show environmental stressors indirectly reduce performance by adversely affecting state-based variables that support work performance, namely motivation, tiredness and distractibility. Stress factors may cause distraction from the pool of cognitive resources that are available for work; reduced performance on the Stroop Test support this theory. Reductions in factors that support performance, such as motivation, suggest ES does not just reduce the capacity to work (cognitive performance), but the rate of work may be impeded by reduced motivation. Cui et al. (2013) support our results, showing that motivation is higher when the temperature is comfortable, also concluding that reductions in performance are better explained by reductions in motivation than the direct effects of stress. Our study shows that this finding occurs in real office settings. Reduction in work performance likely lag behind the initial occurrence of ES. Individuals can maintain performance for short durations of discomfort, but after a period their ability to compensate for the additional stress decreased, consequently causing a reduction in performance (Matsangas et al., 2014). We argue that the act of compensating for environmental stressors requires energy, and expenditure of that energy causes fatigue; Witterseh et al. (2004) found that exposure to noise caused fatigue, which appears to extend to other stressors.

Noise annoyance, reduced lighting, and thermal comfort, individually and in combination significantly reduced mood. Increases in ES is associated with a significantly greater incidence (and severity) of headaches, of feeling ‘off’, and lowered mood. While stress-induced reductions in state factors (motivation, tiredness and distraction) are associated with decreased work performance, reductions in wellbeing variables (headaches, feeling ‘off’, or mood) did not directly affect performance, supporting Lan et al. (2010) where decreases in mood also did not affect performance. However, reductions in wellbeing appear to cause indirect reductions in work performance. Reduced wellbeing caused further reductions in motivation, tiredness and distraction, which in turn adversely affect work performance. Further, participant reports of feeling ‘off’ and experiencing low mood were associated with poorer performance on the Stroop Test.

As the number of environmental stressors increased, participants showed increased use of analgesic medication (painkillers), rising from a baseline of 8.6%–31%, a 22.4% increase. Lamb et al. (2014) observed a similar result where building occupants reported taking analgesic medication to alleviate symptoms caused by wind-induced building motion. Office workers appear to use analgesic medication as treatment for non-specific discomfort. It is unknown whether analgesics provide relief in either context. Nevertheless, use of medication provides a good objective indicator of discomfort.

Environmental design should not only support occupants to maintain a high level of work performance, but also provide a safe and healthy environment that promotes occupant wellbeing. Aside of the obvious value of improved occupant health, lower levels of wellbeing might have more subtle effects on employee satisfaction and staff retention. Our estimates of reduced performance may be conservative, as we only measured direct effects of ES on performance, and did not focus on a greater range of health outcomes, such as communicable illness, sick building syndrome, and other health effects that Fisk (2000) noted as having significant associated costs.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The study lacks objective measures of light, temperature, and sound that cause the observed levels of discomfort. The sample over-represents females, who are known to report environmental discomfort more often than males (Sun et al., 2013). It is unknown whether females are more susceptible to environmental stress than males. Some of the participants were located in wind-sensitive buildings, but the proportion of affected people is relatively small, approximately 2.5% of the total sample, the presence of which is no different to any other uncontrolled variables that may have influenced participants in the study. We collected a limited amount of information existing transitory conditions (e.g. cold/flu, personal/family stress), but we did not measure recent alcohol consumption or any sleep disruptions. The current study did not measure adaptive behaviours as a result of thermal discomfort. Future studies might consider measuring thermal adaptation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In a longitudinal sample of office workers in real office environment, this study characterises inadequate aspects of IEQ as environmental stressors, and shows that these stressor variables, outside the range judged “comfortable”, can significantly reduce work performance by between 2.4 and 14.8%. Environmental stressors act indirectly on work performance by reducing state variables: motivation, alertness, and focus that support high-functioning work performance. Exposure to environmental stress appears to erode individuals' ability to compensate for environmental stress, reducing motivation and focus. These results indicate that environmental stressors reduce not only the cognitive capacity for work, but the rate of work (i.e. motivation). Increasing the number of individual stress factors, on average, results in a near linear reduction in work performance, indicating that environmental stress factors do not have a multiplicative effect. Environmental stressors reduce occupant wellbeing (mood, headaches, and feeling ‘off’) causing indirect reductions in work performance. Improving IEQ will lead to small but significant improvements in workplace performance which may lead to significant gains in profitability. Perhaps more relevant is the opportunity to significantly improve the quality of life of building occupants by moderating known environmental stressors in real-life work environments.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The Australian Research Council's Discovery Projects funding scheme supported the research reported in this paper (grant number DP1096179). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the Australian Research Council. The authors acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Darren Walton, Prof. Vaughan Macefield, and Sarah Lamb.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

