@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Assessing the performance of winter footwear using a new maximum achievable incline method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We assess footwear slip resistance on ice by the maximum slope angles subjects could stand and walk.


                        
                        
                           
                           The maximum slope angles were objective and ecologically valid measures of slip resistance.


                        
                        
                           
                           We tested footwear performance while standing and walking uphill, downhill, and on cross-slopes.


                        
                        
                           
                           This human-centred measure of slip resistance did not require controlling of individuals' gait characteristics.


                        
                        
                           
                           One outsole design significantly outperformed the others on the smooth, wet ice.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Slips and falls

Footwear

Slip resistance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  More informative tests of winter footwear performance are required in order to identify footwear that will prevent injurious slips and falls on icy conditions. In this study, eight participants tested four styles of winter boots on smooth wet ice. The surface was progressively tilted to create increasing longitudinal and cross-slopes until participants could no longer continue standing or walking. Maximum achievable incline angles provided consistent measures of footwear slip resistance and demonstrated better resolution than mechanical tests. One footwear outsole material and tread combination outperformed the others on wet ice allowing participants to successfully walk on steep longitudinal slopes of 17.5° ± 1.9° (mean ± SD). By further exploiting the methodology to include additional surfaces and contaminants, such tests could be used to optimize tread designs and materials that are ideal for reducing the risk of slips and falls.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Slips and falls are one of the most prevalent and injurious types of accidents on-the-job and in public spaces. The direct cost of falls in the United States is estimated at $30 billion per year (Stevens et al., 2006). Winter conditions increase the likelihood of pedestrian slips and falls as precipitation and cold temperatures create hazards and obstacles (Gard and Lundborg, 2000). In winter-experiencing environments, foot slippage is estimated to account for 43% of all falls (Lund, 1984) with ice and snow contributing to two-thirds of outdoor pedestrian injuries (Rolfsman et al., 2012). Medical care costs of slipping injuries are also estimated to be the same as that of all traffic injuries in the same period (Björnstig et al., 1997).

Slip-resistant footwear can reduce the risks of slips and falls (Abeysekera and Gao, 2001). Slip resistance is generally measured as the coefficient of friction (COF) between the footwear sole and underfoot surface as slips occur when the COF is lower than that required for the momentary intended activity (Grönqvist et al., 2001). During gait, force plates are commonly used to measure the ground reaction forces and then the COF is calculated as the ratio of the horizontal and vertical components of the force (Strandberg and Lanshammar, 1981). This ratio represents the friction that is utilized. The maximum utilized friction during normal gait is often referred to as the required COF (Chang, 2012). Slips are more likely to occur when the required COF exceeds the maximum possible COF at the footwear-surface interface, commonly termed the available COF. Therefore, the measure that most critically determines whether slips can be resisted is the available COF and methods that are used to assess footwear slip resistance attempt to estimate the available COF.

The major challenge in the assessment of footwear slip resistance is that the measurement of available COF is not straightforward (Chang et al., 2001a,b). The COF available at any given instant is dependent on the contact surface area and characteristics of the interface (including the adhesional and hysteretic properties of the footwear sole), the applied forces, and moving speed. Contaminants at the interface further increase the complexity in estimating the available COF as it is further affected by properties of the contaminant layer such as its viscosity and thickness (Grönqvist, 1995). The validity of mechanical methods for estimating available COF therefore depends on their ability to simulate human gait over appropriate test surfaces (Chang et al., 2001b).

According to current international standards for testing footwear slip resistance (ASTM F2913-11; ISO 13287:2012), footwear is rigidly mounted to a test rig and the ground reaction forces recorded by load cells are used to calculate the COF while standardized test surfaces such as quarry tile or stainless steel are dragged against the stationary footwear sole. Test specifications for foot angles, sliding velocities, and normal loads are meant to reproduce those observed when a slippery surface is encountered during normal gait (Wilson, 1990). It is understood that larger output COF (i.e. greater available COF) values are indicative of greater footwear slip resistance. However, there are major limitations to this method, and as such, there remains no standard threshold COF criteria for labelling footwear as slip resistant (Grönqvist et al., 2001).

One important limitation is how well the specified mechanical test parameters reflect the range of gait characteristics of actual users, which vary with such factors as age, sex, and weight (Chumanov et al., 2008; Lockhart et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2012). These parameters also vary when walking in slippery conditions, transitioning between high and low friction areas, or on different terrain such as slopes, cross-slopes, and uneven surfaces (Bunterngchit et al., 2000; Dixon and Pearsall, 2010; Heiden et al., 2005; McVay and Redfern, 1994). Types of activity, such as walking, running, turning, or load carrying, will also affect the COF required to resist slips (Fino and Lockhart, 2014).

Standard tests are further limited by how accurately the surfaces over which the footwear is tested reflect the surfaces on which they are intended or actually used. The standardized test surfaces described in the current standard test methods (ASTM F2913-11; 
                     ISO 13287:2012) do not include any winter surfaces or contaminants such as snow or ice, presumably due to the transient nature of such surfaces. Therefore, the ability of the standard tests to reflect slip resistance in winter conditions is particularly poor. It is however, possible to fit standard test rigs with winter surfaces, for example a frosted ice surface can be used in conjunction with the SATRA STM 603 Slip Resistance Testing machine. The caveats to using such a surface are that the repeatability of such tests and the winter conditions it represents have yet to be established; and the testing methods have not been accepted into standard guidelines.

Despite the epidemiological data indicating the frequency and severity of slip and fall injuries in winter, few have studied footwear slip resistance or gait biomechanics on winter surfaces because of how difficult it is to produce and maintain consistent winter test conditions. Gao et al. (2008a,b) used a short, 2.7 m ice walkway inclined at 0°, 6°, and 8° to compare lower extremity muscle activity during gait on ice at −10 °C to gait on a reference, non-ice ramp. In studies of footwear slip-resistance, Gao et al. (2003, 2004, 2008b) conducted experiments using a stationary mechanical portable step simulator device, developed at the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (Grönqvist et al., 1989), on surfaces including ice to show the effects of abrasion, sole material, hardness, and roughness on relative COF of a variety of footwear. Bruce et al. (1986) measured the COF of winter anti-slip devices by attaching subjects in series to a load cell and a winch that dragged the subjects across a hockey rink. More commonly, evaluations of winter footwear performance have utilized subjective ratings of slipperiness, during which participants or observers rank different types of footwear while participants use them on outdoor winter surfaces (Gao and Abeysekera, 2002; Gard and Lundborg, 2000).

Outside of winter testing, adjustable inclined surfaces have been used in the past to determine the slip resistance of footwear and/or flooring materials (Jung and Schenk, 1990; Perkins and Wilson, 1983). Although testing is carried out on sloped surfaces, the underlying assumption is that the relative differences in slip resistance will translate to walking on level ground. The maximum slope angles on which subjects are able to step, typically facing downhill, without slipping are used to assess slip resistance of the footwear-surface combinations. The tangents of the maximum slope angles are used as estimates of the available COF (James, 1999; Brungraber et al., 2003). Some users also prefer direct walking tests to mechanical tests (James, 1999) and these adjustable incline tests have the advantage of providing objective outcomes while involving real users. Ramps used in these tests have previously been small-scale with subjects taking few steps or walking with unnatural gait, such as shuffling with small steps forwards and backwards or stepping in place (Jung and Schenk, 1990; Skiba et al., 1986). Test surfaces on these ramps are often indoor industrial floors with contaminants such as water, oil, and soap (Brungraber et al., 2003). To the authors' knowledge, there have been no published works involving a large-scale adjustable ramp that allows for sustained walking on winter test conditions.

In order for footwear designers and manufacturers to optimize the slip resistant properties of winter footwear and appropriately inform consumers of footwear performance, it is imperative that methods of footwear assessment be relevant and reliable. The primary objective of this study was to use the maximum incline angle that participants were able to maintain balance while standing and walking to assess the slip resistance of a range of footwear on ice. Additionally, results of this new method were compared to those of the current standard mechanical test (ASTM F2913) using an ice tray attachment in order to determine the utility of the new method.

@&#METHODS@&#

A convenience sample of eight young, healthy males took part in this study. Only participants between 20 and 45 years of age who had lived in a winter-experiencing climate for at least one winter season and reported normally walking outdoors in the winter were included in this study. The participants in this study averaged 18.5 ± 11.8 years (mean ± SD) spent living in winter-experiencing regions. Participants were 31.6 ± 8.1 years of age, 179 cm ± 7 cm in height, and weighed 80.2 kg ± 15.4 kg. Participants were fitted to the closest full size footwear and tested a range of U.S. men's sizes from size 9 to 12. Participants who self-reported cardiovascular conditions that could be affected by cold exposure, inability to sustain 30 consecutive minutes of ambulation, or use of medication that could affect balance were excluded from the study. Each participant provided signed informed consent to participate in this study as approved by the Research Ethics Board of the Toronto Rehabilitation Institute–University Health Network.

Participants in this study tested the performance of four styles of men's winter boots with different outsole designs (Fig. 1
                        ). The four styles of test footwear are described as follows:
                           
                              −Style B: boot with proprietary IcePaw design (Shore-A hardness of 60) embedded in rubber with Shore-A hardness of 73 (upper and outsole: Baffin, Ontario, Canada);

−Style N: NCI rubber compound outsole with Shore-A hardness of 54 (outsole material: Dakota, Mark's®, Alberta, Canada);

−Style G: Green Diamond outsole technology consisting of aluminium oxide and silicon carbide granules embedded in rubber with Shore-A hardness of 69 (outsole material: Green Diamond Tire, Colorado, USA);

−Style J: JStep proprietary rubber compound outsole embedded with glass fibres that protrude approximately 10 μm with Shore-A hardness of 53 (outsole material: JStep Sole, Gimhae, Republic of Korea);

−Styles, N, G, and J consisted of identical uppers (uppers: Dakota, Mark's®, Alberta, Canada);

−Styles N and G had identical tread patterns composed of different materials.

Prior to testing, all of the test footwear was worn by volunteers equipped with pedometers for approximately 1000 steps per footwear. The footwear were worn indoors in an office environment on carpet and vinyl tile in order to naturally remove any mould release agent and provide an initial level of wear. Soap and water were used to clean the soles prior to all participant and bench tests.

Each type of footwear was tested on a SATRA STM 603 test machine (SATRA Technology Centre, Northamptonshire, UK), calibrated to the standard for testing footwear slip resistance ASTM F2913-11 (ASTM F2913-11, 2012). While there are many mechanical test devices used to measure footwear slip resistance, the new maximum achievable incline test method was compared to results from ASTM F2913 to provide a point of reference against an internationally relevant standard. ASTM F2913 was adapted directly from ISO 13287 and has identical test specifications and calibration procedures. The SATRA COF of each type of footwear was measured at the heel and forepart of the soles according to ASTM F2913-11. According to the standard method, the test footwear applies a normal force of 400 N or 500 N (depending on the footwear size) to the test surface and the surface is then moved horizontally relative to the footwear at 0.3 m/s. Load cells measure the resulting horizontal and normal forces during constant velocity and the SATRA COF that is output is the ratio of horizontal to normal force. The heel and foreparts of the sole were tested by tilting the footwear 7° with the heel lower and the toe lower, respectively. To test the heel, the footwear slid anteriorly with respect to the test surface to simulate heel slips and for forepart testing, the toe slid posteriorly relative to the test surface to simulate toe slips.

All test parameters were set and carried out according to those specified in ASTM F2913-11. The only aspect of the bench tests that was outside the specifications of the ASTM standard was the preparation of the winter test surfaces because there are as yet no internationally accepted standards for doing so. Preparation of ice surfaces was conducted according to an alternate source, SATRA TM144 (SATRA TM144, 2011). The TM144 guidelines were developed specifically for preparing ice trays to be used in conjunction with the SATRA STM 603 test machine. A 19 cm × 44  cm × 0.5 cm deep tray was filled with water and attached to cooling elements forming ice with a thin top layer of frost. The ice was cooled to −7 °C in ambient testing temperatures of 23 °C ± 2 °C. Throughout testing, the ice was continuously cooled at −7 °C. SATRA COF values were recorded for the frosted surface, the unwetted ice surface immediately below the frost, and then after wetting the ice surface (Fig. 2
                        ). The initial test run yielded a COF value on frosted ice. With subsequent runs over the same area, the footwear penetrated through the frost and a mean COF value for the unwetted ice surface below was recorded over five consecutive runs once a sequence of five runs did not show a systematic increase or decrease of greater than 10%. To more closely simulate smooth wet ice, a thin and continuous layer of water was applied over the ice using a spray bottle and tests were run again to find the mean of five consecutive trials once the five trials showed no systematic change of greater than 10%. The boot soles were preconditioned to −5 °C in an alcohol solution for three hours prior to testing. All the SATRA tests were performed after the participant trials had been completed using the same footwear.

Participant testing was conducted in WinterLab at the Toronto Rehabilitation Institute's Challenging Environment Assessment Laboratories. WinterLab is a self-contained laboratory with a 4.5 m × 4.6 m ice floor and participants were asked to walk 5.5 m across its diagonal. The test walkway surface consisted of smooth wet ice. Ice was created by freezing water and maintaining the ice temperature at −0.5 °C ± 0.5 °C using glycol tubes below the ice surface (Fig. 3
                        ). The ambient temperature of the room was held at 10.6 °C ± 0.6 °C and all test boots were conditioned at this temperature for one hour prior to testing. The warmer ambient temperature in combination with the near freezing ice temperature maintained a thin layer of melting water over the ice surface and no special preparation of the surface was required between trials. The COF of the ice floor was measured according to ASTM F1679 using a Neolite pad on the English XL Variable Incidence Tribometer (ASTM F1679, 2006). The ice conditions were measured before and after each test session and the average COF across all readings was 0.08 ± 0.05. WinterLab was mounted to a hydraulic-powered motion base that could tilt the entire floor surface in any direction to create sloped conditions. In this experiment, the laboratory was tilted to maximum slopes of 20° (Fig. 3).

Prior to testing in WinterLab, participants completed questionnaires indicating the number of days and length of time they spend outdoors per week during winter, winter sports that they take part in, whether they had fallen in the past two years, whether they had any experience using the test footwear prior to participating in the study, and which foot they would normally kick a ball with (to determine their dominant foot). Once the questionnaire was complete, participants were fitted with typical winter garments including winter coats as well as a full-body safety harness. Inside WinterLab, the harness was attached to a fall-arrest system connected to a robotic overhead gantry that automatically followed the position of the participants to stay directly above them. A controlled-descent line, balanced at 2 kg, prevented injury from falls by allowing a maximum downward velocity of 0.7 m/s.

During the experiment, participants were asked to complete two sets of tests while wearing each style of footwear: standing tests followed by walking tests. For the standing tests, participants were asked to stand with their feet shoulder-width apart. They were instructed that they could adjust their posture as required to maintain balance while the laboratory was tilted. The floor was tilted from level at a rate of 0.25° per second, pausing for five seconds at each full degree, until both of the participants' feet began to slide simultaneously. This test was conducted in four slope directions, in random order, with the participant facing downhill, uphill, with their left-side-higher, and their right-side-higher (Fig. 4
                        ). The final angle at which the participant was able to prevent both feet from sliding simultaneously was recorded as the maximum achievable angle for each footwear in each slope direction. The lowest maximum slope achieved in any slope direction during the standing tests were considered the critical angles and were used to determine appropriate incline angles for walking tests in each type of footwear. Critical angles were used to prescribe test angles for the walking tests in order to reduce the variability in the number of walking test trials between better and worse performing styles of footwear. This served to minimize the effects of fatigue and exposure to the cold environment.

The walking tests were conducted on two slope types: longitudinal slopes and cross-slopes, with the tilting axis of the floor either perpendicular to the direction of travel or parallel to the direction of travel, respectively. Participants walked in two slope directions; downhill and uphill on the longitudinal slope and right-side-higher and left-side-higher on the cross-slopes for each slope type (Fig. 4). In these tests, participants were asked to walk at a natural pace and in a controlled manner (without sliding their feet against the ice surface) from one end of the laboratory to the other and back again. The order in which the four styles of footwear were tested was randomized for each subject. Each style of footwear was first tested on the level at 0° and subsequent tests started from 5° less than the critical angles determined during standing tests. If the critical angle was less than 5°, walking tests after the level began at 1° and for critical angles greater than 16° participants included a 10° trial. Between laps, the slope angle of the walkway was progressively increased, changing in 1° increments until failure. A test angle for each slope type was deemed a failure if both feet slipped simultaneously (not including controlled slides to terminate gait), or the participant could not initiate gait, in either slope direction. The order of slope type and starting directions were randomized. Because the starting directions were randomized, a limitation of this study was that the failure angle for the cross-slopes pooled together both the left-side-higher and right-side-higher conditions and the failure angle on the longitudinal slopes pooled together both the uphill and downhill conditions. Rather than determining individual failure angles for each slope direction, for each participant, the first tested direction to result in a failure was used to determine the maximum achievable angle for that slope type.

The primary outcome measure in this study was the maximum achievable incline, recorded during both standing and walking as described in 2.3. The equivalent static COF was calculated as the tangent of the maximum achievable angles while standing and equivalent dynamic COF was calculated as the tangent of the maximum achievable angles during walking tests. Equivalent static and dynamic COF values were compared to SATRA COF values (calculated as the ratio between the horizontal and normal components of the ground reaction force) measured on ice using the standard testing device. The purpose of this comparison was to determine whether the bench and biomechanical tests ranked footwear slip resistance in the same order and how well each test was able to discriminate between types of footwear.

For all analyses of variance (ANOVAs), repeated measures (n = 8) designs were used and along with main effects, all interaction effects were considered. Post-hoc pairwise comparisons, using Bonferonni adjustments to account for multiple comparisons, were conducted for all significant main effects and all effects are reported as significant at p < .05. For each ANOVA, the F-value, p-value, partial eta-squared effect size (η
                        2), and observed power (β), are reported.

A two-way ANOVA was used to determine the effects of footwear (B, N, G, J) and slope direction (left, right, up, down) on the maximum achievable incline angles when standing. For the walking tests, a two-way ANOVA was used to determine the effects of footwear and slope type (longitudinal, cross-slope) on the maximum achievable angle. One-way ANOVAs were used to determine the effect of footwear on the COF readings obtained at the forepart and at the heel of the test footwear during bench-testing.

@&#RESULTS@&#

All participants indicated via questionnaire that they spent some time at least 3–5 days per week outdoors in winter. The average was 1–2 h outdoors during those days. Five of the eight participants indicated that they engage in winter sports such as skiing, skating or snowboarding. Half of the participants had fallen in the previous two years but only one participant had fallen outdoors and indicated that the fall was on ice. None of the participants indicated that they had experience using the test footwear prior to the experiment and all participants in this study were right-foot dominant.

Only the main effect of footwear (F(3,21) = 1476.22, p < .001, η
                        2 = 1.00, β = 1.00) was significant for the maximum achievable angle while standing, and equivalently the static COF (Fig. 5
                        ). Pairwise comparisons showed that there were significant differences between all types of footwear (all p < .001). Boot J significantly outperformed all other footwear with an average maximum achievable incline angle of 19.3° across all slope directions. Boot G allowed participants to stand on slopes of average 9.4° and performed significantly better than Boot N and Boot B. Boot N averaged 6.0° slopes, which was significantly steeper than the 3.4° slopes achieved by Boot B.

On the longitudinal slopes, 59% of the tests terminated in the uphill direction (with participants failing to achieve a downhill slope) while 41% terminated on the downhill. On the cross-slopes, 57% of the tests terminated with the right-side-higher (with participants failing to achieve a left-side-higher slope) while 43% terminated on the left-side higher. The main effects of footwear (F(1.7,11.9) = 397.94, p < .001, η
                        2 = 0.98, β = 1.00) and slope type (F(1,7) = 36.76, p < .05, η
                        2 = 0.84, β = 1.00) were significant for the maximum achievable incline angle while walking and equivalently the dynamic COF (Fig. 6
                        ). There was a significant interaction effect between footwear and slope type (F(3,21) = 13.86, p < .001, η
                        2 = 0.66, β = 1.00). Pairwise comparisons indicated that each type of footwear performed significantly differently from one another (p < .05) during the walking tests, and ranked in the same order as that of the standing tests. The results also showed that the maximum achievable angles were significantly lower while walking on cross-slopes than on longitudinal slopes. This phenomenon is most evident with Boot J indicating that at steeper angles, differences between maximum achievable inclines on the longitudinal slope compared to cross-slopes are more pronounced, which also gives rise to the significant interaction effect.

Equivalent static and dynamic COF values were compared to the SATRA COF values measured from the heel and forepart for each type of footwear (Fig. 7
                        ). The wetted ice surface was the only surface to replicate the ranking order for the four types of footwear seen during tests of maximum achievable incline. On wetted ice, for both the forepart (F(3,12) = 348, p < .001, η
                        2 = 1.00, β = 1.00) and the heel (F(3,12) = 276.56, p < .001, η
                        2 = 0.99, β = 1.00), the type of footwear significantly impacted the SATRA COF. Pairwise comparisons indicated that at both the forepart and heel the SATRA test method found that Boot J produced significantly higher COF values than the other three types of footwear and Boot G had significantly higher COF values than Boot N and Boot B. However, no significant difference was seen between SATRA COF values for Boot B and Boot N at either the forefoot or heel. SATRA COF means and associated errors for each type of footwear are presented in Table 1
                        . Post-hoc comparisons of results from bench testing indicated that each type of footwear was significantly different from the others with the exception of Boot B and Boot N which showed no significant difference.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The methods described in this study for determining the maximum achievable incline angles of footwear on a winter surface provide an ecologically valid approach to determining footwear slip resistance. The experimental setup allowed for sustained walking over 5.5 m on the level and on slopes which is an improvement upon prior techniques involving short ramps (Jung and Schenk, 1990). Participants also walked naturally at a self-selected pace throughout the walking tests in contrast to other studies that have involved altered styles of gait such as backwards walking (Manning et al., 1991) or foot dragging (Bruce et al., 1986) which changes loading through the footwear and the surface contact areas. Furthermore, the robotic overhead safety harness allowed participants to safely test to failure angles at the limits of their ability whereas in studies where participants decide a priori whether a tilt angle is too steep (Jung and Schenk, 1990), achievable incline angles may not have been tested and participant trepidation would have had a greater impact on the experimental results.

This study shows that in future applications of the maximum achievable incline method it would be reasonable to test only to the limits of walking on a single slope-type since the longitudinally sloped walking tests ranked the four styles of footwear in the same order as the cross-sloped walking tests. While walking on steeper slope angles on longitudinal and cross-slopes, studies have shown that trunk stabilization is achieved by positioning the upper body towards the higher slope direction of the base of support (Damavandi et al., 2012; Leroux et al., 2002). The body's centre of mass moves posteriorly during downhill walking, anteriorly during uphill walking, and laterally on cross-slopes. As such, the portion of footwear being tested varies in the different test directions. While the entire footwear sole is engaged in each test, the shift in the centre of mass suggests that the heels are primarily tested during downhill walking, the forefoot during uphill walking, and the sides of the footwear on cross-slopes. Because most falls occur with forward slips of the foot at heel strike (Redfern et al., 2001) the most important tests are those in the downhill direction. However, the current study was limited by the fact that maximum angles were not tested for both uphill and downhill walking independently as the tests on the longitudinal slope was terminated once failure was observed in either direction. In the future, both uphill and downhill walking tests need to be conducted to determine their independent maximum achievable incline angles. The standing tests, which are better indicators of static COF, were used in this study to determine the critical angle and therefore the starting point (5° less than the critical angle) from which to test the performance limits while walking. Because between-subject variability, particularly on the longitudinal slopes was small (maximum standard deviation was less than 1.5°), this study showed that the maximum achievable angles while standing could be determined during pilot testing with a single subject, thereby omitting the necessity of the standing tests as well in future uses of the method. It should be noted that conducting the standing tests prior to the walking tests gave participants a chance to experience greater tilt angles than they might have been comfortable with if only walking tests had been conducted and therefore may have inflated the resulting maximum angles while walking. This effect should be considered if the standing tests are to be omitted in the future.

The smooth, JStep sole (Style J) significantly outperformed all of the other boots in both the standing tests and walking tests on the smooth, wet ice surface, allowing participants to walk on longitudinal slopes of 17.5° ± 1.9° and cross-slopes of 15.1° ± 1.6°. The second best performing footwear utilized the Green Diamond sole (Style G) (longitudinal: 7.5° ± 0.9°, cross-slope: 6.8° ± 0.9°) followed by the NCI rubber footwear (Style N) (longitudinal: 5.1° ± 0.8°, cross-slope: 4.6° ± 1.1°), and finally the IcePaw sole (Style B) (longitudinal: 3.3° ± 0.5°, cross-slope: 3.0° ± 0.8°). Because the material and tread of the JStep footwear differed from those of the other test boots, further testing is required to determine the contribution of tread material and tread pattern independently, in the performance observed in this study. Furthermore, while the smooth, wet ice represents one challenging winter surface, tests involving snow and other typical winter conditions are necessary to develop complete performance ratings.

It should be noted that the two poorer performing styles of footwear failed beyond 3.3° ± 0.5° and 5.1° ± 0.8°, respectively, on longitudinal slopes. The maximum allowable slope of curb ramps is 4.8° as specified in the Americans with Disability Act Standards for Accessible Design (Kirschbaum et al., 2001). Therefore, users would be unable to maintain stable balance on standard curb ramps covered with wet ice while wearing Boot B and may have difficulty while wearing Boot N as well. It should also be noted that as is the case in other ramp tests (James, 1999), the purpose of testing footwear to extreme angles is to obtain a measure of its slip resistance on a slippery surface and not to suggest that the footwear can be worn safely up to the tested limits. In future work, results of this new method for assessing footwear slip resistance should be validated against slip frequency and slip severity on level surfaces.

Although exploration of refinements to the current methodology are recommended, such as simplification to only include downhill walking tests, results obtained in this study can be used to estimate required sample sizes. To calculate the sample size (n) required to determine with 95% confidence that the mean maximum achievable incline angle is within a specified range of the sample mean, the following equation for a 95% confidence interval can be solved:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    Allowable
                                    
                                    Error
                                    =
                                    
                                       (
                                    
                                    1.96
                                    ×
                                    SD
                                    
                                       )
                                    
                                    /
                                    
                                       n
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

Assuming that the greatest standard deviation observed in this study (SD = 1.9° for Boot J) exceeds that observed using a refined study protocol and with different types of test footwear, the required sample size for an error of ±1° is 14. For footwear that demonstrates smaller variances (SD ≤ 0.9° on longitudinal slopes) for an error of ±1° the required sample size is only 3 and for ±0.5° error, the required sample size is 13.

The comparison between the bench and maximum achievable incline methods was conducted in the same manner described by Powers et al. (2010) when validating slip resistance measurement devices: by comparing the order in which the methods ranked footwear slip resistance and the ability of each test to differentiate between footwear slip resistance. Because only a small sample of footwear was compared and the reproducibility of the bench tests is questionable (Jung and Fischer, 1993), the comparisons made here should not be considered to be a system-wide comparison between the methods but rather a demonstration of the potential of the new method over the existing standard.

Comparison of the equivalent static and dynamic COF values from the maximum achievable inclines to the SATRA COF test outcomes showed that wetting the SATRA ice test surface most closely reproduced the order in which footwear ranked in terms of slip resistance based on the human-centred tests. While SATRA specifies methods for testing on frosted and unwetted ice surfaces, there is no specification for testing on wetted ice. Because melting or wet ice is considered one of the most slippery winter conditions (Aschan et al., 2009) and because our tests indicate that even the ranking of footwear slip resistance changes with different test surfaces (Fig. 7), a wet ice condition is important in the testing of winter footwear.

The human-centred approach to testing was also able to discriminate between all four types of footwear, while the mechanical test could not identify a significant difference between the two poorer performing types of footwear. This suggests that the human-centred approach, even without adjusting for inter-subject variability, produced higher resolution results than the mechanical test. Higher resolution tests would be able to detect differences owing to more subtle changes in footwear sole tread and material design that current tests may not detect and would be valuable for the optimization of slip resistant soling. There were however, differences between the test surface conditions in terms of the surface temperatures and ambient temperature conditions that may have contributed to the differences between SATRA COF of values measured during bench testing (ice −7 °C, ambient 23 °C) and the COF values derived during the human-centred tests (ice −0.5 °C, ambient 10.6 °C). Additionally, more types of footwear and additional winter surfaces and ambient conditions should be tested using the maximum achievable incline approach in order to determine the sensitivity of the test and improve generalizability of the test results. Future work is necessary to determine the validity of the maximum achievable incline method as well as that of other methods, including the current standard. It is also important to explore how well results of established, smaller-scale ramp tests (Jung and Schenk, 1990; Skiba et al., 1986), compare to the maximum incline test. However, additional work to adapt these previous methods for use in conjunction with winter surfaces and conditions must be carefully considered. In-field studies of slip frequency and slip severity while using an array of footwear tested using the various methods in real outdoor winter environments would provide the most reliable information in this regard.

As previously described, limitations of this study include the fact that maximum achievable incline angles for uphill and downhill walking and the two cross-slope conditions were not determined separately. Furthermore, comparisons between the bench and human-centred tests are limited by the fact that there were differences between the testing conditions. Future work should be targeted towards measuring the maximum achievable incline angles during downhill walking and comparisons between methods using more similarly prepared surfaces.

Additional future work is necessary to determine the most important surfaces and conditions for testing footwear. Wet ice near the melting point was selected for testing because it is considered extremely slippery (Grönqvist and Hirvonen, 1995), however, other conditions such as a thin layer of snow over ice are also known to cause accidents and footwear slip resistance under such conditions should be analyzed. Unfortunately, current injury reporting systems tend to poorly describe the conditions associated with falls (Courtney et al., 2001) and as such, a field study should be conducted to determine precise conditions that contribute to winter slips and falls and should be used in further testing.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The performance outcomes from this study can be used to inform consumers making decisions regarding winter footwear. Maximum achievable inclines are more ecologically valid and this objective, user-based assessment of footwear slip resistance on slippery slopes is a more useful representation of footwear performance for consumers than in-lab testing following SATRA methodology. This experiment showed that a wide spread of footwear performance can be assessed by walking on increasingly steep slopes under controlled surface conditions. The results also indicate that a relatively small sample size is required and that results are consistent, ranking footwear and discriminating between types equally well for standing tests in all directions and walking tests for both longitudinal and cross-slopes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We thank Susan Gorski and Larry Chrichlow at Toronto Rehabilitation Institute's Challenging Environment Assessment Laboratories for their support throughout data collection. This work was supported by funding from Mark's®, Alberta, Canada and the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) under Grant #H133E100002. Equipment and space were funded through Project #8708 which was awarded by the Canada Foundation for Innovation, Ontario Innovation Trust and the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

