@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Design and finite element-based fatigue prediction of a new self-expandable percutaneous mitral valve stent

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A novel nitinol design for percutaneous mitral valve replacement is presented.


                        
                        
                           
                           The design can address issues of valve migration and paravalvular leakage.


                        
                        
                           
                           Crimpability of the self-expandable stent was studied by the finite element method.


                        
                        
                           
                           Fatigue analysis has been simulated for the design under various cyclic loadings.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Mitral valve stent

Computer aided conceptual design

Finite element analysis

Fatigue modeling

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Percutaneous heart valve replacement is currently limited to the replacement of pulmonary and aortic valves in a targeted group of patients. Designing a heart valve for mitral valve replacement is further limited by its distinctive anatomical feature, which places a constraint on its range of design options. To overcome such limitations, the objectives of this study were to use computational modeling and simulation to design a new nitinol-based mitral valve stent and evaluate its crimpability and fatigue behavior. A self-expandable stent with new features that could address the issues of valve migration and paravalvular leaks was generated using the CAD-based conceptual modeling. Its expansion, crimpability, deployment patterns, and fatigue behavior were simulated and analyzed. Our simulations incorporated cyclic cardiac muscle loading, cyclic blood pressure loading, as well as cyclic valve-leaflet forces in the fatigue life assessment for mitral valves. Our results showed that the stent model passed the fatigue test under the aforementioned loading conditions. Our model provides a simple, fast and cost-effective tool to quantitatively determine the fatigue resistance of stent components. This is of great value to the design of new prosthetic heart valve models, as well as to surgeons involved in valve replacement.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Mitral valve repairs or replacements are good viable treatment options for mitral valve disease. However, these methods involve open heart surgery with their own risks of mortality and morbidity, especially in the elderly and co-morbid patient population  [1]. There remains a need for a less invasive way of treating heart valve disease. Transcatheter heart valve replacement is getting popular amongst cardiology and cardiovascular surgical procedures following the reporting of satisfactory early clinical experiences  [2]. However, the use of this technique is increasing in the replacement of pulmonary and aortic valves than the repair and replacement of mitral valves  [3]. The major reasons for this trend are the delivery of a relatively large prosthesis, device anchorage, chordae tendineae issue, and paravalvular leaks  [4]. Furthermore, fatigue resistance is equally important as it governs the durability of the stent.

Stent fatigue is a major complication following device implantation and must be carefully considered in the design phase of percutaneous heart valve  [5]. Mechanical failure can occur due to static fracture when the mechanical strength of the material is exceeded by over expansion or crimping, or due to fatigue failure from the cyclic pressure loads and cyclic leaflet forces exerted upon the stent  [6]. Fatigue failure is of particular importance as the artificial heart valve will be subjected to a cyclic loading over 400 million cycles, which equates to approximately a life span of 10–15 years  [7]. Stent resistance, on the other hand, depends on the material used to develop the stent. Due to its superelasticity, high flexibility and ease of deployment methodology, nitinol is a preferred choice as the material for self-expanding valve stents. Contrary to conventional engineering materials, nitinol stent fracture is not stress based but strain based, where the oscillating strain amplitude is the main contributor to fatigue behavior  [8]. Recent research works investigated the effects of mean and alternating strains on the fatigue behavior of superelastic nitinol and observed that the alternating strain has a greater effect on fatigue life than the mean strain  [9]. For example, based on 432 nitinol diamond-shaped stent specimens that were exposed to a maximum life of 107 cycles, nitinol stents had an endurance limit of 0.4% strain  [10]. Currently, maximum principal strain is generally used to investigate nitinol stent fracture  [11].

Available numerical studies regarding nitinol stents are more focused on the computational simulation of stent designs, since the stent is an important part of the stented valve assembly from fatigue resistance standpoint  [12]. Hence in the current study, a nitinol based new stent was designed and its deployment in the mitral annulus and resistance to fatigue failure were investigated. Following FDA guidelines, computational analysis of a new stent was carried out, employing the finite element solver ABAQUS (Dassault Systemes, MA). The whole design process of the mitral valve stent development includes CAD geometrical generation, computer modeling and simulation of structural strength and fatigue, and experimental testing on anchorage and leakage of the prototype. Here we mainly discuss the design and analysis of the mechanical performance of the stent in terms of its crimpability and fatigue resistance as part of the whole iterative design process.

@&#METHODS@&#

Human mitral valve is a complex, dynamic and highly variable structure  [13]. Therefore, complications in the deployment of a replacement valve or repair device into this position will potentially interact with (1) the valve leaflets themselves; (2) the chordae tendineae; and/or (3) the papillary muscles  [14]. The design of mitral valve stent is based on its geometric coherence with the mitral annulus and how the stent structure interacts with the extension of the left ventricular outflow tract  [15]. Taking into consideration the importance of these parameters, we have modeled a new stent, which incorporated essential design features that would ensure the implementation of the percutaneous mitral valve design. The 3D geometry of the repeatable units of the stent was generated using SOLIDWORKS 2012 (Dassault Systemes, MA). The geometry consisted of seven crowns with square shaped struts forming a circular stent of diameter of 31 mm at the main body with the hooks as shown in Fig. 1
                        . Two struts join to form a crown allowing the port to be a diamond-shaped structure. The stent designs have a uniform strut thickness of 0.5 mm and a height of 17.3 mm. The new features of the stent are described in Table 1
                        . Fig. 2
                         illustrates the stent and the definition of three representative parameters (crown radius 
                           r
                        , strut thickness 
                           t
                        , and strut width 
                           w
                        ) in a single unit cell. Crown radius is one of the most critical parameters among all, as it controls many key stent functional attributes such as acute fracture, elastic recoil, stent retention on catheters, and crimp profile  [16]. While strut thickness and strut width affect the stent crimp profile, strut width dictates the stent radial strength. Our parametric stent design started with this single unit cell as the design is repeatable.

Annealed nitinol was selected for the modeling and prototyping of the stents  [17]. Nitinol is becoming more popular in biomedical applications due to its remarkable superelasticity, shape memory, biocompatibility, corrosion resistance, as well as fatigue resistance and durability  [18]. A self-expandable nitinol stent for transcatheter mitral valve replacement utilizes these characteristics very well. Cooled to less than 5 °C, it fully transforms into martensite and hence becomes deformable and can easily be compressed into a small catheter  [19]. When the stent is released from the catheter into the mitral annulus, it recovers to its predetermined, considerably larger diameter at the 37 °C body temperature. As a result, it anchors into the mitral annulus and native valve leaflets in left ventricle. The nitinol material used in this study was modeled in ABAQUS as a user material (UMAT) which is a thermo mechanical coupled superelastic model. The model is based on an additive strain decomposition, in which the total strain is taken as the sum of the elastic strain, the transformation strain, and the plastic strain. Plastic strains develop as soon as the material is loaded beyond full transformation. The transformation strain is of the order of 6%, but the elastic strain is much smaller, and should be limited to a maximum of 2%. Since the transformation strains are large compared to the typical elastic strains in a metal, the material is said to be superelastic. The mechanical properties of this model are included in Table 2
                        .

The ABAQUS/Standard (v. 6.11-2) finite element analysis package, in combination with user-defined material subroutines for nitinol material properties as given in Table 2, was employed to calculate the strain fields. A single node was fixed to prevent rigid body translation. For the stent model, rigid-deformable contact constraints were established between the inner and outer surfaces of the stents and rigid crimping and expansion cylinders. Since the stent is cyclically symmetric, one sector was used for the analysis. The stent was modeled with the C3D8R ABAQUS element type comprising 4173 elements. This is an eight node linear brick element with reduced integration and hourglass control. Mesh sensitivity and density independence studies were performed to ensure that all results are independent of further mesh refinements. Large deformations were considered while defining the step in the ABAQUS setup.

Stent crimping and deployment are two important processes during transcatheter implantation of a stented valve. The maximum crimping strain in the stent plays an important role in determining the overall functionality of the stent, with regard to crimpability. This section describes the simulation of crimping and deployment of the stent design. Fig. 3
                            shows the stent model during different stages of manufacture and deployment.

During the first step of the simulation, the laser cut stent (Fig. 3(a)) was expanded to about 31 mm (Fig. 3(b)). This step was developed by deforming the stent (expansion step) by contact between the inner stent surface and a cylindrical rigid surface with a variable radius during the simulation until the desired stent diameter (31 mm) was reached. After the expansion step, an annealing step was imposed for stress relaxation using the model change interaction but maintaining the final form (Fig. 3(c)). Finally, the stent was introduced into a catheter by compression of the device by a rigid analytical surface, decreasing progressively the diameter of the rigid surface (Fig. 3(d)). At this point, the contact was imposed between the external surface of the stent and inner surface of the rigid surface. The nodes on the rigid crimp cylinder were constrained axially as well as circumferentially on a cylindrical coordinate system oriented along the stent longitudinal axis. Boundary conditions were imposed to radially contract the crimp cylinder, thereby crimping the 31 mm outer diameter (OD) stents to 7.2 mm (24 F). At the end of the crimp step, the stent was allowed to recoil by progressively increasing the diameter of the rigid cylinder. Here, the contact was imposed between the internal surface of the stent and the outer surface of the rigid cylinder (Fig. 3(e)). The contact algorithm applied the master surface priority to the crimping tool while the stent outer diameter was set as the slave surface. A penalty interaction property was used to enforce impermeable boundaries  [20]. A nitinol-based mitral valve stent resists crushing during crimping processes due to its radial resistive force and exerts a small outward force on the mitral annulus and other cardiac tissues during recoil due to chronic outward force. This is called the creep effect which can be controlled by appropriate heat treatment. The creep effect owing to chronic outward force also means that the stent continues to exert constant force over a considerable strain recovery range. The nitinol-based stent model proposed here is a progressive self-expansion device that is expected to allow smooth and gradual contact between the stent and the annulus wall by this creep effect  [21].

During the operational lifetime of the stent it will be subjected to a continuous cyclic loading condition at a frequency of approximately 72 Hz (normal heart rate)  [22]. This cyclic loading condition is a result of the cardiac muscle loading acting on the outer surface of the stent, physiologic blood pressure loading acting on the inner surface of the stent as well as the leaflet forces exerted by the valve leaflets on the leaflet–stent attachment points during their opening and closure during systole and diastole. Therefore, following the initial loading steps as described in Section  2.3.2, a cardiac cycle was simulated. This cardiac cycle simulation was conducted to determine the alternating maximum strain induced in the stent as a result of these cyclic loading patterns. That is, to represent the cardiac muscle loading, a cyclic pressure from 50 mmHg (diastolic) to 150 mmHg (systolic) was applied to the outer surface of the stent. To represent the blood pressure loading, a uniform pressure load of 120 mmHg was applied to the inner surface of the stent during flow of blood from the atrium to the ventricle. The pressure loading is based on Food and Drug Administration (FDA) test requirements (ASTM Standard F2477, 2007)  [23]. To represent the leaflet loading, a cyclic concentrated force of 0.7 N was applied radially and axially on the stent–leaflet attachment points as a representation of leaflet closure during diastole  [24]. Fig. 4
                            provides a visual representation of the pressure and force distribution as implemented into the simulation of the cycle.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In this study, we proposed a new stent design whose FEA test results of crimpability and fatigue analyses are as follows.

As part of nitinol stent design, the major concern of crimping is the maximum crimping strain. Fig. 5
                        (a) represents the maximum principal strain fields in the stent after crimping it to 24F and 5b location of the maximum strain. The maximum crimping strain for the stent was 7.5%, which was lower than its critical threshold value of 12% (see Table 2). If the maximum crimping strain exceeds this value, it will lead to failure of the stent. It was found that the maximum strain is located at the strut’s internal side, near the hook-stent main body junction. This could have been because of the bending of the hooks toward the main body during the crimping process.

The nonlinear nature of the superelastic phase transformation in nitinol means that conventional stress-based fatigue life theory is not easy to apply. The volume fraction of martensite phase and its role in the fatigue mechanism is still not clearly understood. The FDA requirement of a fatigue life exceeding 400 million cycles for stents means that a better understanding of the factors contributing to stent fatigue is imperative. Compared to other alloys, nitinol shows excellent fatigue properties at high strain levels. A common way of assessing the fatigue life of alloys with regard to alternating strain amplitude and the mean strain on the designs is to construct a Goodman diagram. Classically the Goodman relationship is linear and the greater the mean strain the lower the alternating strain required for fatigue failure. Current interpretations of the fatigue results do not take into account the material response change as a function of cycles and loading conditions. Rather, they are all based upon nonlinear FEA that simulates the static loading and unloading on the stent. If the alternating strain is less than 0.4%, the fatigue life is said to be infinity  [25]. For the cyclic loading, as discussed in Section  2.3.3, the mean strain and alternating strain were calculated for the entire element set using the ABAQUS Goodman Plugin for fatigue analysis. As mentioned earlier, alternating strain had a greater effect on fatigue life than the mean strain and stress. It should be noted that 
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       ε
                                    
                                    
                                       a
                                    
                                 
                                 =
                                 0.5
                                 
                                    (
                                    
                                       
                                          ε
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             systole
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    −
                                    
                                       
                                          ε
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             diastole
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                           
                         where, 
                           
                              
                                 ε
                              
                              
                                 a
                              
                           
                           ,
                           
                              
                                 ε
                              
                              
                                 
                                    systole
                                 
                              
                           
                         and 
                           
                              
                                 ε
                              
                              
                                 
                                    diastole
                                 
                              
                           
                         are the alternating strain, systolic and diastolic strain, respectively.

The endurance limit of nitinol stents under high cycle fatigue loading is 0.4%. Thus, a stent fatigue safety factor (FSF) was calculated as 
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    FSF
                                 
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       ε
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          fatigue
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 /
                                 
                                    
                                       ε
                                    
                                    
                                       a
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                         where 
                           
                              
                                 ε
                              
                              
                                 
                                    fatigue
                                 
                              
                           
                         is the endurance limit of nitinol  [26]. It was found that the alternating strain in the stent under the loading conditions mentioned in this study is 0.2%, which is lower than bottom line of 0.4% fatigue limit. A safety factor of 2.0 was, therefore, deduced from the data. Fig. 6
                         gives the alternating strain field in the stent and also indicates that the highest risk of fatigue fracture was located at the stent inter crown junction. A Goodman plot of the cardiac loading and blood pressure loading coupled with leaflet force loading is shown in Fig. 7
                        . Calculated data were mentioned below the Goodman diagram failure line, indicating the studied new mitral valve stent that was able to pass the fatigue life of 4×108 cycles under such combined loading conditions  [27].

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Nitinol, a superelastic, shape memory, biocompatibility, and fatigue resistant alloy, has made the material attractive for medical devices such as cardiovascular stents  [28,29]. Finite element modeling can be used to reveal the strain concentrations during crimping of the stent as well as fatigue loading on mitral valve stents  [30]. From the results of the crimping loading and fatigue analysis, it can be seen that the maximum crimping strain in the stent design was 7.5% having a FSF of 2.

It should be noted that a fatigue loading scenario was in line with the accepted range stipulated by FDA in an actual in vivo situation. Therefore, any fatigue safety factor greater than 1 would provide sufficient protection against fatigue failure  [31]. The study by Marrey et al. considered only the effect of the cyclic blood pressure on the fatigue loading of a cobalt?chromium-based stent and used a stress-based fatigue analysis. In the present work we expanded on the methodology developed by Gong et al. and Marrey et al. to predict the fatigue life of a stent component, designed for implementation into a percutaneous mitral valve stent. Our approach expanded on this methodology by using the strain-based fatigue theory reported by Gong et al. and also introducing the effects of cyclic cardiac muscle loading and the cyclic leaflet forces in the fatigue-life analysis  [32,33]. This work is an extension of the work reported by Esterhuyse et al. in which the cyclic cardiac loading was not considered. Our work takes into account all the important loads for fatigue analysis. However, experimental fatigue analysis has not been conducted to compare the simulation results with and hence has not been reported.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

A new stent was designed and analyzed for crimping and fatigue behavior using finite element analysis. This study concluded that the fatigue performance of the studied mitral valve stent is acceptable under the aforementioned loading conditions. Results showed that the stent is not at risk for fatigue failure due to cardiac loading for at least 400 million cycles. Although the actual fatigue lifetime of a stent can only be accurately determined by means of physical cyclic testing in a pulse duplicator, the approach described in this paper provides a cost-effective tool to compare stent designs during the concept development phase.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors thank A*STAR BEP Program—(
                     SERC
                  
                  Grant number—103 149 0004) for funding this research and thank the Institute of High Performance Computing and National University of Singapore for the use the computational resources to carry out this research.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

