@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Age and gender effects on 15 platelet phenotypes in a Spanish population

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A comprehensive analysis of the age and gender effects on the platelet phenotypes.


                        
                        
                           
                           A more reasonable age stratification was proposed: childhood and the mature group.


                        
                        
                           
                           The platelet counts, MPV and IPF levels vary over time.


                           The PFA phenotypes were mantained invariably over time.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Age

Gender

Immature platelet fraction (IPF)

Platelet counts

Platelet indices

Platelet function assay (PFA)

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Introduction
                  Several studies have analysed the platelet parameters in human blood, nevertheless there are no extensive analyses on the less common platelet phenotypes. The main objective of our study is to evaluate the age and gender effects on 15 platelet phenotypes.
               
               
                  Methods
                  We studied 804 individuals, ranging in age from 2 to 93 years, included in the Genetic Analysis of Idiopathic Thrombophilia 2 (GAIT 2) Project. The 15 platelet phenotypes analysed were the platelets counts, platelet volumes, plateletcrits, immature platelet fraction (IPF) and platelet function assay (PFA). A regression-based method was used to evaluate the age and gender effects on these phenotypes.
               
               
                  Results
                  Our results were consistent with the previously reported results regarding platelet counts and plateletcrit (PCT). They showed a decrease with increasing age. The mean platelet volume (MPV), platelet distribution width (PDW) and platelet-large cell ratio (P-LCR) increased with age, but did not present any gender effect. All the IPF phenotypes increased with age, whereas the PFA phenotypes did not show any relation to age or gender.
               
               
                  Discussion
                  To sum up, our study provides a comprehensive analysis of the age and gender effects on the platelet phenotypes in a family-base sample. Our results suggest more reasonable age stratification into two distinct groups: childhood, ranging from 2 to 12 years, and the mature group, from 13 to 93 years. Moreover, the PFA phenotypes were maintained constant while the platelet counts, the MPV and IPF levels vary with age.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Platelets are anucleated blood cells that play an important role in different physiological functions such as haemostasis, wound healing and inflammation [1,2]. Their intrinsic features include size, metabolic capacity, ability to aggregate and relative short lifespan (8–10 days). These features determine their functional properties [3,4]. Megakaryocytes maintain the platelet population and functionality, producing about 1011 platelets per day [4,5].

The haematological status of individuals is currently based on the assessment of different clinical phenotypes such as platelet counts, platelet volumes and plateletcrits [6–8]. These phenotypes are used to determine the thrombopoietic status of patients and quantitative variations in platelet phenotypes [9–11]. The platelet distribution width (PDW) describes how uniform the platelets are in size, and it has been proposed as a marker of platelet activation [7,12]. The platelet-large cell ratio (P-LCR) is defined as the percentage of large platelet volume, and it has been associated with higher platelet reactivity and cardiovascular risk [13–15]. The immature platelet fraction (IPF) phenotypes are an indirect measurement of the reticulated platelets and the thrombopoiesis turnover [7,9,16,17]. The platelet function assay (PFA) phenotypes estimate the platelet function [18,19]. All of these platelet phenotypes are measured using either haematological analysers [6,8,9] or in vitro assays [19–21].

In the healthy human population, normal platelet counts range from 150 to 400·109/L of whole blood [4,5,22]. The mean platelet volume (MPV) ranges from 7.8 to 11.0fL [23] and the reference PDW values range from 2 to 30fL [11]. The IPF values range from 0.70% to 6.1% or 8% [6,7,24]. These phenotypes have previously been studied with respect to the effects of age and gender [25–27]. Some studies have compared also many different haematological analysers [8,9,24,28], intervals of age [25,29,30], and the ethnicity or habitat [31–35]. There are also studies that have reported incomplete or partial analyses of the platelet blood count (PBC) [16,23,25].

The main aim of our study is to provide a comprehensive analysis of the influence of age and gender on 15 platelet phenotypes. An underlying aim is to determine statistical differences among the results obtained using two different automated haematological analysers on these 15 platelet phenotypes and, finally, our third aim was to develop a single statistical model to evaluate the age and gender effects on each these phenotypes.

@&#METHODS@&#

We studied a subset population of the GAIT 2 Project at the Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau of Barcelona, Spain. The main aim of the GAIT 2 Project was to identify genetic factors of thrombophilia using family-based analyses and variance component statistical methods [36]. The GAIT 2 population consisted of 935 individuals from 35 extended Spanish families. Each family consisted of at least 10 members over 3 generations and was ascertained through a proband with idiopathic thrombophilia.

To be included in the present study, an individual had to present normal haematological values, including normal iron metabolism. The exclusion criteria were any venous or arterial thrombosis event (previous or present), apparent illness, signs or symptoms of acute illness, inflammatory or infectious disease in the last four weeks, active malignancy and antiaggregant drugs intake in the last two weeks before onset of the study. Individuals with haemorrhagic diathesis also were excluded of the study. Thus, the total analysed population consisted of 804 healthy Caucasian individuals and 131 individuals were excluded. The ages of our population ranged from 2 to 93 years and it included 389 males and 415 females, who were divided into the following four age groups: childhood (Group 1), adolescence (Group 2), adulthood (Group 3) and elders (Group 4), as listed in 
                        Table 1.

Our study complied with the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all adult patients and by parents of children. All procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board at the Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau.

To minimise the circadian fluctuation, all of the blood samples were obtained by venipuncture between 9:00a.m. and 9:30a.m., under basal conditions after 12-h overnight fasting. A 5ml sample was obtained in anti-coagulant EDTA-K3 to determine platelet counts, platelet volumes, and IPF phenotypes. Another 5ml sample was obtained in citrate to determine PFA phenotypes. Both samples were processed within 2–4h of collection.

We used two automated haematological analysers: Sysmex XE-2100® and KX-21N® (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland), to measure 13 of the 15 phenotypes. Two of the phenotypes were determined using the PFA-100® system (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Marburg, Germany). All the 15 platelet phenotypes are shown in 
                        Table 2.

The platelet counts (PLT and PLTOP), platelet volumes (MPV, P-LCR and PDW) and plateletcrit (PCT) were determined by Sysmex XE-2100®, whereas the Sysmex KX-21N® was used to obtain additional measures of platelet count and platelet volume (PLT40 and MPV40), fixing the upper threshold of the platelet population at 40fL. The plateletcrit (PCT40) was calculated as follow: MPV40·PLT40/1000. The IPF phenotypes were also determined with the Sysmex XE-2100® using the optical technology. These IPF phenotypes were: (1) percentage of the immature platelets (IPF%), (2) percentage of the IPF with the highest RNA content included the IPF% (HIPF%), (3) absolute count of IPF (IPF#) and (4) mean RNA content per platelet (IPF-X). The two PFA phenotypes were measured using the PFA-100® system, shown in Table 2. This system measures the platelet function by simulating a vessel wall under shear stress in in vitro conditions. The Closure Time (CT) was measured using two different cartridge membranes, collagen-ADP (PFAadp) and collagen-epinephrine (PFAepi), according to the instructions of the manufacturers.

Since we used two different analysers to measure platelet counts (PLT, PLTOP and PLT40), mean platelet volumes (MPV and MPV40) and plateletcrits (PCT and PCT40), we applied a non-parametric Sign test to compare the measurements from two different automated haematological analysers (Sysmex XE-2100® and Sysmex KX-21N®) and channels (impedance and optical). The Sign test compares the medians with the null hypothesis of non-differences in the medians between measurements.

To evaluate the effects of age and gender on the 15 phenotypes under study, we used a linear regression model with three covariates: the categorical four age groups, the continuous age and the gender. The categorical age variable allowed for a more clinically relevant interpretation of the phenotypes means and confidence intervals (CI) per age group, while the continuous age variable was used to take into account the dynamics of the phenotype value within the group, especially in the case of the group of children under the age of 13 years old. We also considered possible interactions between the age group and the other two covariates. To explicitly account for the non-independence among individuals in our family-based sample, we applied a linear mixed effects (LME) model. Each phenotype y is denoted in vector notation as following:
                           
                              
                                 y
                                 =
                                 X
                                 •
                                 β
                                 +
                                 g
                                 +
                                 ε
                                 ,
                              
                           
                        where X is a matrix of fixed effects or covariates, β are the regression coefficients or effect sizes, g is a vector of the random genetic effects and ε is the residual error. The term g is assumed to have a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and covariance matrix defined by the kinship matrix.

The R packages lme4 [37] and the lmerTest [38] were used to fit the LME model and test for the statistical significance of the effects, respectively. A backward elimination model-building strategy was used, discarding the non-significant covariates according to the principle of marginality (testing the highest order of interactions first). As random effects, we considered the genetic additive effect by means of the kinship matrix estimated by SOLAR [39]. The random effect of the 15 phenotype models was determined by the double kinship coefficient matrix based on the pedigree structure. That allowed to explicitly control the family-based relatedness among individuals.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The Sysmex XE-2100® measurements were compared to those of the Sysmex KX-21N®, as shown in 
                        Table 3. The platelet counts (PLT, PLTOP and PLT40), the mean platelet volumes (MPV and MPV40), and the plateletcrit (PCT and PCT40) phenotypes were compared in pairs using the Sign test. For these phenotypes, the median values were higher with the Sysmex-KX-21N® than with the Sysmex XE-2100® instrument. For example, the PLT40 median (235) was higher than PLT median (232) with a p-value of 3.1·10−3, as shown in Table 3.

The complete measurements for the platelet counts, platelet volumes and plateletcrits phenotypes are shown in 
                        Table 4. All of measurement of the platelet counts (PLT, PLTOP and PLT40) showed an age and gender effect, as the Group 1 presented higher significant values than Group 3 and Group 4. Also, PLT mean values in males were higher in Group 1 (323) than Group 3 (218) and Group 4 (202). The platelet counts showed higher values in females than in males, except for the Group 1. Namely in Group 3 for the PLT, the mean values in females (248) were higher than in males (218), as shown in 
                        Fig. 1a. Differences between Group 1 and Group 3, as well as Group 1 and Group 4, were statistically significant for all platelets counts (
                        Table 5). For instance, PLT showed an estimated mean differences between Group 1 and Group 3 of −89±7 (p<2·10−16), whereas between Group 1 and Group 4 was of 105±10 (p<2·10−16). Any statistical differences were observed between Group 2 and Group 3.

The plateletcrits values (PCT and PCT40) were significantly higher in females than in males, except in Group 1 (Table 4). For example, the mean PCT value in Group 3 was higher in females (0.26%) than males (0.23%). Also, we observed that the PCT and PCT40 values decreased with age. For instance, the mean PCT40 value in Group 1 (0.46%) was higher than Group 4 (0.27%). In addition, both plateletcrit phenotypes did not show any difference between Group 3 and Group 4.

The remaining platelet phenotypes, MPV, MPV40, PDW and P-LCR, showed an age, but not a gender effect (Table 4). For the MPV, PDW and P-LCR values increased with age. For example, the MPV mean value in Group 1 (9.5fL) was lower than in Group 4 (10.9fL), as shown in Fig. 1b. Also, the PDW and P-LCR values increased with age (Table 4). These three phenotypes showed statistical differences between Group 1 and Group 3, as well as Group 1 and Group 4 (Table 5). For example, the MVP phenotype showed an estimated mean difference between Group 1 and Group 3 of 1.1±0.1fL (p<2·10−16), whereas between the Group 1 and Group 4 was of −1.5±0.2fL (p<2·10−16).

On the other hand, the MPV40 phenotype decreased with increasing age. The Group 1 value (12.7fL) was higher than Group 4 (12.3fL). In addition, this phenotype (MPV40) showed an estimated mean difference between Group 1 and Group 4 of 0.5±0.2fL (p=0.02).

The IPF and PFA measurements are shown in 
                        Table 6 and comparisons between groups in 
                        Table 7. The IPF values increased with the age. For instance, the mean IPF% value in Group 1 (1.92%) was lower than Group 3 (3.32%) and Group 4 (3.67%). Differences between Group 1 and Group 3, as well as between Group 1 and Group 4, were statistically significant for all IPF phenotypes. In addition, any statistical differences were observed between the Group 3 and Group 4 (Table 7).

The CT values of PFAadp and PFAepi were shorter in Group 1 than the rest of the age groups (Table 6). For the PFAadp, the CT mean value in Group 1 (83 seconds) was shorter than in Group 3 (87 seconds). In addition for the PFAepi, the CT mean value in Group 1 (113 seconds) was shorter than in Group 3 (121 seconds). For PFA phenotypes, statistical differences were observed between Group 1 and Group 3 (
                        Fig. 2a and b, Table 7).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We used the LME model to study the effect of age and gender on 15 platelet phenotypes. Our results suggest that two age groups should be considered clinically: childhood, ranging from 2 to 12 years, and the mature group, from 13 to 93 years. Several studies have analysed several haematological parameters of the red and white blood counts [35,40], and the PBC [30,31,34,41], but there are few studies that analysed comprehensively how age and gender affect other platelet phenotypes, such us the IPF and PFA phenotypes.

One of the first aims of the present study was to compare the measurements of the Sysmex XE-2100® and Sysmex KX-21N® analysers. The PLT, PLTOP, MPV and PCT have been analysed largely by the Sysmex XE-2100® 
                     [9,24]. However, there are few studies that analyse the PLT40, MPV40 and PCT40 obtained by the Sysmex KX-21N® 
                     [33,42]. The present study showed significant differences when measuring the same phenotypes with different analysers (PLT and PLT40, MPV and MPV40, and PCT and PCT40). The results obtained with the phenotypes assessed with both analysers were consistent.

We found that all the platelet counts (PLT, PLTOP and PLT40) decrease with age (Fig. 1a). In accordance with previous studies [25,27,43], we also found that the PLT, PLTOP and PLT40 had higher counts in females than in males. An Italian study [25] estimated also that the PLT decreases in older ages more than 35% in men and 25% in women. It has been reported also that the MPV phenotype increases with age [6,23,44]. Besides the MVP, the other platelet volumes (PDW and P-LCR) and the IPF phenotypes, showed increased values with age, but had no gender effect (Fig. 1b). There are some studies [16,17,45] that define the mean and CI of IPF values in different ethnic populations such as Korean (3.4%, 1.1–6.1%), Japanese (3.3%, 1.0–10.3%) or Indian (2.1%, 0.3–8.7%) adults. In our study, the levels of IPF phenotypes (IPF%, IPF#, HIPF% and IPF-X) in the childhood group (Group 1) were significantly lower than the adulthood (Group 3) and elder (Group 4) groups. We also observed that the IPF% increase with age [16]. No gender effect in the adulthood group, unlike the Korean and European studies [9]. We did not observe either an age or a gender effect on PFA phenotypes (Fig. 2a and b), as it has been previously reported [19,21]. Our study in extended Spanish pedigrees of the 15 platelet phenotypes replicate earlier studies [16,25,30], and it provides a better understanding of the PBC behaviour throughout the life.

We also performed a comprehensive analysis of the influence of age and gender on platelet function. In healthy population, the platelet dynamics have been characterized previously taking into account the effect of different covariates [22,25,30], analysing a single [25,33] or a few platelet phenotypes [23,27,29,34], such as the platelet counts, MPV or PCT phenotypes. These previous reports led us to the partition of the subjects into different age and gender groups. With this approach, we were able to replicate earlier studies [25,27]. Regarding other phenotypes, such as the IPF and PFA phenotypes, we report a novel regression-based model taking into account the effect of the age and gender. For instance, the IPF%, IPF# and IPF-X showed a similar dynamics than the MPV (Fig. 1b). Previous studies [14,16] in patients with thrombocytopenia (low platelet counts) reported high IPF values. Therefore, the IPF phenotypes are commonly used as markers to determine if the platelet production is abnormal in aplastic anaemia, with an IPF% mean value of 7.7% (range, 1.0–33.8%) 16]. It is also used to measure platelet over destruction in immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), with an IPF mean value of 3.5% (range, 0.6–12.9%) [16]. Previous studies also have reported [25], thrombocytopenia in children or thrombocytosis in elders could be wrongly diagnosed. As a result of the present study, we propose a new partitioning strategy for the age group to study these 15 platelet phenotypes. In this study, statistically differences between the childhood (Group 1) and adulthood (Group 3) groups (Tables 5 and 7). Consequently, we suggest, under a practical point of view, to only consider two age groups clinically: childhood, ranging from 2 to 12 years, and the mature group, from 13 to 93 years.

The platelet counts and MPV are the phenotypes most commonly analysed by the clinicians. Previous studies suggest that there is an inverse and non-linear correlation between the platelet counts and the mean platelet volume phenotypes [27,30,34]. We attempted to replicate these results, by means of a regression-based model that characterizes the platelet phenotypes according to different age groups (Fig. 1a and b). Our models estimated the relationship between each phenotype and an age group. We found that there was a tendency for the platelet counts to be higher in the childhood group than in the other age groups (Fig. 1a), while the MPV increased more abruptly in the childhood group (Fig. 1b).

Although, the PFA-100® system is unspecific to any particular platelet disorder, it might be a useful screening test for the platelet dysfunction [19,46]. Thus, the measurement of the PFA phenotypes could be considered a proper global test system for primary haemostasis. The present study reports significant differences between the CT of the childhood (Group1) and adulthood (Group 3) groups for both PFA phenotypes, as previous study have reported [46]. In addition, any other statistical differences were observed among the other age groups for the PFAadp and PFAepi (Table 7). Thus, the non-linear and inverse correlation between both platelet phenotypes (platelet counts and MPV) might be explained by a biological trend to maintain invariably the platelet mass and the platelet function throughout the life of the individual [47] (Fig. 2a and b).

Although we have confirmed previous findings, in the present work we report the results from a more comprehensive view of the platelet-related parameters and the platelet function, and its variation throughout the life of the individual. In addition, our study proposes a new approach to analyse a sample of related individuals (within extended Spanish pedigrees) by means of linear mixed regression models. We believe that the same approach should be considered for other study designs where the population stratification is an issue, for example, a sample measured among different geographical regions [25] or ethnic groups [26]. Finally, our results support the hypothesis that platelet function is maintained invariably over time.

The authors report no conflicts of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors thank the families who participated in the GAIT 2 Project. The authors thank Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics (Marburg, Germany) and Roche Diagnostics (Basel, Switzerland) for the technological support. We also would like to thank Professor Bill Stone for reviewing the manuscript.

This work was supported in part by the Spanish grant: Red Investigación Cardiovascular 
                  RD12/0042/0032.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

