@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Network-based approach reveals Y chromosome influences prostate cancer susceptibility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We developed an integrative network-based framework for prostate cancer.


                        
                        
                           
                           We examined the role of Y-chromosome genes through different states.


                        
                        
                           
                           The new definition of modulation score is proposed for detecting novel pathways and processes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Candidate genes are introduced for future research in the field of cancer studies as key factors.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Co-expression networks

Expression data

Prostate cancer

Reverse engineering approach

Y-chromosome genes

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The human Y chromosome contains a small number of genes that play a critical role in the determination of male-specific organs. Today’s advances have provided valuable resources for defining the functions of this chromosome in both normal and cancerous prostates. Despite the fact that generation of high-throughput expression data is becoming usual; the systematic methods of data analysis in a biological context are still an impediment.
                  Here we have shown that constructing co-expression networks using Y-chromosome genes provides an alternative strategy for the detection of new candidate genes involved in prostate cancer. In our approach, independent co-expression networks from normal and cancerous stages are reconstructed using a reverse engineering approach. We then highlight crucial pathways, biological processes, and genes involved in the prostate cancer by analyzing each network individually and in concert. Thus, we have identified 18 critical pathways and processes related to prostate cancer, many of which have previously been shown to be involved in cancer. In particular, we identify 22 Y-chromosome genes putatively linked to prostate cancer, 13 of which have been already verified experimentally.
                  Our novel network-based approach is useful for accurate inference of processes and essential regulators that mediate molecular changes during cancer progression.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The complexity of cancer has prompted various genome-wide studies to achieve a systems-level understanding of the key genetic mediators involved in different types of cancer [1]. Although recent studies have recognized a number of variants, gene fusions, and expression signatures affiliated with prostate cancer, identification and characterization of genes involved in this type of cancer, has still remained as a formidable challenge [2]. One focal point in cancer analysis is reconstruction of co-expression networks, which represents the key mediators that are involved in a specific process. The availability of genome-wide gene expression data has helped the development of various state-of-the-art co-expression networks reconstruction methods [3–5].

In the past decades, using high-throughput technologies, cancer researchers have collected a huge amount of data on the differences between cancer cells and their healthy counterparts, with the ultimate purpose of identifying therapeutic targets. Many systems biology methods have been developed to infer the complexity of gene regulation using this high-throughput data. This has led to the identification of genes casually involved in human cancer [6,7].

Prostate cancer, in particular, is a complex polygenic disorder which is a one of the most known cause of mortality in men [8]. The identification of critical molecular markers of prostate cancer may direct us towards better and earlier diagnosis of this type of cancer. Moreover, better understanding of the molecular process affecting prostate cancer progression may lead to the introduction of new drugs and tools for the prevention of this very common disease [9]. Previous work on prostate cancer, totally ignores the contribution of the Y chromosome, which is the male-specific chromosome in the human genome and contains genes that play critical roles in vital functions in male-specific organs, such as the testis and prostate gland [10]. In this paper, we approach this problem by identifying candidate genes on the Y chromosome involved in prostate cancer.

Taking a systems-wide approach, we have reconstructed two stage-specific co-expression networks from a comprehensive prostate cancer gene expression dataset, consisting of 171 different samples representing gene expression in two different cell states. Our analysis has led to recognition of 18 both well-established and novel pathways and processes involved in prostate cancer. Additionally, we have identified 22 genes that putatively contribute to prostate cancer. Through extensive literature search, we have found that for 13 out of the 22 candidate genes (~59%), there is experimental evidence suggesting a role in prostate cancer. This level of experimental confirmation reflects the high accuracy of our proposed approach.

We have used a network-based approach to seek systems-level perturbations during cancer progression. We have applied three different workflows for regulatory perturbation inference to cancerous and normal networks. These workflows are presented schematically in a flowchart (
                     Fig. 1).

Reverse engineering of co-expression networks based on whole genome data is an approach that attempts to discover the underlying gene regulatory circuits by observing changes in gene expression profiles. With advances in high-throughput technologies, several computational reverse-engineering approaches have been developed using different statistical measurements [11–14], including information-theoretic network inference methods, which identify connections between genes by approximating the quantity of information common to any pair of genes. We employed the context likelihood relevance (CLR) algorithm by Faith et al. [3] as it had the best performance among information theory-based approaches in the Dialogue on Reverse Engineering Assessment and Methods 5 (DREAM5) challenge [15].

Briefly, CLR evaluates an interaction between two genes as significant by considering their mutual information (MI) value against a background distribution of the MI values of every other pair involving one of the two genes of interest. In this way, the significance level is dynamically determined for each interacting pair according to their expression profiles. Given a gene expression dataset and the significance scores calculated by the CLR algorithm, the corresponding empirical false discovery rate (FDR) can be estimated by running the algorithm on randomly shuffled datasets. In this study, we have reconstructed two co-expression networks using CLR with an FDR threshold of 0.05.

In the initial phase of this study, through a series of expression studies conducted on all 60 genes (loci) on the human Y chromosome [10], we have retrieved all genes that interact with Y-chromosome genes from the Information Hyperlinked over Proteins (iHOPE) database [16]. Overall, we identified 471 genes (in addition to genes on the Y chromosome) in the entire human genome that interact with genes on the Y chromosome.

Prostate cancer microarray data were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (accession number GDS2545) [17]. This dataset contains 171 samples, including prostate tissue free of any pathology (Normal, 18 samples), normal prostate tissue adjacent to tumors (Adjacent, 63 samples), primary prostate tumor tissue (Tumor, 65 samples), and metastatic prostate cancer (Metastasis, 25 samples). For this study, we grouped Normal and Adjacent samples as normal prostate tissue and Tumor and Metastasis samples as cancerous prostate tissue. Microarray data were preprocessed and analyzed using the LIMMA package in R [18].

It has been demonstrated that functionally related genes tend to have coherent expression patterns [19]. Our goal is to identify pathways and biological processes (BP) with altered regulation using the prostate cell expression data in two stages. First, we have constructed co-expression networks for each stage, independently. Next, for each co-expression network, we queried whether genes in a particular BP or pathway are significantly interconnected (reasoning that the density of connections among genes involved in an active process will be significantly higher than a random selection of genes). To formulate this idea, we developed a modulation score based on the concept of cohesiveness from the network topology analysis [20]. For convenience, we refer to an interaction between two genes in the same pathway or BP as intra-interactions. Similarly, we refer to an interaction between a gene in a pathway or BP with another gene not in that pathway or BP as an inter-interaction. Then, we defined the modulation score as follows:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 modulation
                                 
                                 score
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       number
                                       
                                       
                                       of
                                       
                                       
                                       intra
                                       -
                                       interactions
                                    
                                    
                                       number
                                       
                                       
                                       of
                                       
                                       
                                       intra
                                       -
                                       interactions
                                       
                                       +
                                       
                                       number
                                       
                                       
                                       of
                                       
                                       
                                       inter
                                       -
                                       interactions
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

To assess the significance state of a calculated modulation score for a gene set composed of n genes, we have observed the distribution pattern of 1000 modulation scores obtained from randomly selected gene sets with the same size from the network. Assuming a normal distribution for the random modulation scores, the Z-score is:
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 Z
                                 -
                                 score
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       m
                                       −
                                       
                                          
                                             m
                                          
                                          
                                             0
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       s
                                       d
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where m is the modulation score for a particular set of n genes, m
                        0 is the expected modulation score for random selection of n genes in the network, and sd is the standard deviation for the distribution of modulation scores. Our preliminary analysis indicated Z-scores for very small gene sets are not reliable, therefore only gene sets with size greater than 5 were considered in our analysis.

Our analysis had two distinct objectives. The first was to identify the most likely candidate oncogene among the genes in the reconstructed networks via topological analysis. The second one was to evaluate the Y-chromosome genes involved in prostate cancer, based on whether they interact with the identified candidate(s) in the reconstructed sub-networks.

To identify the key genes in prostate cancer, we searched the stage-specific co-expression networks of prostate cancer for high connectivity (hub) or bottleneck genes [21,22]. The hub and bottleneck properties are considered as important centrality indices because they indicate critical intersections between clusters in the network, such that the network will be disrupted if they are removed [23]. Considering the possibility of more appropriate centrality indices, we also searched for genes with high Density of Maximum Neighborhood Component (DMNC), Maximum Neighborhood Component (MNC), and Maximal Clique Centrality (MCC) scores. There now exists a significant body of research which use the centrality measures to detect critical nodes in biological networks [24,25]. Lin et al. evaluated the performance of these indices in the analysis of a yeast protein–protein interaction dataset, and found that they could identify essential genes with high precision [26]. We performed topological analysis of both constructed networks using the cyto-Hubba package [26] which is a plugin for the popular network analysis software Cytoscape [27].

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS@&#

To reconstruct the cell stage-specific co-expression networks, we concentrated on the available comprehensive transcriptome dataset, originally published in [17]. In our approach, we are able to make reliable predictions only for genes with altered expression levels across the normal and cancerous conditions. Therefore, we only considered up-/down-regulated genes (fold change ≥1.5 and p-value <0.05) in the cancerous stage that also interact with Y-chromosome genes (310 genes).

Using the CLR algorithm, we have reconstructed two independent co-expression networks for the normal and cancerous tissues (Supplementary file 1). For the first step, we considered 310 genes of the 471 genes extracted from iHOPE due to the availability of the expression data from our transcriptomics dataset. The resulting normal and cancerous networks contain 1973 and 1831 interactions, respectively. Both reconstructed networks were mainly composed of the same gene sets (307 and 305 genes for normal and cancerous, respectively). However the conserved interactions among these two networks were very low.

To identify essential genes and their associated interactions governing cell-specific behavior in normal and cancerous state, we compared the two networks with each other. Considering Hub, Bottleneck, DMNC, MNC and MCC centrality indices in the structure of the co-expression networks, the 20 highest-ranked genes (for each score) were identified for each stage-specific network (Supplementary file 2). After eliminating common genes for all five scores, 80 candidate genes in total were selected for further analysis. Among these genes, only RPS4Y1 is related to Y-chromosome gene that has been found by DMNC centrality.

We checked for enrichment of the known cancerous genes among the set using a curated list of 555 high-confidence cancer genes, originally published in [28], 100 genes identified as mediators in metastatic prostate cancer from [29], and 276 genes annotated as either a cancer pathway or prostate cancer gene in the KEGG database [30,31]. Analysis of cyto-Hubba results showed that 18 of these genes have different scores between the normal and cancer networks. Interestingly, using only one centrality index would result in non-detection more that 55% of the mentioned genes. On the other hand, using either of the sets (degree, BN, DMNC and MNC) or (BN, DMNC, MNC and MCC) together flagged all 18 of the known cancer genes with distinct normal versus cancerous scores.

We extracted a sub-network from normal and cancer co-expression networks using the Y-chromosome gene list due to detection of the Y-chromosome genes that interact with the 80 defined high score genes; therefore, the sub-networks extracts from this co-expression networks by considering only the interactions wherein at least one Y-chromosome genes is involved (Supplementary file 3). We detected 22 genes related to the Y chromosome in our sub-network. The sub-networks were extracted and visualized in Cytoscape (
                        Fig. 2).

The reconstructed normal sub-networks contain 134 interactions among 123 genes, while the reconstructed cancerous sub-network contained 109 interactions among 101 genes. As illustrated in Fig. 2, 22 Y-chromosome genes and 36 genes out of the 80 high-scoring genes were found in the sub-network related to normal tissue, while in the cancerous network, the number of Y-chromosome genes decreased to 21, interacting with 21 high-scoring genes. Closer investigation shows that UTY has been removed from the cancerous network while it has 12 interactions in normal network. Moreover, the results show that 14 other Y-chromosome genes have changed the number of interactions, with fold change (FC)≥1.5, through cancer progression. Some genes, such as AMELY, EIF1AY, NLGN4Y, VCY1B, DDX3Y, RPS4Y1, CDY1B and RBMY1E, have fewer interactions in the cancerous network while others, such as USP9Y, ZFY, SRY, KDM5D, TMSB4Y and XKRY2, have dramatically more interactions. These results recapitulate previous findings in which some active sub-networks contain regulatory interactions that are supplanted by new interactions and exhibit changes in their degree distributions under different conditions [32]. In addition, topological comparison of the two sub-networks confirms the previous findings about extensive networks rewiring [33].

We have also investigated the expression alteration of 22 Y-chromosome genes. The result shows that CYORF15B, DAZ4, PRY2, RBMY1E and RPS4Y1have been up-regulated in the cancerous stage, while some genes such as RBMY1J, USP9Y, DDX3Y and KDM5D have been down-regulated during cancer progression (
                        Fig. 3).

Accumulated evidence indicates that different processes contribute to the progression of cancer [34–38]. To identify these processes, we reasoned that because gene regulation is finely regulated, the set of genes involved in such an active process should be co-regulated. The assumption of this relationship between gene co-regulation and functional processes suggests that correlated expression patterns, and, consequently, significant connection of these genes in the corresponding co-expression network could imply participation in the same functional processes. Therefore, we have defined an active biological module as a set of genes that: (1) share similar BP annotations or KEGG pathways, and (2) are significantly connected to each other in the co-expression network.

Applying our method (calculation of the modulation score and Z-score) on stage-specific prostate cancer co-expression networks, we identified 14 BPs and 4 KEGG pathways containing genes significantly connected in at least one co-expression network with Bonferroni corrected p-value <0.05 (
                        Fig. 4).

To demonstrate the change in density of the interacting genes within a module, we focused on the co-expression among genes involved in the positive regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase cascade [GO:0014068] and the TNF signaling pathway [KEGG:hsa04668]. As shown in 
                        Fig. 5, the genes contributing to the positive regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase cascade are significantly co-regulated only in cancerous stage (Z-score=3.64). On the other hand, the genes involved in the TNF signaling pathway are significantly co-regulated in the normal stage (Z-score=3.35) and tend to lose their mutual co-regulation during cancer progression.

This novel network-based analysis suggests that significant biases exist among the two stage-specific co-expression networks when their constituent genes are classified by Gene Ontology (GO) terms or KEGG pathways.

Finally, the pathway analysis results (Supplementary file 4) show that Y-chromosome genes such as PRKY, RPS4Y1 and USP9Y involve in protein phosphorylation, cellular protein metabolic process, and transforming growth factor beta receptor signaling pathway, respectively. As expected, our analysis reveals multiple GOs and pathways are active only in normal or cancerous states. The role of some of these GOs/pathways in prostate cancer is well-known, while others, to the best of our knowledge, have not been previously associated with this type of cancer (Fig. 4).

We performed a literature search for the associations between 22 Y-chromosome genes and prostate cancer. Although the role of some of these genes such as PRKY, PCDH11Y, PRY2, USP9Y, EIF1AY, NLGN4Y, ZFY, DDX3Y, BPY2, SRY, UTY, KDM5D, and TMSB4Y are most well-known in prostate cancer [39–44], we could not find any evidence linking the remaining genes with prostate cancer. However, based on the results, genes such as AMELY, DAZ4, RBMY1J, RBMY1E, VCY1B, RPS4Y1, CDY1B, XKRY2 and CYORF15B may have unknown roles in prostate cancer.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this paper, we have presented an accurate network-based approach for the analysis of transcriptome data. This approach has been led to the identification of 18 pathways and biological processes which are putatively involved in prostate cancer. Additionally, the analysis of prostate state specific co-expression revealed 22 genes that are critically important for prostate cancer progression. There are experimental evidences for the role of about 59% of the candidate genes in prostate cancer which have been detected through this analysis.

We have recommended 9 candidate genes for future research in the field of cancer studies as key factors. The high efficacy of our approach might be due to the high degree of overlap with previously known events and low number of predictions. In addition, the low number of the predicted genes makes it easier to follow-up experiments to validate the results.

PK and VHG conceived and designed of the study. PK and VHG analyzed and interpreted the data. PK, YA and BL prepared the initial manuscript. BG and MS headed the research program. All authors made substantial written contributions to the manuscript, and have given approval to the final version presented here.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

Taking a systems-wide approach, we have reconstructed two stage-specific co-expression networks based on comprehensive prostate cancer gene expression dataset including 171 different samples of gene expression in two different cell states. Topological analysis of two networks recapitulates the previous findings about extensive network rewiring. We have next developed a novel network-based framework to understand the molecular changes involved in the prostate cancer. The analysis has been led to the identification of both well-established and novel pathways and processes involved in this type of cancer. Additionally, we have identified 22 important genes putatively involved in prostate cancer. Through an extensive literature search, we have found that there exists experimental evidence suggesting a role in prostate cancer for 13 of the 22 candidate genes, which reflects the high accuracy of our proposed approach.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Vahid H. Gazestani is supported by the CIHR Systems Biology Fellowship. The authors would like to thank Dr. Gary D. Bader of the Donnelly centre for very helpful advice throughout the project; Dr. Ghasem H. Salekdeh and Dr. Armin M. Sobhani for their invaluable insights; and Ali Esfandiari of PNUB for helpful comments on the manuscript.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.08.020.


                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Supplementary file 1: Co-expression networks. This table contains two co-expression networks for normal and cancerous stages. Cancerous reconstructed network shows high rewiring of gene regulatory circuits.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Supplementary file 2: Cyto-Hubba scores for networks. This table contains 5 different scores for both reconstructed networks.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Supplementary file 3: Sub-networks of Y-chromosome genes. This table contains the reconstructed neighborhood sub-networks of 22 Y-chromosome genes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Supplementary file 4: Pathways and GOs involve in prostate cancer. This table contains 18 pathways and BPs putatively involved in prostate cancer, with genes significantly connected in at least one co-expression network with Bonferroni corrected p-value <0.05.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

