@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Biological-data-based finite-element stress analysis of mandibular bone with implant-supported overdenture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We clarify the stress distribution in peri-implant mandibular bone of a subject with an implant-supported overdenture.


                        
                        
                           
                           FEA models of mandible with two and four implants were constructed by CT images and in vivo loading data in the subject.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stress reduction was observed by increasing the number of implants.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stress concentrated at thin cortical bone around the implants.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stress concentrated around the implant aligned with a large deviation from load direction.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Implant

Finite element method

Overdenture

Stress

Biological data

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  This study aimed to evaluate the stress distribution in a mandibular bone with an implant-supported overdenture by a biological-data-based finite element analysis (FEA) utilizing personal CT images and in vivo loading data, and to evaluate the influence of the number and alignment of implants and bone conditions on the stress in peri-implant bone.
               
               
                  Methods
                  FEA models of a mandible were constructed for two types of overdentures: 4 implants supported overdenture (4-OD) and 2 implants supported overdenture (2-OD). The geometry of these models was constructed from CT images of a subject, who wore an implant-supported overdenture. The magnitude and direction of the loads on the implants for two types of overdentures during the maximal voluntary clenching were measured with 3D force transducers. FEA using these loads was carried out to observe stress distributions in peri-implant bone.
               
               
                  Results
                  Higher stress was observed in cortical bone around the implant neck. Stress in peri-implant bone for 4-OD was reduced in comparison with those for the 2-OD. For the 4-OD, notwithstanding such reduction of the stress, the stress concentrated at the cortical bone around the implant aligned with large deviation from load direction.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  In this study, biological data from a certain subject was successfully duplicated to the FEA models. The results demonstrate the mechanical prominence of using more implants. Even in 4 implants model, high stress was found around an implant with a large inclination and with thin cortical bone. This suffices to demonstrate the capability and usefulness of the biological-data-based FEA.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

An implant-supported overdenture (OD) is applied increasingly in recent years, supported by excellent clinical outcomes [1–3]. It offers significant improvements for subjects who are lacking stability and retention of their denture. In long-term results of implant-supported overdentures, despite achieving satisfactory survival rate, the prosthetic complications such as screw loosening and fracturing of the prosthetic component were often observed and significantly affected by biomechanical conditions [4]. Additionally, possible association between biomechanical conditions and peri-implant bone loss was reported [5]. Mechanical stress in peri-implant bone, induced by occlusal loads transmitted to these implants, is known to affect bone homeostasis [6].

In human study, the duration of load was found to significantly affect bone loss and implant failure [7]. In animal study, excessive and dynamic loads induced marginal bone loss [8,9]. Thus, it is important to investigate this mechanical stress, which plays a prominent role in long-term prognosis of implant treatment and mechanobiological reaction of the tissue. In particular, the effect of mechanical stress might be more detrimental in unfavorable patient’s conditions, such as low bone quality, limited bone quantity, adverse functional habits, and compromised medical health [10]. Finite element analysis (FEA) has come to be utilized to investigate stress on the implant components and peri-implant bone. As confirmed by several FEA study, mechanical stress in peri-implant bone is strongly affected by implant number, diameter, length, thread profile, material properties of implant components, quality and quantity of surrounding bone [11–15]. It is also well known that the performance of FEA is dependent on various factors of the model, such as geometry, load conditions, material properties, and boundary conditions [16]. Recent development of digital imaging techniques made it possible to obtain subject-specific biological data of bone geometry and property for FEA modeling [17–19].

In previous studies, we developed a methodology to measure 3-D forces exerted on implants in vivo 
                     [20–22]. We also conducted a pilot study to construct a biological-data-based FEA model of a mandible with implants, utilizing CT images and in vivo load data of a subject with an implant-supported overdenture, in whom 3-D force on each implants had been measured. The measured load on the implant was unpredictable and the bone morphology and quality are peculiar to individual patients. Therefore, patient’s specific “biological-data-based FEA” could be worthy to improve understanding of biomechanical conditions relating to the implant treatment. The purpose of this study was to investigate the mechanical stress distribution in a mandibular bone of the subject with an implant-supported overdenture by a biological-data-based FEA and to evaluate the influence of the number of implants on the stress in peri-implant bone.

The present FEA was based on biological data collected from a 62-year-old female subject, who wore an overdenture (OD) supported by four dental implants 3.75mm in diameter, 13mm in length (MkIII RP, Nobel Biocare, Kloten, Switzerland). The implants were installed between the mental foramens of mandible (
                     Fig. 1a and b), which were labeled with 1 to 4, with Imp1 being the right distal implant and Imp4 the left distal one. The subject had no systemic disease and no abnormalities and disorders in her stomatognathic system. CT images of the subject, taken before the implants installation, were used to constructing FEA models geometry. Bone quality and bone quantity were classified in B-3 type described by Lekholm and Zarb [23]. It was characteristic of the subject that the left distal implant was supported by thin cortical bone. All of four implants were installed nearly vertical to her occlusal plane, according to the common guideline of implant insertion.

The magnitude and direction of forces exerted on implants during maximal voluntary clenching (MVC) were recorded with 3-D load-measuring devices, consisting of piezoelectric force transducers (Type Z18400, Kistler Instrument, Winterthur, Switzerland) (Fig. 1c). The lower part of this device was connected to the abutment with a titanium screw, and its upper part was connected with a bar attachment (Fig. 1d). These transducers can record triaxial forces simultaneously and independently with high linearity, low hysteresis and good temperature stability for each measuring axis as described in detail in the literature [24]. Measured loads were analyzed according to the three dimensional coordinates defined as vertical (z), antero-posterior (y) and mediolateral (x) axes based on the mandibular plane and sagittal plane. Measurements were conducted for two types of overdentures: 4 implants supported overdenture (4-OD) and 2 implants (locating medially) supported overdenture (2-OD) (Fig. 1e and f). The overdenture had 3 clip attachments that were connected with bar splinting 4 implants during function for 4-OD, only a clip at the center was connected with a bar splinting 2 implants for 2-OD (Fig. 1g). In 2-OD case, the distal implants (Imp1 and Imp4) were not contacted to the inner surface of denture during function. Clenching task was repeated five times for each condition. To avoid the influence of fatigue, duration of each clenching was 2s with the interval of 2min. Check bites were taken with silicone impression material (FLEXICON, GC Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) to make sure that the occlusal contact pattern was identical in both cases of 4-OD and 2-OD.

This study was approved by the research ethics committee of Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry.

4-OD and 2-OD FEA models were constructed with an ensemble of computer-aided-engineering software (
                     Fig. 2).
                        
                           (1)
                           The CT data was converted to the JPEG images for shape extraction. Model geometry of the mandible was constructed from the images of the subject with dedicated software (Mechanical Finder, Research Center Of Computational Mechanics Inc, Tokyo, Japan). The region of mandible comprising cortical bone layer around a cancellous bone core was obtained by setting a threshold for the image data.

The geometry of the implants (3.75mm in diameter/13mm in length) and the bar attachment were constructed with CAD software (Solidworks, Solidworks Corp, Concord, MA, USA).

The position and angulation of each implant were determined with reference to X-ray cephalometric images of the subject (
                              Fig. 3 and 
                              Table 1) and each implant was implemented into the model with FEA software (Patran, MSC Software, Santa Ana, CA, USA).

The interface between the implants and the surrounding bone was completely fixed to simulate the state of osseointegration. The part of mandibular ramus was completely constrained by enforcing zero-displacement conditions for all nodes (Fig. 2). All materials were assumed to be linear elastic isotropic behavior and material volumes were considered as homogeneous (
                     Table 2) [25,26]. The model consisted of 126,134 ten-node tetrahedral elements and 196,198 nodes for 4-OD model and 135,420 elements and 180,830 nodes for 2-OD model.

The loads were applied on the upper plane of individual implants where the load measuring devices were mounted. Magnitude and direction of loads applied on the individual implants were the mean values of the loads on the respective implants, measured in the subject during her maximal voluntary clenching (MVC) (the arrows in Fig. 2b and d and 
                     Table 3).

The linear static stress analysis of those two models was conducted by FEA solver program, MSC Marc (MSC Software, LA, CA, USA) with TX7/i9610 supercomputer (Cyberscience Center, Tohoku University, Japan). The von Mises stress, the minimum principal stress, and the maximum principal stress were used to observe stress distribution. In the present study, we introduced the stresses contour maps for qualitative evaluation of the stress distributions comparatively between 2-OD and 4-OD. On the other hand, we introduced the two scalar-valued evaluation factors, σ
                     
                        R
                      and V
                     
                        R
                      for quantitative evaluation of the stress values defined as follows [21]:


                     σ
                     
                        R
                     : Average von Mises stress in 5mm3 stress concentration area around peri-implant bone (MPa). Before identifying the σ
                     
                        R
                     , von Mises stress of each element around each implant was calculated, and the elements were realigned in higher stress sequence up to 50mm3 in sum of the element volume for the implant. Then σ
                     
                        R
                      was calculated as the average of the stress in these elements.


                     V
                     
                        R
                     : Volume of von Mises stress concentration area (mm3) (criteria: more than 3MPa for the von Mises stress).

These two scalar-valued evaluation factors were computed for the von Mises stress in a columnar-shaped domain of the bone surrounding each implant.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Distributions of von Mises stress, the minimum and maximum principal stresses in cortical bone for both models (2-OD and 4-OD) are shown in 
                     Fig. 4. Distributions of von Mises stress, the minimum and maximum principal stresses are also displayed in two cross-sectional planes: the first plane included the center points of the upper plane of Imp2 and Imp3 and perpendicular to X–Y plane, i.e. mandibular plane, and the second plane included the center points of the upper plane of Imp1 and Imp4 as shown in 
                     
                     
                     Figs. 5–7. Associated scalar-valued evaluation factors, σ
                     
                        R
                      and V
                     
                        R
                      are shown in 
                     Table 4. Here 3MPa was used to define V
                     
                        R
                      because the value of σ
                     
                        R
                      for the implants in 4-OD, showing smallest σ
                     
                        R, was approximately equal to 3MPa. For this reason, we defined the area where von Mises stress exceeds 3MPa as stress concentration area namely V
                     
                        R
                      for this analysis.

In cortical bone, higher von Mises stress was observed around the neck of each implant (Fig. 4a and Fig. 5a). The minimum and maximum principal stress were higher in the distal and mesial side of each implant, respectively (Fig. 4a). In cancellous bone, relatively lower stresses were observed at implant thread parts (Fig. 4a, Fig. 6a and Fig. 7a)

The stress concentration factor σ
                        
                           R
                         was 4.90MPa and the volume of stress concentration V
                        
                           R
                         was 78.0mm3 in Imp2, and 6.01MPa and 64.0mm3 in Imp3, respectively (Table 4).

Similar to 2-OD model, stress concentration was observed for 4-OD model in cortical bone around each implant and low stresses were observed at implant thread part in cancellous bone (Figs. 4–7). On the other hand, the stress distributions were dependent on the definition of stresses and were quite irregular.

The minimum principal stress was higher in the distal side of Imp1, Imp3 and Imp4, and in the mesial side of Imp2 (Figs. 4 and 6b). The maximum principal stress was higher in the mesial side of Imp1, Imp3 and Imp4, and in the distal side of Imp3 (Figs. 4 and 7b). To summarize, around Imp1, Imp2 and Imp3, higher stress distributed in relatively smaller areas than observed in 2-OD model, but around Imp4, higher stress distributed broadly. The σ
                        
                           R
                         at Imp4 was 4.82MPa which was almost twice as at Imp1 (2.66MPa), Imp2 (2.70MPa) and Imp3 (2.97MPa). The V
                        
                           R
                         was 66.0mm3 at Imp4, whereas it was 4.8, 6.5 and 16.0mm3 at Imp1, Imp2 and Imp3, respectively (Table 4).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Previous FEA studies in dentistry introduced various simplifying assumptions in modeling geometry, load, boundary condition, and material properties, and so on. Such simplifications are known to affect the analytical result [16,27].

In the living body, the shape, quality, and quantity of bone have individual variability, which significantly influences the prognosis of implant treatment. Recent development of digital imaging techniques (CT and MRI) made it possible to obtain complex morphological data and improved accuracy of geometrical modeling of FEA [16,18,28,29]. In the present study, a series of image data from CT images of the subject was binarized to construct FEA model geometry consisting of cortical bone and cancellous bone. In modeling process, CT data was converted to JPEG format for shape extraction. Both cortical and cancellous bone geometry was constructed by setting threshold for JPEG data with 256Gy levels. As the transition between cortical and cancellous bone was not clear, the threshold was decided by setting in a stepwise manner for appropriate geometrical modeling. Thus thickness of cortical bone has local variability.

Occlusal load exerted on implants varies depending upon forces generated by multiple masticatory muscles. Muscles activities, as well as craniofacial morphology, influence the magnitude and direction of the occlusal load [30–32]. Although a few previous FEA studies have simulated muscle forces in various manners [18,33,34], it is currently difficult to duplicate individual muscle activity to FEA modeling. Thus it is customary to use vertical or oblique load on teeth or implants as input load in FEA [17,26].

Meriske-Stern et al. [35] used piezoelectric transducers to measure 3D loads on implants supporting an overdenture in vivo. These transducers have been improved to be much smaller and to be applicable to in vivo sequential measurements. Using the improved transducers, we developed an in vivo measuring system of three-dimensional loads exerted on implants [21,22]. In the present study, mean values of the loads on the respective implants, measured in the subject during her MVC, were used as the input static load. Hence, the exerted loads on the implants during function including mastication of various foods show much dynamic and complicated manner, it is obvious that the loading scenario used in the present study is only a fragment of functional loading condition of the implants and do not completely describe a whole loading condition. It had better be taken into account for a real loading condition in future. Bonnet et al. conducted an FEA study of mandible bone supporting a four-implant retained bridge and examined the influence of foodstuff position [36]. They suggested that critical compressive stress induced in the case of foodstuff on molar position. The authors have measured the loads on the implants during chewing of various foods and during biting wax on the either side of the denture in the same subject. The measured load vector varied dynamically time by time in terms of its direction and magnitude, and the norms of the vectors were relatively smaller than those during her MVC. The results of trial analyses using these functional loads as the input loading data to the same static FEA model employed in this study were rather difficult to comprehend the stress distribution caused by the difference of the number of supporting implants and surrounding bone structure. Thus, the authors decided to use the loads during her MVC for analyses.

In this study, the loads transiting through the mucosa beneath the denture base were not modeled, although the mucosa was contacted with the inner surface of her denture in molar region. In both case of 4-OD and 2-OD, total occlusal force on the denture, total loads on the implants were not significantly different and the contact area beneath the denture to mucosa were identical and away from Imp1 and Imp4, so that the influence was assumed to be relatively small. For further detailed analysis, it is definitely important to reproduce realistic loading conditions and to employ dynamic analyzing method.

In this study, biological data such as CT data and measured load from a certain subject was successfully duplicated to the FEA models. The cortical bone and cancellous bone are both heterogeneous and have anisotropic mechanical properties [37]. It has been reported that bone anisotropy significantly affects stresses and strains in peri-implant bone [26]. Yet, in the present study, cortical bone and cancellous bone were assumed to be isotropic and their material properties were determined according to literatures for simplicity. This simplification would be permissible, because main objective of the present paper was to investigate the influence of real load in her mouth on the stress distribution around implants. It is a topic in future research to consider individual anisotropic material properties (transversely isotropic) and inhomogeneities of bone.

This study focused on the mechanical stress in the peri-implant bone. In FEA studies to evaluate mechanical stress in the peri-implant bone, it is customary to use stresses of various kinds, such as von Mises stress, the maximum, the minimum principal stress and the maximum shear stress. The maximum principal stress is suited for the observation of tensile stress and the minimum one for compressive one, whereas the von Mises stress is the most commonly and primarily used scalar-valued stress invariant to evaluate yielding/failure behavior of various materials. Since bone have both ductile and brittle response, the use of principle stress is appropriate in such studies.

Both in 2-OD model and 4-OD model, distributions of such stresses in peri-implant bone were complex due to in vivo loads (Fig. 4). As a whole, high stress mainly distributed in cortical bone around implants, whereas low stress distributed in cancellous bone, regardless the definition of stress (Figs. 5–7). Such low stress in cancellous bone might be ascribed to the binarization of material properties. Although cancellous bone showed low stress distributions, it doesn’t contradict the risk of bone damage or modeling. It has been reported lower stress affect the activation of bone metabolism in cancellous bone [14].

In 2-OD model, cortical bone around each implant showed high stress distribution in different directions: the mesiodistal direction for the von Mises stress, the mesial direction for the maximum principal stress, and the distal direction for the minimum principal stress (Fig. 4a). These tendencies might reflect the in vivo load direction of each implant (Fig. 2b). Imp3 had higher stress concentration and Imp2 had a larger volume of stress concentration (Table 4). Such lack of bilateral symmetry might be ascribed to the characteristic of this particular subject, i.e. inclination of each implant, loading conditions and peri-implant bone conditions, which cannot be accounted for without having biological data.

In 4-OD model, high stresses also distributed in various directions with the definition of stresses (Fig. 4b), which was affected by the in vivo load direction (Fig. 2d) similar to 2-OD model. In particular, higher and wider stress concentration was observed around Imp4 with a large inclination of load direction and with thin supporting cortical bone. Influence of cortical bone thickness on stress around implants has been reported in previous study [38]. The stress concentration observed around Imp4 also shows the importance of biological-data-based FEA.

In the present study, we introduced the two scalar-valued evaluation factors (σ
                        
                           R
                         and V
                        
                           R
                        ) to evaluate the stress concentration area comparatively between 2-OD and 4-OD. This evaluation method was effective to grasp the spatial distribution of mechanical stress in an averaged sense. Within the limitations of this analysis, we defined criteria of these values. Therefore, the criteria of scalar-valued evaluation factors might needs to examine in each analysis.

The total amount of load applied to the implant was 197.2(N) in 2-OD model and was almost identical with that of 192.8(N) in 4-OD model (Table 3). In 4-OD model, all implants, except for Imp4, displayed obviously lower evaluation factors than 2-OD model (Table 4). Stress reduction in 4-OD model might be related to the higher rigidity of 4-OD model being connected with the bar attachment. A similar effect of splinting implants with bar attachment in a mandibular overdenture was reported in previous study [39]. Furthermore, stress reduction by increasing the number of implants was also reported by in vitro experimental studies [40,41]. Silva et al. reported comparative FEA study of prostheses supported by four or six implants [42]. They concluded increasing the number of implants induced reduction of von Mises stress values and the cantilever greatly increase stress on the distal implant. These results are in common with the present results. Although the biological data were obtained from only one subject, the present result suggests 4-OD model can reduced the overloads compared with 2-OD model, which differs from the conclusion of Meijer et al. They concluded that there is no reduction of the extreme principal stresses by increasing the number of implants on two versus four implants in edentulous mandible FEA [43]. Such inconsistency might be caused by the different evaluation methods of spatial stress distribution in an averaged sense (σ
                        
                           R
                         and V
                        
                           R
                        ) and implementation of in vivo load data in FEA.

Regardless of the stress reduction achieved in 4-OD model, higher stress distributed around Imp4. This might be owing to a large deviation of load direction from the alignment of Imp4 and also to thin supporting cortical bone. The difference between load direction and implant alignment was larger in the mesiodistal direction than in the buccolingual direction, and, accordingly high stress distributed in the mesiodistal direction around Imp4. This indicates the stress distribution around an implant strongly depends on in vivo load direction, and also shows the importance of the implementation of individual variability into FEA analysis. Interaction of load direction on stress distribution has been reported in previous study [44,45]. The rigidity and deflection of prosthetic materials and stress concentration (overloads) contribute to clinical complications, such as screw loosening and fracturing of the prosthetic component [4,16]. Hence, stress reduction achieved in 4-OD model would possibly make the risk of clinical complications lower. In addition, it is reported that mechanical stress plays an essential role in maintaining homeostasis of the bone [46] and occlusal overload could be one of the risk factor for peri-implant bone loss in animal model [9]. Demenko et al. conducted an FEA study, suggesting to choose implant size with due consideration of its load-carrying capacity [47]. Barbier et al. reported a comparative study of FEA and animal experiment and concluded that the highest bone remodeling events coincided with high equivalent stress area and that major remodeling difference between axial and non-axial load was mainly ascribed to the horizontal component of stress [48]. In long-term results of mandibular implants supported overdenture, it has been reported that loss of osseointegration without signs of infection was more frequent than peri-implantitis [5]. These associations indicate the importance of biomechanical condition on implant-bone interfaces for long-term implant success. In this paper, we made clear that the number of implants and the individual bone geometry of the subject affected mechanical stress in the mandibular bone around implants. It indicates the possibility of biomechanical optimization of implant treatment based on biological data of a subject, possibly supported by an FEA analysis. Furthermore, it may contribute to decision of treatment design of implant treatment.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In the present study, we successfully constructed a biological-data-based FEA system from in vivo loads and CT data of a subject. Stress distribution was affected by magnitude and direction of the load and bone geometry. High von Mises stress was observed in cortical bone around implant neck. The stress around the supporting bone in 2 implants model was higher than that in 4 implants model to demonstrate the mechanical prominence of using more implants. Even in 4 implants model, high stress was found around an implant with a large inclination and with thin cortical bone. This suffices to demonstrate the capability and usefulness of the biological-data-based FEA.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (No’s 26462910) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

