@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of offset values for artificial teeth positions in CAD/CAM complete denture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We evaluated the optimal offset required for artificial teeth positioning during fabrication of CAD/CAM complete dentures.


                        
                        
                           
                           The optimal offset values differ with the basal shape of artificial teeth.


                        
                        
                           
                           Optimal offset values were 0.15–0.25mm for upper left central incisor, 0.15 and 0.25mm for upper left canine, 0.25mm for upper left first premolar, and 0.10–0.25mm for upper left first molar.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Complete denture

Accuracy

Artificial teeth

Measurement

Offset

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Recently, computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) technology has been applied to the field of removable complete denture prosthodontics. We developed a system for fabricating complete dentures applying CAD/CAM technology. In this system, artificial teeth were bonded to the recesses of a milled denture base. However, the offset values needed for the recesses are not known. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the accuracy of bonded artificial teeth positions in 0.00 (control), 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25mm offset recess groups. Four types of artificial teeth, upper left central incisor (UL1), upper left canine (UL3), upper left first premolar (UL4), and upper left first molar (UL6), were used. Each type of artificial tooth was arranged at regular intervals on the denture base model with the CAD software. These data were defined as the master data. The artificial teeth parts were subtracted from the denture base model by Boolean logic operations in order to make recesses, and the recesses were then offset in five values. Based on these denture base data, prepolymerized resin blocks were milled (n=3). After bonding artificial teeth on the milled denture base model, a cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) scan was performed to obtain scanned data. Deviations between the master data and the scanned data were calculated. Based on the results, the optimal offset values were found to be 0.15–0.25mm for UL1, 0.15 and 0.25mm for UL3, 0.25mm for UL4, and 0.10–0.25mm for UL6.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Many treatment and laboratory procedures involved in the fabrication of complete dentures are complicated [1]. Problems encountered during fabrication have been mostly solved by computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) technology, which was initially applied to fixed partial dentures [2]. Application of CAD/CAM technology was introduced to complete denture prosthodontics in the 1990s. Stereolithography and a computerized numerical machine were used for fabricating complete dentures [3,4]. Virtual arrangement of artificial teeth on CAD software has been reported in the 2000s [5,6]. In recent years, anterior teeth positions were determined based on muscular movements and pronunciation for CAD/CAM complete dentures [7]. In the United States, some CAD/CAM complete dentures have been launched in the dental market [8], and this is gradually becoming common. However, the abovementioned reports described the fabrication methods and did not mention the accuracy of the finished dentures.

Previously, we developed systems for fabricating CAD/CAM complete dentures [9–11]. We also reported the fabrication accuracy of milled complete dentures [12]. In the report, the polished surface of dentures showed high accuracy, whereas the occlusal surface showed low accuracy. In this system, the final impressions were scanned with cone beam computed tomography (CBCT). The obtained Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) data were translated into Standard Triangulated Language (STL) data. With CAD software, the artificial teeth were arranged on the impression data, and the polished surface was designed. After designing was completed, the artificial teeth parts were subtracted from the denture bases by Boolean logic operations. In this way, denture bases with recesses for bonding artificial teeth data were obtained. Based on these data, denture bases were milled from prepolymerized resin blocks, and the artificial teeth were bonded to the recesses. In the bonding process, artificial teeth have occasionally not been returned to the specified positions, when there was no space between artificial teeth and the recesses. If there is appropriate offset recess in the socket, the artificial teeth fit into the recess. Meanwhile, if the offset value is too big, the artificial teeth may sink. Thus, offset recess data are needed to create spaces between recesses and artificial teeth. However, optimal offset values have not been set. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of bonded artificial teeth positions in 0.00 (control), 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25mm offset groups.

The denture base model was designed with CAD software (FreeForm; Geomagic, Morrisville, NC, USA) (
                        Fig. 1a). In this study, the STL data of the upper left central incisor (UL1), upper left canine (UL3), upper left first premolar (UL4), and upper left first molar (UL6) of the artificial teeth (SURPASS G; GC, Tokyo, Japan) were obtained using a three-dimensional (3D) scanner (ATOS Triple Scan; GOM mbH, Braunschweig, Germany) (
                        Fig. 2). These artificial teeth were arranged on the denture base model with CAD software (CATIA V5R19; Dassault Systemes, Vélizy-Villacoublay, France). Each type of artificial teeth was arranged at regular intervals on the denture base model; these data were defined as the master data (
                        Figs. 1b and 3).

The artificial teeth were subtracted from the denture base model by Boolean logic operations in order to make recesses (Fig. 1c). The recesses were then offset with five different values. There was no offset in the control group. The offset values were 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25mm (
                        Fig. 4). By this process, offset recesses for the artificial teeth were prepared on the denture base model (
                        Figs. 1d and 5). Based on these data, a machining center (GM-1000; GC, Tokyo, Japan) milled three prepolymerized custom fabricated acrylic resin (ACRON; GC, Tokyo, Japan) blocks to obtain denture base models with recesses (Fig. 1e). There were three samples in each offset group. Self-curing resin (UNIFAST III; GC, Tokyo, Japan) was used for bonding artificial teeth on the base model with recesses. In order to avoid technical errors, examiners practiced returning artificial teeth into the recesses without bonding agent. Three examiners who had more than 3 years of clinical experience in prosthodontics at the Dental Hospital, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU) bonded one sample piece each. While setting of self-curing resin, artificial teeth were held by hand for 3min and 30s. These denture base models with bonded artificial teeth (
                        Figs. 1f and 6) were scanned by CBCT (Finecube; Yoshida, Tokyo, Japan) (Fig. 1g). CAD software (Mimics; Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) translated the obtained DICOM data into STL data, which were defined as the scanned data.

The scanned data were superimposed on the master data in accordance with the semi-cylindrical part of the denture base model (Fig. 1h). The excess parts of artificial teeth were trimmed with FreeForm (
                        Figs. 1i and 7). The deviation analysis between the master data and the scanned data was performed with CATIA. Deviation was defined as the normal distance between point clouds of the master model and the scanned model surface (
                        Fig. 8). Deviation analysis of STL models did not compare two corresponding points. In this study, the distance between a point of scanned model and a point of master data, which is located in the normal distance from the scanned model point, was calculated as the deviation. The maximum deviation and the mean deviations of the absolute value were calculated. The mean deviations were obtained by dividing the sum of all the absolute values of the deviations by the number of point clouds.

Data were statistically analyzed by one-way analysis of variance with Tukey post-hoc test. The analysis of variance was used to compare the mean absolute value of deviations and maximum absolute value of deviations for each artificial tooth between the five groups. Data were analyzed using statistical analysis software (SPSS version 16.0; SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). The level of significance was set at P=0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The mean absolute value of deviations and the maximum absolute value of deviations for each artificial tooth are shown in 
                     
                     Tables 1 and 2. The color-coded maps of deviation analysis performed by CATIA for each tooth are shown in 
                     Fig. 9. The deviations get smaller as the color changes from red to green in color-coded maps.

For UL1, the 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.25mm offset groups showed significantly smaller mean absolute value of deviations compared to the control group. The 0.15 and 0.20mm offset groups showed significantly smaller mean absolute value of deviations compared to the 0.10mm offset group. The 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.25mm offset groups showed significantly smaller maximum absolute value of deviations compared to the control group. From the color-coded maps, large deviations were observed at the incisal margin of the tooth for the control group (Fig. 9A).

For UL3, the 0.15 and 0.25mm offset groups showed significantly smaller mean absolute value of deviations compared to the control group. The 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.25mm offset groups showed significantly smaller maximum absolute value of deviations compared to the control group. From the color-coded maps, large deviations were observed at the incisal margin of the tooth for the control group (Fig. 9B).

For UL4, the 0.25mm offset group showed significantly smaller mean absolute value of deviations compared to the control groups. The 0.15, 0.20 and 0.25mm offset groups showed significantly smaller maximum absolute value of deviations compared to the control group. From the color-coded maps, large deviations were observed on the occlusal surface of the tooth for the control group (Fig. 9C).

For UL6, the 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.25mm offset groups showed significantly smaller mean absolute value of deviations compared to the control group. The 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.25mm offset groups showed significantly smaller maximum absolute value of deviations compared to the control group. From the color-coded maps, large deviations were observed on the occlusal surface of the tooth for the control group (Fig. 9D).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Since the incisal position and symmetry of anterior teeth have a great impact on the esthetics of dentures [13], reducing the displacement of bonding anterior teeth to the denture is important. In UL1 and UL3, the offset groups showed small deviations. The spaces between the recesses and artificial teeth probably eliminated the interferences during bonding. Large deviations at the incisal margin in the control group were seen in the color-coded map of UL1 (Fig. 9A) and color-coded map of UL3 (Fig. 9B). Interferences are likely to occur when there is less space between artificial teeth and recesses. The interference points work as a fulcrum and the artificial teeth may incline to the slope sides of basal area (Figs. 2A and B).

Reducing the displacement of the maxillary first premolar, which is located in the middle of the dental arch, would improve the esthetics and functionality of the denture [14]. For UL4, lifting of the palatal cusp side is larger than that of the buccal cusp in the control group and the 0.10mm offset group. However, deviations decreased gradually. In the bonding procedure, the forces were applied from the occlusal surface to the basal surface. At this time, the force vector was directed towards the buccal surface because of the slope of the UL4 basal area (Fig. 2C). Thus, UL4 may incline to the buccal surface.

Reducing the displacement of the maxillary molar, which is mainly associated with the occlusion of the denture, is important for occlusal contacts and vertical dimension of the denture [14]. For UL6, the occlusal surface showed small deviations compared to other artificial teeth. Since the UL6 basal area is large and flat (Fig. 2D), the tooth is stable and may hardly be displaced to the buccal surface.

There are positive and negative deviations in deviation analysis. The positive deviations indicate the scanned data located over the surface of the master data. Because the amount of displacement is clinically more important than the direction of displacement, the mean and maximum deviations in absolute value were measured in this study. The mean deviation is obtained by dividing all the sum of deviations by the number of point-clouds. Because there were approximately 25,000 point-clouds in each artificial tooth data, many areas of small deviations may mask little areas of large deviations. Therefore, not only mean deviations but the visual image from the color-coded maps and the value of the maximum deviations were evaluated.

Deviation analysis by superimposing scanned data and the master data with CAD software has been performed previously [15,16]. In these studies, superimposition was performed by best-fit algorithm operations. According to this method, the master model and the scanned model were positioned in the least deviation area. Thus, this method is suitable for comparing identical shape models. However, in the present study, displacement of the artificial teeth to the denture base model was measured. Therefore, instead of using best fit algorithm operation, the master data and the scanned data were superimposed at the point of the half cylinder part of the denture base, which seemed to be identical in both data sets.

In this study, the CBCT was used to measure the bonded artificial tooth. High reliability of CBCT, which has been used for measuring models, has been reported [17,18]. However, we cannot ignore the dimensional change of the data caused by the partial volume effect in CBCT [19]. Meanwhile, CBCT can be conveniently used to obtain images of the inner surface of the object.

With regard to the sample size, no research has yet been published in the field of CAD/CAM complete dentures regarding accuracy of artificial teeth position. In this study, the sample size was set at three in each group. The results showed small standard deviation in most of the groups. Post-hoc power analysis showed more than 0.8 for every group which showed significant differences. Thus, the number of sample groups is considered to be appropriate. However, a significant difference was not observed between the control group and the 0.20mm offset group for the mean deviation in UL3. In this regard, we cannot ignore the possibility of outliers. To reduce the effect of outliers, increasing the sample size should be considered.

The optimal bond strength of resin based artificial teeth and polymethyl-methacrylate (PMMA) materials has been reported [20]. Thus, PMMA self-curing resin was used for bonding artificial teeth to the denture base model. The dimensional changes of self-curing resin due to polymerization shrinkage ranged from 0.04% to 0.88% [21]. The offset value of 0.25mm, which means a cement space of linear distance 0.25mm, is considerably small. And the observed mean deviations were about 0.1–0.3mm. Considering the small shrinkage and cement space, the effect of polymerization of resin is negligible.

In this study, the minimum value of the maximum deviation was 0.39mm for UL1, 0.46mm for UL3, 0.46mm for UL4, and 0.30mm for UL6 (Table 2). These values were greater than the amount of displaceability of the mucosa, which ranges from 0.14 to 0.34mm [22]. The larger displacements of artificial teeth than displaceability of the mucosa cause an increase in the occlusal vertical dimension or premature occlusal contact. Further studies are needed on the role of shape of artificial teeth or bonding agent in decreasing artificial tooth displacement.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Within the limitations of this study, it was shown that in CAD/CAM complete denture, the recesses need offset for accurate teeth positions. The optimal offset values differ with the basal shape of artificial teeth. Optimal offset values were 0.15–0.25mm for UL1, 0.15 and 0.25mm for UL3, 0.25mm for UL4, and 0.10–0.25mm for UL6.

Recently, CAD/CAM technology has been applied to removable complete denture prosthodontics. We developed a system for fabricating complete dentures applying CAD/CAM technology in which artificial teeth are bonded into recesses in a milled denture base. However, the offset values needed for recesses are not known. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of bonded artificial teeth positions in 0.00 (control), 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25mm offset groups.

Four types of artificial teeth, upper left central incisor (UL1), upper left canine (UL3), upper left first premolar (UL4), and upper left first molar (UL6), were used. The denture base model was designed with CAD software. Each type of artificial tooth was arranged at regular intervals on the denture base model; this was defined as the master data. Then, the artificial teeth were subtracted from the denture base model by Boolean logic operations to make recesses. The recess data were offset in five different values. Based on these denture base data, a machining center milled prepolymerized resin blocks (n=3). Three examiners, who had more than 3 years of clinical experience in prosthodontics, performed this procedure. In this process, one examiner treated one sample piece. Artificial teeth were bonded by self-curing resin. After bonding artificial teeth on the denture base model, CBCT scan was performed to obtain the scanned data. The scanned data were superimposed on the master data. The excess parts of artificial teeth were trimmed. Then the mean and the maximum deviations between the master data and the scanned data were calculated. Data were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance with Tukey post-hoc test. The level of significance was set at P=0.05.

For UL1, a significant difference was observed between the control group and the 0.15–0.25mm offset group for both the mean and maximum absolute value of deviations. For UL3, a significant difference was observed between the control group and the 0.15 and 0.25mm offset groups for both the mean and maximum absolute values of deviations. For UL4, a significant difference was observed between the control group and the 0.25mm offset group in both the mean and maximum absolute value of deviations. For UL6, a significant difference was observed between the control group and the other offset groups for both the mean and maximum absolute values of deviation. From color-coded maps of deviation analysis, UL1, UL3, and UL4 control groups showed inclination towards the buccal side, probably due to the influence of the artificial tooth basal area shape. In the bonding procedure, the forces were applied from the occlusal surface to the basal surface. The force vector was directed to the buccal surface because of the slope of the UL1, UL3, and UL4 basal area.

Within the limitations of this study, it was shown that in CAD/CAM complete dentures, recesses require offset for accurate tooth positioning. Optimal offset values were 0.15–0.25mm for UL1, 0.15 and 0.25mm for UL3, 0.25mm for UL4, and 0.10–0.25mm for UL6.

None declared.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

