@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Design, analysis and verification of a knee joint oncological prosthesis finite element model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           PROSPON oncological implant FE model developed and validated.


                        
                        
                           
                           The PEEK-OPTIMA® hinge pin bushing analysed in knee-bent position.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stress distribution in accordance with contact pressure distribution.


                        
                        
                           
                           Maximal Von Mises stress (46.64MPa) in accordance with material yield strength.


                        
                        
                           
                           The final model in accordance with the real endoprosthesis behaviour.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Endoprosthesis

Oncological implant

Knee joint

Finite element model

Finite element method

Knee-bending

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  The aim of this paper was to design a finite element model for a hinged PROSPON oncological knee endoprosthesis and to verify the model by comparison with ankle flexion angle using knee-bending experimental data obtained previously.
               
               
                  Method
                  Visible Human Project CT scans were used to create a general lower extremity bones model and to compose a 3D CAD knee joint model to which muscles and ligaments were added. Into the assembly the designed finite element PROSPON prosthesis model was integrated and an analysis focused on the PEEK-OPTIMA® hinge pin bushing stress state was carried out. To confirm the stress state analysis results, contact pressure was investigated. The analysis was performed in the knee-bending position within 15.4–69.4° hip joint flexion range.
               
               
                  Results
                  The results showed that the maximum stress achieved during the analysis (46.6MPa) did not exceed the yield strength of the material (90MPa); the condition of plastic stability was therefore met. The stress state analysis results were confirmed by the distribution of contact pressure during knee-bending.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  The applicability of our designed finite element model for the real implant behaviour prediction was proven on the basis of good correlation of the analytical and experimental ankle flexion angle data.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The knee joint (lat. articulatio genus) is a synovial complex joint and is one of the most stressed in the entire human body. The joint consists of three main bones – the thigh bone (femur), shin bone (tibia) and knee pan (patella). Between the femur and tibia bone surfaces can be found the inner and outer meniscuses (meniscus medialis et lateralis). The joint further consists of muscles (musculi), ligaments (ligamenta) and bursas (bursae) [1]. Such a complex joint can become severely damaged as a result of illness, disease, injury, accident, etc. In cases of extreme damage, or following degenerative processes, the application of an oncological implant may be necessary. In some cases, unicompartmental knee arthroplasty is satisfactory (e.g. to reform osteoarthritis knee deformation [2]) but the application of a complete endoprosthesis is necessary in most cases [3].

Before implanting a prosthesis into a human body, its behaviour and properties need to be tested to prevent supplemental surgery. Various mechanical tests of oncological implants that may be time and money consuming can be simulated using the finite element method (FEM). FEM simulations have already been a standard development tool in mechanical or materials engineering. In biomechanics they have been used to carry out various analyses of soft tissues, such as simulations of mechanical behaviour of arteries [4] or intervertebral discs [5], or analyses of joints, implants and bones, which are, in orthopaedy, often focused on bone tissue behaviour after an arthroplasty [6–8]. Human joints analyses are mostly carried out to predict mechanical behaviour of a joint [9–11], to investigate stress state in a joint [12], or to find out a reason for pain in the joint [13]. The simulations involving joint implants are often focused on stress analyses between implant parts [14–16] or between the implant and a bone [17]. Implant loading can be analysed from several points of view, such as calculating the entire endoprosthesis strength, locating sites of increased stress concentrations that can lead to implant damage and observing implant behaviour during static and dynamic loading. Moreover, FEM is an important instrument for the computation of contact pressure and its distribution [18,19] that has a direct influence on the development of abrasion between particular parts of the endoprosthesis surfaces; wear being influenced by size and shape of contact areas can be investigated as well [20]. Using the FEM, comparison of different endoprostheses designs [21,22] as well as various prostheses materials [23] can be performed. Advantageously, FEM can be used to accelerate the development of joint implants [24] or to predict new endoprostheses designs [25].

To perform a finite element analysis, first of all, a model must be created. Several papers published elsewhere have already been focused on creation of a finite element model either of a joint itself (knee joint [12,26,27], hip joint [28], temporo-mandibular joint [11], etc.) or of an implant (total knee replacement [29]). Construction of bone models is performed usually on the basis of computer tomography (CT) scans [26,28,30]. Using this method the surface shapes of tissues throughout the body can be displayed by superposition of individual scans, in which different kinds of tissues (e.g. spongy or compact bones) can be distinguished according to the different grey tones. For modelling of soft tissues, such as muscles, ligaments, cartilages or meniscuses, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) process, suitable for visualisation of tissues with high volume of water, is recommended [26,31].

The aim of this paper was to design a finite element model for a hinged PROSPON oncological knee endoprosthesis. This Czech company, one of the manufacturers of oncological implants, was established in 1992 and focuses on the production of oncological implants and instruments for traumatology and orthopaedic surgery (www.prospon.cz). Its implants are widespread all over the central Europe, and also in France, Turkey, Greece or Russia. The knee endoprostheses are non-symmetrical and case-hardened and are basically made of the Ti–6Al–4V alloy, which is among the basic materials used in the manufacture of implants [32,33] together with titanium–nickel (shape memory) alloys [34–37], the Co–Cr–Mo alloy [2,23], or ceramics [23]. The prostheses condyles are coated with a DLC (diamond-like carbon) layer. Bone replacements are made from UHMWPE, ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene, while the PEEK-OPTIMA® material is used for the sliding hinge pin bushings. Although the PEEK-OPTIMA® is commonly used by various companies for spine implants (SIGNUS Medical; Calvary Spine Products, etc.), it is not so widespread among joint prostheses. The designed finite element prosthesis model was implemented into a lower extremity model created on the basis of Visible Human Project CT scans to carry out a finite element simulation focused on the hinge pin bushing stress state analysis; the pin bushing had been considered to be the most loaded part of the implant. A knee-bending position was chosen due to the presupposition of increased knee endoprosthesis loading. Verification of the model was done by comparison with previously obtained ankle flexion angle in knee-bending experimental data [3].

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

The PROSPON oncological implants are made to order for an individual patient; the used oncological implant consisted of the following parts: femoral stem, femoral component, rotating hinge post, tibial plateau, tibial base plate, tibial stem, medial/lateral hinge pin bushing, hinge pin, and hinge pin plug. The implant is schematically depicted in 
                        Fig. 1.

For the 3D reconstruction of lower extremity bones in this analysis, scans acquired within the Visible Human Project (National Library of Medicine) using the CT method were used (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/visible/visible_human.html). In this research project, a man 186cm in height and 90kg in weight had been scanned and the scans had been saved at 1mm intervals with a resolution of 512×512 pixels. After acquisition, CT scans had to be adjusted and segmented. During segmentation, individual types of tissues were assigned to individual regions of the scans according to the grey tones; final manual correction of the boundary lines was necessary. The 3D reconstruction process, during which a 3D model from the individual 2D scans of the tissue boundary lines was created, followed. A 3D model was constructed semi-automatically and its boundary (surface) consisted of a mesh of triangles. Such a model was then ready to be exported in the VRML (Virtual Reality Mark-Up Language) format. The VRML file assembled from the scans had to be further adjusted and modifications related to implant integration had to be done. During this adjustment process the mesh of triangles was transformed into a set of surfaces from which a 3D lower extremity CAD model, which was used for the analysis of the PROSPON knee endoprosthesis loading, was created. For the creation of a CAD model from the VRML file, UNIGRAPHICS NX software with the GRIP program kit upgrade was used. According to the operating procedures of the manufacturer, setting of the knee endoprosthesis on the relevant bones and necessary final verification of the implant by the manufacturer and an experienced physician were carried out.

To carry out a realistic 3D FEM simulation of knee endoprosthesis loading the main lower extremity muscles were added to the assembly. For this analysis, works published by White et al. [38] were used as primary data sources. Pelvis geometry was added to the model in order to implement the coordinates of the muscle tendons. For this purpose the pelvis geometry model VRML file, created by Viceconti at the Biomechanics European Lab [39] also using the Visible Human Project CT scans, was incorporated. According to White, 25 main muscles were implemented: Mm. iliacus, psoas; M. Pectineus; M. adductor longus; M. adductor brevis; M. gluteus maximus; M. gluteus medius; M. gluteus medius posterior; M. gluteus minimus anterior; M. gluteus minimus posterior; Biceps femoris longus; M. semitendinosus; M. semimembranosus; M. Sartorius; M. gracilis; Tensor fasciace latae; Rectus femoris; Biceps femoris brevis; Vastus lateralis; Vastus intermedialis; Vastus medialis; M. gastrocnemius medialis; M. gastrocnemius lateralis; M. soleus; M. tibialis anterior; and M. tibialis posterior 
                        [3]. The coordinates presented in his work conform to a human 177cm in height and 66.5kg in weight; however, for this simulation, CT scans of a human 186cm in height and 90kg in weight were used. In this analysis the geometry (positions of ligaments, muscles and tendons) was solved directly in the model but data were modified according to medical literature [40] so that they were in accordance with human anatomy and, at the same time, were in line with the surfaces of the reconstructed bones. As the last adjustment of this lower extremity model, knee ligaments were added. Twelve ligaments were implemented in the model in the same way as the muscles, i.e. ligament data were added according to literature [41,42], modified to fit the lower extremity geometry and validated by an experienced physician. Those ligaments were ACL ant.; ACL post.; PCL ant; PCL post.; MCL ant.; MCL obl.; MCL prof.; LCL; Post. capsule med.; Post. capsule lat.; Post. capsule, obl. popl.; and Post. capsule, arcu. popl. 
                        [3]. The final validated geometry is shown in 
                        Fig. 2. As can be seen in the figure, all the muscles were replaced by straight lines connecting the points of attachments of muscles to bones. These points had been chosen by White et al. [38] as gravity centres of bone surfaces where a muscle originates, or where a muscle tendon ends. The final complete assembly involved bones (femur, fibula, tibia and patella), muscles and ligaments according to the above-mentioned model description. The one and only original anatomic static stabiliser in this analysis was the articular capsule, which was replaced by a boundary condition applied to the patella (described below).

For the finite element model creation and the analysis described in this paper, ABAQUS [43] software was used. The finite element mesh of this assembly combined several types of elements. A schematic illustration of the used elements is shown in 
                        Fig. 3a; the data concerning mesh density are summarised in 
                        Table 1. The femur, tibia and fibula were meshed with C3D4 first-order tetrahedral elements; the patella as well as the femoral stem, the femoral component, the tibial base plate and the tibial stem meshes consisted of C3D10M second-order modified tetrahedral elements, which have hourglass control associated with their internal degrees of freedom. The C3D20R (quadratic hexahedral element with reduced integration) and C3D10M elements were combined in the hinge pin, hinge pin plug and both of the hinge pin bushing meshes. The mesh of the rotating hinge post consisted of a C3D15 (quadratic triangular prism element), C3D20R and C3D10M elements combination. For the muscles, CONN3D2 connector elements of the AXIAL type with two nodes and one degree of freedom were used. These elements connected gravity centres of points of attachments of muscles to bones and transferred only axial load. In the analysis only one tendon was specified; this was the patellar tendon which was represented by another connector of the AXIAL type (of 1000N/m rigidity). All the other tendons were components of the general lower extremity model. The ankle was replaced by a combination of JOIN and CARDAN connectors, which enabled independent rotation of the shin to the foot. The foot was replaced by a rigid part consisting of five points (ankle, heel muscles׳ tendons, m. tibialis anterior tendon, m. tibialis posterior tendon and the point of bottom to foot reaction force effect). For implant fixation, bone cement (polymethylmethacrylate) is usually used. In the designed model, this contact was replaced by a solid TIE connection, i.e. there was a presupposition of ideal solid bond completely transferring the entire loading from the implant to the bone and vice versa. A bond of the same type was used for the connection between the femur and tibia bones, and it was applied between all the PROSPON endoprosthesis components. Surface-to-surface contacts were used for the following contact pairs: femur–patella, femoral component–patella, femoral component–hinge pin bushing, and hinge pin–hinge pin bushing. The friction value for contact pairs was chosen to be 0.2, or 0.5 for pairs connecting a bone (i.e. femur–patella, femoral component–patella, femoral component–hinge pin bushing, hinge pin–hinge pin bushing) [3,44,45].

A simplified constitutive model was used to define the materials - there was a presupposition of homogenous, isotropic or linear material behaviour. The mechanical properties of the materials used for this analysis are summarised in 
                        Table 2. For all the materials except the UHMWPE, an elastic material model was used. The linear elastic material behaviour was defined using the following formula:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 σ
                                 =
                                 D
                                 ε
                              
                           
                        where σ is the total stress (true stress), D is the fourth-order elasticity tensor, and ε is the total elastic strain (logarithmic). The UHMWPE material was defined using an elastic–plastic material model due to the possibility of plastic deformation development; parameters of the material model are described in Table 2. The stress–strain dependence for the UHMWPE is depicted in Fig. 3b.

Boundary conditions were taken mainly from works by Vilímek and Čadová [44,45], in which they had determined forces in specific muscles during knee-bending with the use of static optimisation. Fig. 3c depicts forces in selected main knee musculotendons estimated by Vilímek. These forces were applied for the specific muscles connectors in this analysis model. Moreover, according to Vilímek, a rotation (flexion/extension) boundary condition was inserted into the centre of the femoral head. A boundary condition replacing a knee joint articular capsule was further applied on the patella surface through a connector which disabled medial–lateral translation of the patella and, at the same time, disabled patella rotation about the anteroposterior, vertical and horizontal axes. The ankle was replaced by a connector enabling independent rotation of the foot to the shin; the foot, which was replaced by a rigid part, could merely translate. A reaction force from the bottom to the foot was applied as well; the force was variable in time.

To confirm the designed model and its functionality in the lower extremity assembly, loading of the prosthesis during a knee-bending was analysed in a simulation. The analysis was focused on the PEEK-OPTIMA® hinged pin bushing stress state; contact pressures were analysed to confirm the stress state analysis results. Details of the analysed part of the prosthesis are depicted in Fig. 3d. The whole assembly was solved as a dynamic implicit model with automatic steps. The total time of the knee-bending simulation was 2.25s (from 15.4° to 69.4° hip joint flexion), and the step was 0.025s (i.e. 100 steps in total). The complete assembly in the initial (15.4° flexion) and the final (69.4° flexion) knee-bending position is shown in 
                        Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b, respectively. To verify the model, a comparison of our analysis results with the data previously obtained experimentally [3] was done.

@&#RESULTS@&#

An analysis focused on the Von Mises stress and the material plastic stability together with the contact pressure distribution on the PEEK hinged pin bushing surfaces during knee-bending in the 15.4–69.4° hip joint flexion range was carried out. To validate the designed endoprosthesis model before performing data analysis, a comparison of the simulation process with previously obtained experimental data was made [3]. In the experiment, ankle flexion angle during knee-bending was measured; the resulting comparison of the predicted and experimentally obtained data is shown in Fig. 4c. In the experiment the ankle flexion angle was 28.4° for the maximal hip joint flexion angle (69.4°), while in the FE analysis it was 32.7°. The maximal difference between the experimentally obtained and the predicted data is, therefore, 4.3°.

The Von Mises stress analysis results are shown in 
                        Fig. 5a (the initial position) and Fig. 5b (the final position). The simulation showed that the maximum stress value of 46.64MPa was achieved in the initial flexion angle. Stress distribution in the bushing is similar to the contact pressure distribution, i.e. at low hip joint flexion angle the maximum stress value affects the lateral bushing inner contact surface, whereas the maximum value decreases as the flexion angle increases and the medial bushing side becomes affected by the maximum stress value as well.

In 
                        Fig. 6a and b the contact pressure distributions for the initial and final knee-bending positions, respectively, are shown. In Fig. 6a the maximum contact pressure value of 60.32MPa can be seen. From the figure it is evident that in the initial position the maximum contact pressure affects only on the lateral bushing inner contact surface. As the flexion angle increases, i.e. the extremity goes to the knee-bending position the maximum contact pressure value decreases to 30.77MPa and, at the same time, the distribution of the pressure becomes more homogenous as it affects both, the lateral as well as the medial, sides of the bushing.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The main focus of work was to design a PROSPON knee endoprosthesis FE model and to confirm its functionality; for this purpose the ABAQUS software was used. The model was validated using previously obtained experimental data [3]. The experimental and predicted data are compared in Fig. 4c where it can be seen that the ankle angle progression during knee-bending previously obtained experimentally is in a good correlation with the data obtained during our simulation. On the basis of these findings, the results of the analysis including the designed finite element model can be considered as relevant. Mesh density was chosen based on a reasonable computational time together with relevance of the results; mesh refinement is suggested to influence the results only marginally [29].

For the analysis, the knee-bending position was chosen on the basis of the presumption of the wrong effect of the knee-bending position on the endoprosthesis lifetime; the bushing was supposed to be more stressed in a larger hip-joint flexion. The primary focus of Von Mises stress analysis was on the condition of plastic stability. From the Von Mises stress calculations it is evident that the maximum stress value achieved during the analysis (46.64MPa) (Fig. 5a) did not exceed the PEEK material yield strength (90 MPa according to Ref. [3]); therefore no plastic deformation of the prosthesis occurred and the condition of plastic stability was met.

Contact pressure analysis was performed to confirm the stress state investigated during the Von Mises stress analysis; this additional parameter had been chosen on the basis of several studies published elsewhere [20,28]. The contact pressure distribution is in accordance with the distribution of Von Mises stress; from Fig. 6a and b it can be seen that the maximal pressure value occurrs locally on the lateral bushing side in the lower hip joint flexion angle whereas, as the hip joint flexion angle increases, the contact pressure distribution becomes more homogenous and the maximal value decreases. These findings are in accordance with the Von Mises stress analysis results.

The results of the analysis imply that the effect of the knee-bending position on the endoprosthesis is not so harmful since the stress distribution in the bushing for larger flexion is more homogeneous than for lower flexion angle. Moreover, the maximum stress value was almost twice as high for the lower flexion angle as in the deeper knee-bending position. Since a higher stress value locally affecting the lateral bushing side is more harmful than a lower stress value distributed more homogeneously on both sides of the bushing it can be said that the lower hip-joint flexion, i.e. a position near the standing position, can affect the endoprosthesis lifetime more negatively than the knee-bending position. However, pressure reduction in the deeper knee-bending position can be due to loads being transferred through the other bony structures or ligaments implemented in the general lower extremity model since their acting forces decrease the pin bushing stress loading with increasing flexion angle. Furthermore, with increasing flexion angle the loading force vector orientation changes. The value of the stress acting on the pin bushing is influenced by the rotation of the thigh to the shin and therefore by the contact surface size, which varies with flexion angle as well. However, it is necessary to mention that only the PEEK-OPTIMA® hinged pin bushing is analysed. Additional loads can be transferred not only by bony structures, ligaments and muscles, but also by the other prosthesis components as well.

There can be a different number of muscles and bones in individual cases. Only the main muscles were chosen to be implemented into this analysis. The musculotendon forces were based on previous works by Vilímek [44]. He investigated the forces by recording the electromyographic activity (EMG) of joint actuators. Subsequently, the data were optimised using three different optimisation methods. The static optimisation model seemed to be the most suitable. It can be assumed that for different methods of recording, as well as for different optimisation methods, the obtained musculotendon forces can be slightly different. This can be considered to be a limitation of this work. After the stability of the materials used is predicted, it is also necessary to study the real behaviour of the whole endoprosthesis in individual cases. A study in which children with sarcomas were treated using the PROSPON prostheses was carried out recently [46]. Nevertheless, the simulation was carried out to demonstrate functionality of the designed model; individual cases are beyond the framework of this analysis.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The objective of this paper was to design a finite element model for a hinged PROSPON oncological knee endoprosthesis. Verification of the model was done by comparison with previously obtained ankle flexion angle in knee-bending experimental data. The comparison showed maximal deviation of 4.3° for the largest investigated hip-flexion angle (69.4°); on the basis of this finding the model can be considered as relevant. Analysis was carried out of the knee-bending position in 15.4–69.4° hip joint flexion range. According to the results, the condition of plastic stability was met; the maximum Von Mises stress (46.6MPa) did not exceed the yield strength of the material (90MPa), and contact pressures distribution confirmed the Von Mises stress distribution. On the basis of the results the final finite element model can be considered to be in accordance with the real endoprosthesis behaviour and thus it can be used to carry out various simulations implementing different numbers of muscles or ligaments according to individual cases. In further studies the model will be investigated under dynamic loading.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was carried out under the Project no. CZ.1.05/2.1.00/01.0040 of ‘Regional Materials Science and Technology Centre’ within the framework of the operation program ‘Research and Development for Innovations’, financed through the Structural Funds and from the state budget of the Czech Republic under the grant of Ministry of Industry of the Czech Republic 
                  FR-TI3/221.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

