@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Modeling of transcatheter aortic valve replacement: Patient specific vs general approaches based on finite element analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The modeling of calcium deposits and leaflets will improve the FEA of the TAVR.


                        
                        
                           
                           Neither patient specific nor generalized approach has clear advantage over the other.


                        
                        
                           
                           Generalized approach is more cost effective way of FEA-based TAVR modeling.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Aortic root

Finite element analysis

Transcatheter heart valves

Calcification

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  There are two main methods used for transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) FEA modeling for medical devices development: patient specific and general approaches. Advantages and disadvantages of both approaches have never been compared in a single study.
               
               
                  Method
                  Here we propose a bioinformatic algorithm to evaluate the accuracy of patient specific and generalized FEA approaches with regards to proximity configuration of the implanted stent reconstructed by computed tomography. In addition, in this study we also assessed the impact of the level of detail on FEA accuracy in the patient specific approach.
               
               
                  Results
                  Our results demonstrate that in certain cases, the generalized approach can ensure the same accuracy as the patient specific approach. Therefore, considering high cost effectiveness of the generalized approach, we identify it as more feasible in the context of TAVR. Furthermore, we suggest that high level of detail can improve the reproducibility of modeling results in the patient specific approach.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our findings may help medical engineers to better understand the peculiarities of both approaches and therefore make the right decision when choosing a particular approach for computer modeling. Future studies are required to validate our observations.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In developed countries, the dramatic increase in average life expectancy during the last century have resulted in a surge in the incidence of aortic stenosis (AS), a valvular heart disease which is common in elderly people [1]. According to recent statistical analysis, AS affects approximately 3% of population over 75 years of age [2]. One third of patients with AS are not candidates for surgical valve replacement due to severe comorbidities that increase the risk of perioperative mortality [3]. For this group of patients, transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is a suitable and minimally invasive alternative, demonstrating impressive clinical and economic effectiveness over the past decade [4,5]. However, the existing transcatheter prostheses are largely inferior to the classical surgical prostheses in terms of durability, reliability and risks of complications [6]. Much effort is being put in the development of TAVR prostheses with better design, as it has paramount importance for their performance.

Contemporary methods of mathematical and computer modeling, in particular, finite element analysis (FEA), are widely used in the development of medical devices, enabling to perform the in-depth analysis of the organ-implant interaction [7,8]. Currently, there are two essentially different FEA-based approaches for TAVR modeling. The first approach, generalized, implies the use of either an averaged aortic root (AR) geometry obtained from measurements performed in large groups of patients [9], or generic models with a simplified geometry, but complex structure [10]. Although this approach does not enable to reproduce a highly detailed geometry of the system as well as extreme cases of pathological anatomy, it potentially has a significant advantage in performance, and can be used for modeling complex systems; for example, the Heart Living Project, where finite element analysis is employed to simulate the behavior of cardiomyocytes [10].

Another methodology that has become very popular in the last few years is the patient specific approach, which is based on computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) aided de novo 3D reconstruction of the AR and leaflet apparatus models of a single patient [11]. Although this method is more labor-intensive and time consuming, it provides good accuracy and takes into account potential calcium deposits within the AR. However, it is still unclear what level of detail is necessary and sufficient for TAVR modeling, as more details require much more time spent on prosthesis development.

Advantages and disadvantages of both approaches have never been compared in a single study and it is therefore imperative to identify what method is more preferable for TAVR modeling in terms of time cost and quality. In this study, we developed a bioinformatic approach to compare the accuracy of generalized and patient specific FEA approaches for TAVR modeling. In addition, we examined how the level of detail for patient specific FEA modeling affected the results of implantation modeling. Our data demonstrate that patient specific FEA model of the AR has no advances over the generalized AR model reconstructed on the basis of clinical data from 137 patients. Having performed the analysis of the level of detail for FEA modeling, we identify that modeling results are more affected by variants of the description of the AR material rather than the presence of additional elements, such as leaflets or calcium deposits.

A 72-year-old female was admitted to the Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases with stage 3 arterial hypertension and aortic valve calcification. Preoperative echocardiography showed severe left ventricular hypertrophy and normal contractility of the left ventricle. The CoreValve (Medtronic, USA) transcatheter aortic valve bioprosthesis (29mm) was implanted using the transfemoral delivery catheter system under direct image-guidance (
                        Fig. 1d–h).Upon deployment, a control angiogram was performed to confirm the absence of regurgitation, violation of atrioventricular conduction, or compromise of coronary blood flow (Fig. 1i). No clinical complications were reported. After surgery, the patient underwent the repeated coronal CT imaging without contrast (Fig. 1j–l). The study was performed in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and had been approved by the local ethical committee

FEA modeling of the CoreValve bioprosthesis (Fig. 1a) was made by using the experimental microcomputed tomography scanner. The following settings were used for scanning after adjustment for size and X-ray density of the bioprosthesis: voltage 200kV, current 2.7mA, copper filter thickness 0.5mm, exposure 1s, angular step 0.4°, number of projections 900, voxel size 64.4μm.

Based on CT imaging (Fig. 1b), the model of the CoreValve bioprosthesis was reconstructed using the finite element mesh of 17,070 C3D8 elements (Fig. 1c). Material properties of a superelastic nickel–titanium alloy Nitinol were applied to the resulting finite element mesh in accordance with Aurichio׳s model [12,13]. We failed to reconstruct the model of the leaflet apparatus due to a large difference in the X-ray density of the bioprosthesis and the leaflet apparatus.

We previously described an approach for the development of the computer-based 3D model of the aortic root (AR) [9]. Briefly, computed tomography (CT) was performed to measure AR elements of the patient. The analysis was performed using the Siemens Sensation SOMATOM 64CT scanner (Siemens, Germany). Scan direction was craniocaudal, and the following CT characteristics were set: field of view 200mm; pitch 0.7mm; tube voltage 120kV; electrocardiogram sync 1mm; and section thickness 1mm. The contrast agent Ultravist at iodine concentration of 370mg/mL was used for intravenous injection at a dose rate of 1–1.5mL/kg of body weight. 3D reconstruction of the sections was performed using the Amira software (FEI, Germany). The use of grayscale gradient coloration spectrum allowed us to visualize the aortic wall as well as calcium deposits.

On the basis of CT imaging, we reconstructed 3D models of the AR and leaflets utilizing the UGS NX 8.0 design software (Siemens, Germany). The finite element mesh was generated using the ABAQUS/CAE software (Dassault Systems, France) with 56,912 C3D8 elements for the AR and 2877 S4 elements for the leaflet apparatus (
                        Fig. 2a–d). The modeling of calcium deposits was directly performed in the Amira software using the tetrahedral mesh of 7316 C3D4 elements based on the X-ray density of calcium (Fig. 2e).

The resulting patient specific model was compared to a generalized FEA model of the AR described by our group previously [10]. Briefly, this AR model has a simplified geometry and was reconstructed in the same way on the basis of echocardiography measurements of 117 patients and coronary CT imaging of 20 patients with and without aortic valvular disease (Fig. 2f–l). The resulting model consisted of 60′426 C3D8 elements.

The modeling of implantation was performed using 5 patient specific models (psa132, psa221, psa212, psa222, and psa232) with different level of detail (
                        Table 1) and a generalized model (ga000) from our previous study [9].

The modeling of TAVI implantation was performed in two steps. The bioprosthesis was first loaded into the delivery catheter system by radial displacement of the catheter (Fig. 1m). At the second stage, the bioprosthesis was released by shifting the catheter along its longitudinal axis (Fig. 1n and o). The model of the catheter was reconstructed using the finite element mesh of 5000 M3D4 elements.

After interaction between the bioprosthesis and the AR, an artificial viscoelastic damping component was introduced to stabilize dynamic components of the system. The energetic contribution of this damping component did not exceed 0.8% of the total system energy. For the modeling of all elements of the system, the paired softened contact was used («penalty», coefficient of friction µ=0.2 [17]). There was no friction or mutual penetration (the «hard» contact) during the catheter–frame interaction. For the experiments with the leaflets, the leaflets model was connected to the aorta via geometric grids with rigidly predetermined distance between nodes (the «tie» contact). To prevent mutual penetration of frame finite elements, the «self» contact was used.

Second-order polynomial nonlinear model based on the previous study was used for modeling the AR (
                        Table 2 
                        [14]). Nitinol description (Auricchio model) of the stent was used according to the ABAQUS UMAT subroutine [13]. Linear models were used to model the calcium deposits and leaflet apparatus (E=10MPa) [16] as well as calcified aortic annulus (E=22.6MPa) [15].

In order to compare the results of implantation modeling with post TAVR CT images of the implanted bioprosthesis, we developed a bioinformatic algorithm using the MATLAB R2014a software (The MathWorks, USA). In this algorithm, 11 orthogonal slices of the stent were made in accordance with either CT imaging or FEA modeling results (
                        Fig. 3b), which was previously described in [18] For each slice, CT- and FEA-derived arrays of points that correspond to the center of the beam were overlaid in a cylindrical coordinate system in order to identify the error of modeling (Fig. 3a). The algorithm performed a search for the central axis and then calculated a provisional error minimization for sections׳ rotation in relation to each other. Then, the computer program identified the minimum distance between the corresponding points and calculated the modeling error in each of the 11 slices (δ
                        sum), or the sum of deviations for the entire model (Σδ
                        sum). In addition, FEA dataset was approximated to the ellipse (in accordance with the canonical equation of the ellipse), followed by the calculation of minor and major elliptical radii, the eccentricity of the ellipse, and the area of the ellipse. The source code of the algorithm is provided in Supplementary material 1.

@&#RESULTS@&#

We first sought to identify how the level of detail affects the accuracy of the patient specific FEA modeling (Fig. 3c). In total, the implanted model differed from the initial geometry of the bioprosthesis by 71% (the ratio of Σδ
                        sum of the original geometry to Σδ
                        sum of the average FEA results was 171%) (Fig. 3d). In particular, the average value of the total error was within 17.9–29.3mm (8–16%, respectively to the radial distance) for each slice (Fig. 3c). Importantly, we found that the total error of FEA modeling was unrelated to the level of detail, as the difference of the total error value did not exceed 11% between models with various levels of detail (Fig. 3d). Unexpectedly, the highest total error was observed for the psa221 model, which reflects the most detailed description of the system: separate description of aorta properties, calcified leaflets, and calcium deposits (Fig. 3d).

In clinical practice, the position of implanted bioprosthesis is examined by measuring the eccentricity of the supporting nitinol stent, as this parameter is important for predicting regurgitation and performance of the leaflet apparatus [19–21]. In our study, the greatest difference of the eccentricity with CT data was observed for the patient specific model with the lowest level of detail psa232 (84%) as well as for the generalized model ga000 (80%) (Fig. 3e). The model with the highest level of detail (psa221) accurately repeated CT data in slices 1–3, which correspond to the inflow part of the bioprosthesis (error <4%). For medium and outflow parts of the bioprosthesis (slices 4–11), eccentricity values significantly differed from CT measurements in all of the tested models (Fig. 3e). The ratio of averaged eccentricity values obtained as a result of modeling to reference CT data varied from 26% (psa221) to 84% (psa232) across the models (Fig. 3f).

Interesting results were observed for the models characterized by the lowest level of detail and differing only in the description of the material of the aorta (psa132 and psa232). On one hand, these models had significantly altered eccentricity values compared to CT data (39% and 80%, respectively); on the other hand, the sum of deviations (Σδ
                        sum) for these two models did not significantly differ, suggesting that material parameters play an important role in FEA modeling of implantation (Fig. 3d–f).

Overall, our studies suggest that the level of detail has little impact on the accuracy of the patient specific FEA modeling.

We then questioned if the generalized approach has a comparable accuracy to the patient specific method. For that, we developed a bioinformatic algorithm to identify how FEA modeling results from both approaches match with actual parameters of the AR. Strikingly, our results showed that the generalized model ga000 had the highest similarity with CT data when evaluating the error using struts deviation algorithm (Fig. 3c). For the patient specific approach, the model psa132 showed the closest proximity to the model ga000 (Σδ
                        sum=233.4mm vs 243.15mm, respectively), whereas the model psa221 showed the maximum deviation from the ga000 results (Σδ
                        sum=284.9mm vs 233.4mm, respectively).

However, when evaluating the eccentricity, the patient specific models demonstrated closer proximity to CT data in comparison with the g000 model (Fig. 3e). In particular, the best results for this parameter were obtained for the model psa221, the average eccentricity of which was 73% similar to CT data. Interestingly, for all the patient specific models except psa232, eccentricity values had the closest proximity to CT data in the inflow zone of the stent (slices 1–3), whereas middle and outflow zones (slices 4–11) showed a considerable deviation. It is also important to note that the model ga000 demonstrated nearly zero eccentricity (0.03), which may be explained by constructive restrictions of the generalized model. Overall, these studies suggest that neither approach has accuracy advantage over the other, since the accuracy of the patient specific approach estimated through eccentricity was offset by a loss in the absolute accuracy determined by a strut position.

We then asked how different approaches of TAVR modeling affect the functional characteristics of the stent. We calculated the cross sectional area of approximation ellipse of the stent for both approaches (
                        Fig. 4a), as this parameter determines multiple characteristics of the bioprosthesis, including valve performance and radial force balance of the stent.

The closest proximity to CT measurements regarding to the ellipse area was observed for the model with highest level of detail psa221 in slices 1–5, which contain the aortic annulus area (Fig. 1a). However, for the generalized model and other patient specific models, this parameter was similar and had high proximity to the initial geometry of the stent (average area 550mm2 for slice 2). This observation was further confirmed by the qualitative analysis of stent deformation: the highest proximity to CT data was demonstrated for the model psa221, suggesting the importance of calcium-leaflets interaction (Fig. 4b and c).

The other major characteristics of the TAVR procedure are the stress–strain resulting from the biomechanical interaction between the stent and the AR. These parameters define the risk of stent fatigue and device failure (frame strain), and AR wall rupture or AR aneurysm (biomaterial stress) [22]. The maximum logarithmic principal strain value of 0.032 for the final state of the TAVR frame was observed for the model psa221, which was significantly lower than the critical value of 0.07 (Fig. 4b and c). Having measured the von Mises stress in the biomaterial, we found that critical values of the stress also have not been exceeded (the tensile strength values of the ascending aorta, and aortic annulus are 1.4 and 3.7MPa, respectively) [14]. In particular, the maximum stress value obtained for the aortic annulus was 1.8MPa in the model psa232 (Fig. 4d–f).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Proper FEA-based modeling of TAVR will enable developing bioprostheses of appropriate sizing and positioning; however, the gold standard for TAVR modeling has yet to be established. Here, we developed a bioinformatics tool to compare the performance of generalized and patient specific approaches for TAVR modeling.

Having evaluated the modeling error in 11 slices of the stent (δ
                     sum) and the sum of deviations for the entire stent (Σδ
                     sum), we suggest that the level of detail has no major impact on the accuracy of modeling results in the patient specific approach. On average, the results of modeling demonstrated intermediate values between CT data and original stent geometry (Fig. 4a). However, it is not clear whether the presence of calcium deposits or leaflet apparatus influences the accuracy of modeling. Furthermore, the model with the highest level of detail psa221 only slightly differed from the generalized model g000 according to the direct method of accuracy evaluation (Σδ
                     sum difference of 18.3%). These findings can be explained by relatively small geometric dimensions of calcium deposits and small thickness of the leaflets, so that they cannot exert sufficient influence on the final geometry of the stent. Similar results were obtained for the aortic annulus, where models psa132 (same material for the whole aorta) and psa232 (different material model for the aortic annulus) differed only by 5.5% (Σδ
                     sum). We therefore suggest that the aortic annulus material description has little contribution to the final geometry of the stent and the AR because of its small size.

It should be mentioned, however, that the analysis of eccentricity demonstrated a clear advantage of patient specific models over the generalized model ga000 (Fig. 3e and f). It seems that the level of detail plays a significant role in the eccentricity, as the model with the highest level of detail showed closer proximity to CT data as compared to the model with low level of detail psa232 (Fig. 3e and f). This inconsistency with our previous results can be explained by the fact that the generalized model does not originally account for eccentricity of the aortic annulus, and consequently, geometry of the stent is alike to a cylinder. Taking into account the importance of the eccentricity in the clinical effectiveness of TAVR [19], it is reasonable to consider this geometric feature of the aorta for reducing the risk of complications; however, this would be only possible when utilizing the patient specific FEA approach with the high level of detail.

The analysis of the functional characteristics of the implanted prosthesis, in particular, cross-sectional area of approximate ellipse, did not enable us to draw definitive conclusions about the advantage of an approach over the other. On the one hand, the model with the highest level of detail psa221 was in the close proximity with CT data in the majority of slices. On the other hand, however,the rest of the patient specific models as well as the generalized model ga000 had relatively little proximity with CT data on the whole (Fig. 4a). According to this, we suggest that the highest level of detail is preferential when using the patient specific approach, as it may improve functional characteristics of the bioprosthesis.

Interesting findings were obtained when analyzing the stress resulting from the interaction of the bioprosthesis with the AR. The von Mises stress diagrams obtained for various models revealed a major role of calcium deposits and leaflets, which seem to redistribute stress within the model (Fig. 4d–f). The presence of the above mentioned elements decrease the stress of the aortic annulus, partially taking over the stress and distributing it over the sinuses of Valsalva (Fig. 4d and e). Therefore, we assume that modeling of leaflets and calcium deposits provides a more comprehensive description of the interaction between the stent and the AR.

In the similar study by Russ et al. [18], the circumference error of the FEA model of the implanted CoreValve bioprosthesis was 4.2% to 7.4%, depending on the aorta deformation material model and the presence of calcium deposits. The authors found that the accuracy of results was improved when modeling valve leaflets and calcium deposits, suggesting that high level of detail is feasible for FEA-based TAVR modeling. In our studies, we found a comparable difference between FEA data and CT data, as well as considerable importance of the material used in modeling. However, error deviation in our studies was much more pronounced, depending on the type of analysis.

An important limitation of our study is that the patient specific approach was based on the analysis of only one clinical case. Also, we used a simplified method for the reconstruction of the leaflet apparatus, which is less accurate in comparison with three-dimensional echocardiography, a method recommended for future studies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The patient specific approach has been proposed as a more accurate way of TAVR modeling. Intuitively, modeling additional geometric elements such as calcium deposits and leaflet apparatus must improve the fidelity of TAVR modeling. In this study we show that patient specific approach requires a substantial degree of subject specificity. Nonetheless, we also show that with regards to certain parameters, for example, modeling error and area of ellipse, the generalized approach can be as effective as patient specific approach. However, further studies involving larger sample size for patient specific model are needed to confirm our observations.

None.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to express their gratitude to Dr. Abul Siddiky MB ChB (Hons), MSc. MRCSEd, DPhil, for careful proofreading of the manuscript.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2015.12.001.


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

