@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Piperine derivatives as potential inhibitors of Survivin: An in silico molecular docking

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Molecular docking shows strong inhibition of some Piperine derivatives to Survivin.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hydrogen bonding and van der Waals interactions have role in the binding process.


                        
                        
                           
                           Piperine derivatives may interfere with the function of Survivin in mitosis.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Survivin

Piperine

Anticancer drug

Inhibitor

Molecular docking

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               Graphical abstract
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Apoptosis, the process of programmed cell death (PCD), is a natural defense mechanism to remove damaged or abnormal cells that arise in different ways. This process is inhibited by a family of special proteins which are called inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) [1]. All of the members of this group have one to three Baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR) domains which is essential to their inhibitory activities. IAPs can bind to caspases which are the essential proteins in apoptosis and subsequently, deactivate their activity [2]. After the apoptotic stimulus, secondary mitochondrial activator of caspase (Smac), which is also referred to as direct IAP binding protein with low pI (DIABLO), is released from the inner mitochondrial membrane into the cytosol; thus, disrupting the inhibitory activity of IAPs on caspases. As a result, Smac/DIABLO acts as a deactivator for apoptosis inhibitors [3]. The identification of Smac as a natural inhibitor of IAPs has motivated scientists to explore Smac mimetics. It has been reported that compounds synthesized based on Smac structure can bind to BIR domains of IAPs, causing caspases to be released from this unit, and thus promoting apoptosis [4]. Survivin, the smallest member of IAPs family is a 16.5kDa protein with 142 amino acid residues. Its tertiary structure contains a long C-terminal α- helix (amino acid residues: 100–140) and a single N-terminal BIR domain (amino acid residues: 15–89) [5]. The BIR domain consists of a three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet bordered by four small α-helices. Moreover, one zinc which is tetrahedrally coordinated by one histidine and three cysteine residues is responsible for stabilizing the BIR domain. The crystal structure of Survivin shows a homodimeric arrangement with the dimer interface shaped by amino acid residues 6–10 and 89–102 [6]. This protein has two outstanding features; besides its significant role in inhibiting apoptosis, it is essential in cell division. Survivin participates in chromosomal passenger complex (CPC). It has been shown that binding of Survivin to the phosphorylated form of the histone H3 N-terminus (H3-T3ph) is essential in CPC formation and thereby functions as a key regulator of chromosomal segregation and cytokinesis [7]. It was shown that Survivin inhibits apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo 
                     [8], perhaps via interactions with different regulators of two apoptosis pathways [4]. Survivin is expressed in fetal tissues and different types of cancer cells [9]. Over-expression of Survivin enhances resistance to apoptotic stimuli in many malignancies [10]. The most remarkable property of Survivin which has made it unique among other members of IAPs family is its negligible population in differentiated normal tissues [6]. Thus, the inhibition of Survivin as a cancer specific protein that leads to apoptosis in cancer cells, does not affect the normal tissues much. Despite the growing amount of knowledge about Survivin in the last decade, the development of Survivin inhibitors is relatively slow as compared to other therapeutic inhibitors for cancer treatment which is a matter of concern [6]. In other words, one cannot deny the fact that novel inhibitors with higher efficacy must be developed. Alkaloids are diverse plant-origin chemical substances composed of nitrogen atom and a ring structure. They are known as the most significant active ingredients in herbs and rich sources for drug discovery. Alkaloids exhibit antimetastasis and antiproliferation effects on different types of cancers both in vitro and in vivo 
                     [11,12]. Piperine, as a pungent alkaloid with the molecular formula C17H19O3N, isolated from Piper nigrum and Piper longum, is a compound found in famous spices that have been used for centuries [13] (
                     Scheme1).

It shows several pharmaceutical activities and can also inhibit breast stem cell self-renewal without affecting the differentiated cells [14,15]. The inhibition of solid tumor growth and antimetastatic properties against lung metastasis in mice have also been reported for this compound [16,17]. Moreover, Sherif et al. screened 55 compounds from natural productsin combination with tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells. They identified Piperine as the most potent adjuvant at enhancing the efficacy of TRAIL-based therapies in TNBC cells in vitro and in vivo, which might be mediated through inhibition of Survivin [18]. This hypothesis has been also examined on Withanone as another herbal ligand and its binding properties to Survivin have been comprehensively investigated using molecular docking tools. After analyzing the results, it has been suggested that Withanone could be a potent anticancer drug candidate due to its potential to inhibit Survivin activity through interfering with the inhibitory action of Survivin against caspases [2]. Moreover, Muthukumar et al. investigated molecular interaction of Survivin and Piperine through molecular docking analyses for neuroblastoma targeting. Binding mode as well as interactions are explained in this study and their results represent the possible binding of Piperine to the active site of Survivin with a good energy level (the estimating binding free energy (ΔG) was −14.04kJ/mol) [19].

Considering the significant role of Survivin in cancer progression and the ability of Piperine in inhibiting Survivin and regarding the fact that there is not any computational study on the interactions of Piperine analogs and Survivin in the literature, it would be of interest to do computational studies on the binding of Piperine and its analogs with Survivin to gain knowledge about their inhibition properties with a certain level of accuracy. For this purpose, in the present study the interactions of this natural compound and some of its previously synthesized analogs with Survivin have been investigated using molecular docking tools. The selected Piperine analogs have been previously synthesized and showed inhibitory activity on monoamine oxidase [20]. The results of this study would help us to explore structure–activity relationship of these analogs that consequentely would lead us to design new compounds with higher efficacy. Furthermore, their binding modes, binding energies, the number of hydrogen bonds and the essential functional groups participated in the interactions of Piperine analogs and Survivin have been reported. All the docking results were performed with AutoDock 4.2. Finally, the interactions of H3-T3ph with Survivin in its binding site were also explored using molecular docking calculations. Afterwards, the binding site of this compound and that of the Piperine derivatives were compared in order to find out whether these compounds can interfere with the formation of Survivin–H3-T3ph complex and therefore disrupt the function of Survivin in cell division.

The initial coordinates of Survivin–Smac/DIABLO complex were obtained from Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb) (PDB IDs: 3UIH).This file of protein was chosen because it has no missing atom, has a reasonable resolution and contains Smac/DIABLO. The chemical structures of ligands were drawn in GaussView. In order to get the most stable geometry, these structures were optimized through employing the Becke three-parameter Lee–Yang–Parr (B3LYP) hybrid density functional theory at the 6–31
                        G
                        ⁎⁎ basis set using the quantum chemistry software Gaussian03. The output files were saved in PDB format.

Molecular docking calculations were performed byAutoDock4.2 program package using the AutoDock empirical free energy function and the Lamarckian genetic algorithm with local search. First of all, water molecules were removed from the initial structure of protein as well as Smac molecule and then missing hydrogens and Gasteiger charges were added to the system during the preparation of the protein input file. AutoDockTools was used for the preparation of coordinate files of ligands and protein (PDBQT). Afterwards, pre-calculation of grid maps was done using AutoGrid in order to save a lot of time during the docking. After docking Smac/DIABLO as the reference ligand back into Survivin, the RMSD (root mean square deviation) value between the docked Smac/DIABLO and the reference Smac/DIABLO was 1.45Å. The superimposition of the obtained binding modes of Smac/DIABLO from docking calculation and experimental data represents high similarity between the two. This high similarity and the calculated RMSD value confirm the validity of AutoDock 4.2 for the docking of ligands to Survivin. 
                           Fig. 1a and b shows the binding mode and detailed interactions of Smac/DIABLO in the binding site of Survivin, respectively. With respect to this figure, Smac interacts with Leu54, Leu64 and Trp67 as hydrophobic and Glu51, Glu63, Glu65, Glu76, Lys62, Asp71 and His80 as hydrophilic residues. The aforementioned interactions along with the hydrogen bond between Val2 residue of Smac and Glu65 of protein, stabilize the binding mode of Smac.

The 3D structure of Survivin–Smac/DIABLO complex shows that Smac binding site is located in BIR domain of this protein. Therefore, the docking calculations were performed by locating a grid map with 60×60×60Å3 points and a grid-point spacing of 0.375Å which was centered on the Smac binding site in a way that all the amino acid residues in this site were incorporated in the grid. The number of independent docking runs performed for each docking simulation was set to 200 with 25,000,000 energy evaluations for each run. The default values of program were used for other docking parameters.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The first step of drug design is the computational approach. Molecular docking which is probably the most heavily used computer-aided tool for this purpose reduces the cost of drug production substantially. It is used to identify the compounds which bind to a protein well and to see the 3-D structure of the compounds bound in the protein׳s binding site. This technique plays a key role both in pharmaceutical studies and in drug design. At the first step of drug design, medicinal chemists analyze a large amount of compounds with docking. Subsequently, the compounds that have the best docking results will be synthesized and sent to the laboratory for more analyses. Regarding the ability of Piperine in inhibiting Survivin, a group of 18 previously synthesized Piperine derivatives has been chosen from the literature to evaluate their inhibitory effects against Survivin (
                        Table 1) [20].

The superimposition of the docking poses of Smac and Piperine derivatives in the binding site of Survivin that was generated by AutoDock 4.2 is shown in 
                        Fig. 2. This represents that Smac binding site which is a cavity in the BIR domain, would be also the binding site of these compounds with suitable binding energies ranging from −19.93 to −30.43kJ/mol.

The calculated binding free energies and relevant inhibition constants are presented in 
                        
                        
                        Tables 2–4. For deeper elucidation, the interactions of compound 1 (Piperine) in the binding site are shown in 
                        Fig. 3. With respect to this figure, Piperine interacts with Leu54, Leu64 and Trp67 as hydrophobic and Glu63, Glu65, Glu76, Asp71 and His80 as hydrophilic residues. These mentioned interactions accompanied by a hydrogen bond between one of the oxygens of 1, 3-Benzodioxol group of Piperine and Glu65, stabilize the binding mode of Piperinein the binding site of Survivin.

To explore the structure–activity relationship (SAR), these compounds are divided into three scaffolds with respect to their structural similarity. The binding details of each scaffold are presented in the following subsections.

The general chemical structure of compounds in this group is presented in 
                           Scheme 2.

Compounds 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10 and 11 belong to this category.

The superimposition of the conformations with the minimum binding energies shows the similar binding modes of these analogs (
                           Fig. 4a).

Compounds 6 and 9 have the minimum binding energies among the members of this group. In order to demonstrate the binding modes of these analogs, detailed interactions of compound 9 are shown in Fig. 4b. As can be seen, hydrophilic residues (Glu63, Glu65, Glu76, Asp71, and His80) and hydrophobic residues (Leu54, Leu64, Gly66, and Trp67) interact with this compound. These results are presented in the Table 2.The comparison between predicted binding energies of compounds 3 and 4 suggests that substitution of the amide moiety (NH) with a more hydrophobic group results in an analog with a higher activity. On the basis of the docking scores of compounds 2, 10 and 11, it can be found that substitution of hydrogen in the –COOH group of compound 2 with lipophilic groups on compounds 10 and 11 improves the inhibitory activity. Compounds 1 and 9 have the same structures except for the fact that in compound 9, in which carbonyl group is removed, the binding energy has been improved. In conclusion, substitution of more hydrophobic R groups in this group results in lower binding energies.

The chemical structure of compounds in this scaffold is shown in 
                           Scheme 3.

As can be seen in Table 3, compounds 7 and 8 have similar structures except for their R groups.

The superimposition of the docking poses with the minimum binding energy reveals that compounds 7 and 8 have similar binding modes (
                           Fig. 5a).

Compounds 7 and 8 have almost the same binding energies but to clarify the binding modes of these analogs, only the detailed interactions of compound 8 are shown in Fig. 5b. As can be seen, Glu63, Glu65, Glu76, Glu51 and Asp71, as hydrophilic residues, and Leu54, Leu64 and Trp67, as hydrophobic residues, interact with this compound. In this analog, the methoxy group forms two hydrogen bonds with Lys62 and Glu63. Binding energy and inhibition constants of these analogs are represented in Table 3. Comparing binding energies of the compounds in this category with Piperine suggests that different substitutions other than dioxol could be integrated into the benzene of Piperine to give inhibitors with better efficacy.

The general chemical structure of compounds in this group has been shown in 
                           Scheme 4.

With respect to this scheme, compounds 12–18 that are presented in this scaffold, have similar structures except for their R group (Table 4).

The superimposition of the docking poses with the minimum binding energy reveals that they have similar binding modes in the binding site of Survivin (
                           Fig. 6a).

The minimum binding energy in this category belongs to Compound 16. In order to demonstrate the binding modes of these analogs, detailed interactions of this compound are shown in Fig. 6b. As can be seen, hydrophilic residues Glu63, Glu65, Glu76, Glu51, Asp71 and His80 and hydrophobic residues Leu54, Leu64 and Trp67 in the binding site of the protein interact with this compound. Furthermore, one of the oxygens of 1, 3-Benzodioxol group and nitrogen atom of piperazine ring of this compound, were found to interact with Asp71 and Glu51 via two hydrogen bonds, respectively.

The binding energy and inhibition constants of these analogs are presented in Table 4. On the basis of the docking scores of compounds 13 and 14, it can be found that substitution of the amide moiety (NH) with a more hydrophobic group results in an analog with a higher inhibitory activity. It can be inferred from the binding energies of compounds 17 and 18 that substitution of the carboxyl group with more hydrophobic group results in an analog with a higher inhibitory activity.

In this section, 7 pairs of these ligands have been defined: (1 and 12), (3 and 13), (4 and 14), (5 and 15), (6 and 16), (10 and 17), (11 and 18). In each pair, the two compounds have the same structure except for the fact that the first one has the conjugated double bonds in the linker chain while the other one does not. Comparing the obtained binding energy for these pair ligands represents the higher activity of analogs with conjugated double bonds.

As mentioned before, Survivin as a member of CPC plays a crucial role in mitosis. It has been shown that binding of Survivin to the phosphorylated form of the histone H3 N-terminus (H3-T3ph) is essential in CPC formation [21]. Survivin has an available binding site on its BIR domain to identify H3-T3ph. In this study, the binding site of this compound and that of the Piperine derivatives were compared in order to find out if the ligands can interfere with the formation of Survivin–H3-T3ph complex and thus disrupt the function of Survivin in cell division. Therefore, a molecular docking calculation of H3-T3ph and Survivin has been performed. The PDB file of Survivin–H3-T3ph complex were obtained from Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (PDB IDs: 3UEE) (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb). With respect to this crystallographic file, the binding sites of H3-T3ph and Piperine analogs are the same. Moreover, docking H3-T3ph to Survivin recognized the same binding site; thus, validating the docking calculations for this complex. Results show the binding energy of −23.40kJ/mol for H3-T3ph and Survivin. The detailed interactions of H3-T3ph and Survivin have been shown in 
                        Fig. 7, it can be concluded that Piperine and its derivatives that occupy the binding site of H3-T3ph with comparable binding energy may interfere with the function of Survivin as a key regulator of chromosomal segregation and subsequently inhibit cells from proliferation.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

It has been reported that Survivin as a member of IAPs can directly bind to caspases through the BIR domain and inhibit their activities [4]. On the other hand, when the intrinsic apoptosis pathway is triggered, the IAP regulatory protein Smac which is normally restricted to the inter-membrane space of mitochondria is released to the cytosol and binds to a cavity on BIR domain. After forming some hydrogen bonds with amino acid residues in this region, it releases caspases from the complex and consequently interferes with the inhibitory activity of IAPs on caspases [22]. Cancer cells in which Survivin has been over expressed, do not have sufficient free Smac to inhibit Survivin. Therefore, if the drug candidates are used in proper concentration, they can saturate Survivin molecules in cancer cells and drive abnormal cells towards death [2]. Molecular docking computations show that Piperine and some of its derivatives can bind to BIR domain of Survivin in the same hydrophobic pocket as that of Smac/DIABLO with a suitable binding energy. The binding of Piperine and its derivatives to Survivin may result in the segregation of Smac/DIABLO in the cytosol and subsequently free Smac/DIABLO molecules could be available for binding with inhibitors of apoptosis to initiate caspase mediated apoptosis.

The results of molecular docking calculations are summarized here:
                        
                           1.
                           In scaffold 1, substitution of more hydrophobic R groups in this category of compounds results in lower binding energies. Also, when carbonyl group is removed, the binding energy improves.

Different substitutions other than dioxol could be integrated into the benzene of Piperine to give inhibitors with a suitable binding energy in scaffold 2.

Substitutions of the amide moiety (NH) and the carboxyl group in scaffold 3, with more hydrophobic groups results in an analog with a higher inhibitory activity.

In similar cases, the existence of conjugated double bond results in an analog with higher inhibitory activity.

Piperine and its derivatives occupy the binding site of H3-T3ph with comparable binding energy. Hence, they may interfere with the function of Survivin as a key regulator of chromosomal segregation and subsequently inhibit cells to proliferate.

In conclusion, compounds 6, 7, 8, 9 and 16 show higher activities in comparison with Piperine.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The financial supports of Isfahan University, Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) (Grant number 93013717) and National Elites Foundation are kindly appreciated.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

