@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Genome-wide identification and structure-function studies of proteases and protease inhibitors in Cicer arietinum (chickpea)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Genes for a significant number of proteases and protease inhibitors have been identified in chickpea.


                        
                        
                           
                           Most of them have close orthologs in Medicago truncatula and Glycine max.


                        
                        
                           
                           Although codon preference was seen for the catalytic residues but the relation is complex.


                        
                        
                           
                           A differential pattern of gene expression was observed in multiple plant tissues.


                        
                        
                           
                           The docking and molecular dynamics simulation showed chickpea protease-inhibitor molecular recognition pattern.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Genome analysis

Orthologs

Phylogeny

Domain

Motif

Gene expression

Homology modelling

Molecular docking

Molecular dynamics simulation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Proteases are a family of enzymes present in almost all living organisms. In plants they are involved in many biological processes requiring stress response in situations such as water deficiency, pathogen attack, maintaining protein content of the cell, programmed cell death, senescence, reproduction and many more. Similarly, protease inhibitors (PIs) are involved in various important functions like suppression of invasion by pathogenic nematodes, inhibition of spores-germination and mycelium growth of Alternaria alternata and response to wounding and fungal attack. As much as we know, no genome-wide study of proteases together with proteinaceous PIs is reported in any of the sequenced genomes till now.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Phylogenetic studies and domain analysis of proteases were carried out to understand the molecular evolution as well as gene and protein features. Structural analysis was carried out to explore the binding mode and affinity of PIs for cognate proteases and prolyl oligopeptidase protease with inhibitor ligand.
               
               
                  Results
                  In the study reported here, a significant number of proteases and PIs were identified in chickpea genome. The gene expression profiles of proteases and PIs in five different plant tissues revealed a differential expression pattern in more than one plant tissue. Molecular dynamics studies revealed the formation of stable complex owing to increased number of protein–ligand and inter and intramolecular protein–protein hydrogen bonds.
               
               
                  Discussion
                  The genome-wide identification, characterization, evolutionary understanding, gene expression, and structural analysis of proteases and PIs provide a framework for future analysis when defining their roles in stress response and developing a more stress tolerant variety of chickpea.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Plants, being sessile in nature, are continuously exposed to a broad range of environmental stress conditions that adversely affect their growth, development, and productivity. Plants encounter both biotic and abiotic stress conditions during their complete life cycle. In biotic stress, plants face the threat of infection by pathogens (including bacteria, fungi, viruses and nematodes) and attack by herbivore pests [1]. Abiotic stress includes exposure of plants to drought, salinity, heat, cold, chilling, freezing, nutrient deprivation, high light intensity, ozone (O3) and anaerobic stresses [2]. Therefore, in order to withstand such situations, plants have developed diverse mechanisms to detect such environmental changes and respond in such a manner to reduce damage while conserving crucial resources for growth and reproduction. A stress response is initiated when plants perceive stress at the cellular level. Stress recognition activates signal transduction pathways that transmit information within the individual cell and throughout the plant [3]. Further it leads to alterations in the gene expression pattern, which modify growth and development and even influence reproductive capabilities. Various studies have shown the devastating effect of such adverse environmental conditions on the productivity of crops.

According to a report by Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 2008 chickpea is one of the ancient and second most widely grown crops in the world [4]. It is the primary source of human dietary nitrogen, rich in proteins, carbohydrates, fibres, vitamins, minerals, sans any cholesterol content [5]. Various studies have shown that consuming chickpea reduces blood cholesterol level [6]. Chickpea crop loss caused by abiotic stress exceeds those due to biotic stress. Major crop damage is caused due to drought, salinity, and cold. The following diseases are also commonly seen in chickpea affecting its productivity severely: Ascochyta blight caused by Ascochyta rabiei (Pass) Labr.; Botrytis Grey Mould (BGM) caused by Botrytis cinerea Pers; Fusarium wilt caused by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. ciceri; Dry root rot caused by Macrophomina phaseolina; Collar rot caused by Sclerotium rolfsii; and Phytophthora root rot caused by Phytophthora medicaginis. Another major concern is the attack by insect pests that mainly includes Pod borer caused by Helicoverpa armigera Hubner; leaf miner caused by Liriomyza ciceriana Rondani; and seed beetle caused by Callosobruchus spp. in major production areas [7].

Plants are well equipped with a large proteolytic machinery which hydrolyze the non-functional proteins of the cells and make the resultant amino acids available for recycling. Along with that, proteases also take part in several biological processes like recognition of pathogens and pests and the induction of effective defence responses, programmed cell death, countering water deficit etc. [8–10]. Although proteases play an indispensable role in the maintenance and survival of the organisms they can be harmful if over expressed. Apart from the synthesis of these enzymes as inactive pre-proteins, their activity is also controlled by interaction with protease inhibitors (PIs) that leads to the formation of less active or fully inactive complexes [8]. Plant protease inhibitors (PPIs) are generally small proteins commonly present in the storage tissues like seeds, tubers, and aerial parts of the plants. One of the important roles of PPIs in plant defence mechanism is in triggering response to attack by insects or due to pathogenesis and wounding. They react by inhibiting the proteases present in the insect gut or that secreted by the microorganism which result in reduced amount of amino acids available for their growth and development [11].

Previously Yan et al. reported the genome-wide analysis of regulatory proteases in Taenia solium genome [12]. However, in our study, an in silico search of both proteases and PIs together in chickpea genome was conducted. A significant number of members belonging to four protease families (aspartate protease, cysteine protease, serine protease, and metalloprotease) and PIs (cysteine and serine protease inhibitors) were identified in the chickpea proteome (1.28% of the total chickpea genome encodes proteases out of which 0.8% are with catalytic residues). Phylogenetic analysis of each class of proteases showed clustering that matched with their functional diversification and domain diversity. Orthologs were identified in other sequenced genomes also, the maximum number of orthologs was found in the genome of Glycine max. Chickpea proteases and PI genes were further characterized for their chromosomal location, domain classification, gene architecture, gene duplication events, analysis of codon composition and gene expression. The binding studies of the PIs/ proteases with their cognate target proteases/ inhibitors were carried out to get more insight about the mode of binding and affinity. 
                     Fig. 1 perspicuously depicts the workflow followed in the research represented here. These findings will help to select candidate stress-related genes in chickpea, experimentally characterize their function and manipulate them to enhance the stress tolerance capacity of chickpea crop.

@&#METHODS@&#

A draft genome of chickpea was retrieved from legume information system (LIS) database (http://cicar.comparative-legumes.org/). Estimated genome size of Cicer arietinum is around 740Mb which consisted of 28,269 gene models and 7163 scaffolds covering 544.73Mb (over 70% of the estimated genome size) [13]. The proteases (aspartate protease, cysteine protease, serine protease, and metalloprotease) and protein protease inhibitors (cysteine protease inhibitor and serine protease inhibitors) of chickpea were searched in the chickpea proteome using the hidden Markov model (HMM) profile in pfam 27.0 [14] with the help of HMMER 3.0 [15]. The E-value cut off used was 1. The multiple sequence alignment was generated by employing ClustalX 2.1 [16].

The identified protein sequences were first aligned in ClustalX. The aligned sequences in phylip format were subjected to bootstrapping using the program SeqBoot in the Phylip package [17]. The bootstrap replicates were analyzed by employing ProtDist program. The distance matrices generated in the previous step were then analysed in Neighbor program using the Neighbor–Joining algorithm. The data sets were analysed in Consense program to obtain bootstrap values that shows the consistency of branching patterns in trees. The dendrograms were generated using the FigTree v1.4.0 program (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/). Bootstrap value was set to 1000 replicates for analyzing the clustering pattern in the dendrogram.

The pfam domain and signal peptide in the identified proteases were predicted by SMART (a Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool) [18,19]. The diagram of the protein structure and domain architecture was generated with the Domain Graph 2.0 (DOG) software [20]. The presence of signal peptide was predicted using SignalP 4.1 Server [21].

Orthologs of predicted proteases and protease inhibitors were searched for in some of the reported plant genome sequences such as Medicago truncatula, G. max, Phaseolus vulgaris, Vitis vinifera, Lotus japonicus and Arabidopsis thaliana using Blast2GO tool [22] keeping the sequence similarity cut off of ≥80% and E-value cut off of 0.001. These plant genomes were selected based on the genome homology reported by Varshney et al. [13].

The codon based sequence alignment was generated to analyze the codon composition of catalytic dyad and triad residues using MEGA 5.1 [23]. The CDS sequences were aligned by using UPGMB based clustering. Gap open and gap extension penalties were set to −400 and 0. The standard genetic code was selected for the analysis.

The gene architecture was analyzed using the Gene Structure Display Server 2.0 (GSDS; gsds.cbi.pku.edu.cn) with the help of gene sequence and coding sequence which depicts the exon/intron arrangement, gene length, intron phases, and untranslated regions [24].

RNA-seq data sets were downloaded from NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra), from 5 different plant tissues namely, germinating seedling (GSM1047862), young leaves (GSM1047863), shoot apical meristem (GSM1047864) (Sam), flower bud (GSM1047865, GSM1047866, GSM1047867, GSM1047868) and flower (GSM1047869, GSM1047870, GSM1047871, GSM1047872) from ICC4598 chickpea genotype [25]. Spliced read mapper, TopHat was utilized to map reads on to the genomic sequence of C. arietinum 
                           [26]. Cufflinks was employed to estimate the abundance of reads mapped to gene body and thus Fragments Per Kilobase of transcript per Million (FPKM) values were calculated as proxy for gene expression in different tissues [27].

Additionally, in order to obtain the transcriptional evidence, blastn search was carried out against NCBI chickpea EST database (from GenBank in 14-April-2013; 46120 EST sequences) (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nucest/?term=Cicer+arietinum). The sequence identity cut off was set to >90% to match an EST to map over a gene model keeping Expectation threshold value of 1.

Similarity search using basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) against the protein data bank (PDB) [28,29] was done to identify homologous proteins with known structures to be employed as templates for homology model building [30]. The sequence identity cut off was set to ≥30% (E-value cut off=1). Homology modelling was carried out using the Composite/Chimeric model type of Prime 3.1 [31] in order to study their structural features, binding mode and affinity with the substrates.

The initial models were evaluated for the stereochemical quality of the protein backbone and side chains using PROCHECK [32]. ERRAT plot showed the environment of the atoms in the protein model [33]. The quality of the model structures was also checked with ProSA server [34]. After model validation, initial models were refined using impref minimization of protein preparation wizard [35,36] and Impact 5.8 [35] minimization. The energy minimized final models were used further for the binding studies with their substrates.

The substrates considered in the present study were either a protein molecule or a small organic compound (Z-PRO-PROLINAL:ZPR). The ligand compound was downloaded from PubChem compound database [37]. The targets and substrates were prepared first before proceeding with the docking studies. The water molecules and other hetero atom groups were removed from the protein structures using protein preparation utility of Maestro, followed by addition of hydrogen to carry out restrained minimization. The impref utility of Maestro was utilized to carry out minimization in which the heavy atoms were restrained such that the strains generated upon protonation could be relieved. The root mean square deviation (RMSD) of the atomic displacement for terminating the minimization was set as 0.3Å. Similarly, the ligand structure was refined in LigPrep 2.5 [38] to define their charged state and enumerate their stereo isomers. The processed receptors and ligands were used for the docking studies using ZDOCK 3.0.2 [39] and Glide 5.8 [40] by defining the interface residues between the two protein chains or reference ligand. A total of 10 (ZDOCK) -20 poses (Glide) generated were scored on the basis of their ZDOCK score, glide score and E-model values. The hydrogen bonds in the docked complexes were visualized using PyMOL [41].

The docked complexes were prepared first using protein preparation wizard and further subjected to molecular dynamics simulations for a time scale of 10nanosecond (ns) using desmond 3.1 [42] of maestro. OPLS2005 force field was applied on docked complexes placed in the centre of the orthorhombic box solvated in water. Protein was immersed in orthorhombic water box of SPC water model. Total negative charges on the docked structures were balanced by suitable number of counter ions to make the whole system neutral (Table S1). The system was initially energy minimized for maximum 2000 iterations of the steepest descent (500 steps) and the limited memory Broyden–Fletcher–Gold farb-Shanno (LBFGS) algorithm with a convergence threshold of 1.0kcal/mol/Å. The short- and long-range Coulombic interactions were handled by Cutoff and Smooth particle mesh Ewald method with a cut off radius of 9.0Å and Ewald tolerance of 1e−09. Periodic boundary conditions were applied in all three directions. The relaxed system was simulated for 10ns with a time step of 2.0 femtosecond (fs), NPT ensemble using a Berendsen thermostat at 300K temperature and atmospheric pressure of 1bar. The energies and trajectories were recorded after every 2.0picosecond (ps). The energies and RMSD of the complex in each trajectory were monitored with respect to simulation time. The C-alpha atom root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) of each residue was analyzed. The intermolecular interactions between the target and substrate were assessed to check the stability of the complexes.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

A hidden Markov model profile (PF00026) search using HMMER (hmmsearch) resulted in the identification of a total of 89 CaAPs (C. arietinum APs), out of which 66 sequences had the two complete Asp-Thr/Ser-Gly motifs (Fig. S1). The remaining sequences had either an incomplete ASP domain or present in the data only a single motif. Out of these 66 sequences, genomic locations of 56 sequences were known and named from CaAP1–CaAP56 based on their order on the chromosomes. The remaining 8 sequences were present on scaffolds and named as CaAP_S1 to S8. The GenBank accession numbers were assigned for 16 sequences [GenBank: KJ151780–KJ151790, KJ561459–KJ561463] (Table S2). Almost all known aspartyl proteases are inhibited by an antimicrobial hexapeptide Pepstatin.

The HMM profile of cysteine proteases (PF00112) aided in the identification of 33 CaCPs (C. arietinum CPs), out of which 28 sequences had all the three catalytic residues i.e. Cys, His, and Asn (Fig. S1). 26 genes were mapped on chromosomes and their nomenclature was done in the similar way as done for CaAPs. GenBank accession numbers were assigned to 8 CaCP sequences [GenBank: KJ151791–KJ151797, KJ579708] (Table S2).

The HMM profile search of the chickpea proteome for the presence of cystatin (PF00031) yielded 17 hits, out of which 3 hits had high E-values. The remaining 14 hits were used in further analysis. Two sequences were assigned GenBank accession number [GenBank: KJ619654–KJ619655] (Table S2).

Thirteen serine protease families as discussed by Tripathi et al. [43] were identified in chickpea genome using HMM profile of each family (
                           Table 1). Interestingly, the number of serine proteases encoded by chickpea is comparable to the number identified in Arabidopsis and rice genomes (206 and 222). Out of the total 220 CaSP (C. arietinum SPs), 125 sequences possess the catalytic dyad or triad required for the catalytic reaction. The catalytic dyad or triad involved in the hydrolysis reaction are listed in 
                           Table 2. The GenBank accession numbers are assigned to 21 serine protease sequences [GenBank: KJ579709–KJ579715, KJ598059–KJ598071, and KJ619656] (Fig. S1, Table S2).

Five different classes of serine protease inhibitors were identified in chickpea namely Bowman–Birk inhibitor (PF00228) (BBI), Kazal (PF07648), Kunitz-type (PF00197), squash (PF00299), potato inhibitor-I (PI-I) (PF00280), potato inhibitor-II (PI-II) (PF02428), and serpin (serine protease inhibitor) (PF00079). Ten Kunitz-type inhibitors, three serpins and one each of BBI, Kazal and potato inhibitor-I were found in chickpea. Squash inhibitor and potato inhibitor-II were not observed in chickpea proteome. GenBank accession number was assigned to one serpin sequence [GenBank: KJ619653] (Fig. S1, Table S2).

The number of metalloproteases found in chickpea is not large. Only three members of metallopeptidase families i.e. M41 (PF01434), M48 (PF01435), and M50 (PF02163) were identified. The following GenBank accession numbers were assigned to 7 CaMPs (C. arietinum MPs) [GenBank: KJ619646–KJ619652] (Fig. S1, Table S2).

The proteases and PIs with missing catalytic dyad or triad residues were not used in further analysis. The possibility that such proteins may be functional by following some other mechanism cannot be ruled out (Table S3).

Phylogenetic analysis of 66 CaAPs revealed their clustering into three groups i.e. typical, atypical, and nucellin-like similar to those described in Arabidopsis and rice. The clustering of typical APs could be supported by the presence of plant-specific insert (PSI) bearing homology with the precursor of mammalian saposins. Six sequences belong to the nucellin-like category of APs. However, maximum number of CaAPs (54) belongs to the atypical category. The three well characterized APs of Arabidopsis i.e. promotion of cell survival 1 (NP_195839, PCS1), constitutive disease resistance 1 (NP_198319, CDR1), and aspartic protease in guard cell 1 (NP_188478, ASPG1) got clustered with the atypical chickpea APs (
                        Fig. 2).

Phylogenetic tree of all the 125 protein sequences showed well defined clusters for each peptidase family of SPs. However, few members of signal peptidase class got diverged into two groups. The reason behind their separation might be the presence of two different peptidase domains i.e. S24 and S26 but this doesn’t hold true for SP3. One member of serine carboxypeptidase (SCP20), owing to the presence of three additional domains CLH, WD40, and RING domain, behaved differently with respect to its other members. The clustering of the different classes of SPs is supported by the presence of different domain structure in them (
                        Fig. 3; Fig. S2).

To some extent, the members of cysteine proteases also got clustered on the basis of protein domains present in them. RD21 (responsive to desiccation 21), a papain-like cysteine protease (PLCP), is up-regulated in drought-stressed Arabidopsis. Its maturation process involves successive removal of signal peptide, prodomain cleavage, and removal of granulin (GRAN) domain which subsequently leads to a mature RD21. Four chickpea CaCPs (CaCP3, CaCP10, CaCP11, and CaCP14) possess the GRAN domain which clustered together in the phylogenetic tree. Three proteins (CaCP15, CaCP_S1, and CaCP_S2) bear a carboxy-terminal amino acid sequence (KDEL) responsible for their retention in endoplasmic reticulum. The vacuolar targeting signal (NPIR) was observed in the prodomain region of only one chickpea member (CaCP24) (
                        Fig. 4). Two possible recent gene duplication events were observed in the following gene pairs CaAP8–CaAP9 (90.9%) and CaAP52–CaAP53 (99.5%). However, only one gene pair each of cysteine proteases (CaCP18 and CaCP20—92.4%) and serine proteases (subtilase: Sub40 and Sub41–95%) was found to be involved in recent duplication event.

The domain analysis of identified APs showed the presence of a basic architecture of signal peptide, pro-peptide, and AP domain. A total of 66% of the total APs possess this structure. The transmembrane region was observed at the C-terminal region of 6 proteins while low complexity regions were seen in 19 proteins. The six typical APs had a SapB, SapB_1, and SapB_2 domain located in the PSI segment (Fig. S3). The exon–intron architecture of AP genes was explored to get more insight about it. Our results showed correlation between the phylogeny and the exon–intron arrangement in AP genes. It means the genes possessing similar gene architecture got clustered together in the phylogenetic tree. The genomic location of following AP genes with sequence id CaAP_S1-CaAP_S8 couldn’t be located therefore assigned them on scaffolds. Due to this reason the exon–intron architecture of these genes couldn’t be analyzed. The gene corresponding to nucellin-like proteins had number of introns ranged from 7 to 9. However, the typical AP genes had 10 and 12 introns. A varied arrangement of exons and introns was seen in atypical APs i.e. 8–11 introns with an exception of CaAP28 which had only 4 introns. However, the other group of atypical APs consists of 0–1 intron with an exception of CaAP48 and CaAP55 having 11 introns (
                        Fig. 5).

A peptidase domain present in CPs, SPs, and MPs modulates the activity of the enzyme. Each peptidase family possesses certain unique domains which are responsible for their function. Nevertheless, we couldn’t identify any correlation between phylogeny, gene structure, and the domains present in them (Fig. 4, Fig. S4 and S5).

Orthologs were identified in some closely related and sequenced genomes like that of M. truncatula, G. max, V. vinifera, A. thaliana, P. vulgaris, and L. japonicus. The maximum number of orthologs was identified in G. max and M. truncatula. A few proteases and protease inhibitors had diverged away from the set and were unique to chickpea (Table S4).

The codon composition of the key catalytic residues of proteases was analyzed to study the evolutionary conservation of a particular codon of a functionally important amino acid. The first ASP domain of most of the members of APs had amino acid threonine at second position. The codon for the conserved aspartic acid in both the ASP domains was GAT. On the contrary, the second position of another ASP domain was occupied by serine residue in most of the sequences. Moreover, the preference for GAT codon was seen in some of the serine proteases too where aspartic acid forms the catalytic site. The conserved histidine residue in CPs and SPs also showed more preference for CAT codon as compared to CAC. The similar preference for CAT and GAT codons for histidine and aspartic acid residues was also observed in MPs. The codon for the key residues cysteine and serine of CPs and SPs, respectively, in most of their members were found to be TGT and TCA. An attempt was made to identify a linkage pattern among the codons of the key residues for dyad and triads but couldn’t find any such linkage (Table S2).

Gene expression for proteases and protease inhibitors were identified with the help of EST data of chickpea. 12, 9, and 32 CaAP, CaCP, and CaSP genes showed expression in tissues such as leaves, roots, root and collar regions, and shoots. Members of various classes of serine proteases were found to express in leaves, roots, shoots, and roots and collar except trypsin, nucleoporin, and protease IV. Not a single member of M50 family of metalloprotease had support of EST data. Seven CaCP and CaSP inhibitor genes showed expression pattern in various plant tissues. Seven CPI and SPI genes were observed to be expressed in the above plant tissues except Bowman–Birk and serpin (Table S5).

RNA-seq data showed that 42 out 66 CaAP genes were highly expressed (FPKM≥5) and 23 were lowly expressed (0<FPKM<5) in the five tissues taken for the study. CaAP_S6 gene did not show expression in any of the five tissues. Similar analysis on CaCP showed that 19 genes out of 28 were highly expressed and the remaining nine genes were expressed at low level in the plant tissues. 86 CaSPs genes were highly expressed while 36 genes were lowly expressed (3 genes were unexpressed) in the five tissues under study. Eighteen CaMPs genes were highly expressed while only 2 genes were lowly expressed. The expression pattern was also observed for the inhibitor genes (cysteine protease inhibitor and serine protease inhibitor); most of the genes were known to be expressed in one or more plant tissue (Fig. S6, Table S6). However, if a particular gene is unexpressed in the above tissues searched, that doesn’t conclude that they are non-functional. They might be expressed in some other tissues, different developmental phase or under a specific condition not explored.

The homology models of serine protease (POP), serine and cysteine protease inhibitors were built with the help of structures of homologous proteins. The sequences for which the structural studies were possible and possess maximum identity with the template were chosen for the structural studies. The chickpea POP structure was built using homologous protein from Sus scrofa (PDB: 1E8M, Identity—55%, Resolution—1.50Å). The structure of potato inhibitor-I was modelled using the 3-D coordinates of serine protease inhibitor from barley seeds (PDB: 1C12, Identity: 30%, Resolution: 2Å). Crystal structure of BBI in complex with bovine trypsin was utilized to model the chickpea BBI. The structure has a resolution of 2Å and showed an identity of 69% with the chickpea BBI sequence (PDB: 2ILN). The ten Kunitz-type inhibitors were modelled using following crystal structures—2QN4, 3ZC8, and 1R8N (Identity >30%, Resolution—1.80Å, 2.24Å, 1.75Å). The structural alignment of 10 Kunitz inhibitor models showed highly diverse amino acid composition in the reaction site loop as stated by Patil et al. [44] (Fig. S7). The cysteine protease inhibitor from chickpea was modelled using crystal structure of tarocystatin and papain complex (PDB-3IMA, Identity 58%, and Resolution 2.03Å). The 3-D structure of serpin was modelled using coordinates of serpin from A. thaliana (PDB-3LE2, Identity 57%, and Resolution 2.20Å) (
                        Fig. 6, Fig. S8). The signal peptide was observed at the N-terminal of BBI and ten Kunitz-type inhibitors, which was missing in POP, serpin, cystatin, and PI-I sequences.

The generated models were assessed for their stereochemical parameters. The Ramachandran plot revealed that more than 98% of the residues occupied the allowed region. The goodness factor (g-factor) of the models had values between −0.5 and 0.2. The overall RMSD values of the C-alpha atoms of the models with respect to the templates were close to 1Å. The overall quality score (z-score) of the models; calculated by ProSA lies within the z-scores of experimentally determined protein structures. The overall quality score shown in ERRAT graph also proves the reliability of the generated models (Table S7).

After model generation, the structures were pre-processed first by adding hydrogens, assigning bond order, and filling missing loops and side chains. Subsequently, the models were subjected to restrained minimization by converging the non-hydrogen atoms to an RMSD of 0.3Å by employing OPLS 2005 [35] force field. After that, the models were energy minimized to 500 steps of steepest descent energy minimization followed by 1000 steps of conjugate gradient energy minimization using identical force field. The energy minimized and refined models were further utilized for docking and molecular dynamics studies [45].

The docking studies of POP with ZPR, by utilizing the reference ligand of the model, generate the best pose with a glide score and E-model value of −7.76 and −65.15. The O9 and O16 atoms of ZPR interact with the NH1 atom of Arg656 and NE1 atom of Trp604 with an interacting distance of 3.16Å and 2.92Å. Amino acid residue R239 was positioned in a close proximity of the six carbon ring of ZPR. The catalytic Ser563 and His696 were involved in mutual hydrogen bond of length 3.3Å (
                        Fig. 7).

The cysteine protease inhibitor of chickpea was docked in the binding site pocket of papain from Carica papaya by defining their probable interface residues. The z-score of the best pose was 1224.27 (
                        Fig. 8). Similarly, BBI and PI-I were docked in the binding pockets of their respective targets i.e. bovine trypsin. The z-scores for both BBI-trypsin and PI-trypsin docked complexes were 2227.32 and 1883.65. The structure of BBI was stabilized by five disulphide bonds which maintain the structure of the double-headed binding loops. Four hydrogen bonds were observed at the interface of the two trypsin molecules and BBI i.e. F41–Y92, G216–C88, N97–N73, and H57–S65 (
                        Fig. 9). Only two inter-molecular hydrogen bonds, between K61–D60 and S213–D54, were observed in the PI-trypsin docked complex. The residues of the inhibitor loop were involved in few intramolecular hydrogen bonding, (D60–R65, K62–R65, and S55–P52) which is essential for maintaining proper fit (
                        Fig. 10).

In order to examine the role of protease inhibitors in chickpea, the inhibitor binding sites of bovine trypsin and papain were compared with the trypsin and cysteine proteases of chickpea. Interestingly, it was observed that chickpea trypsin was very much different from bovine trypsin with respect to its amino acid composition and tertiary structure. It belongs to a specific class of serine protease i.e. DegP which is involved in the cleavage of photodamaged D2 protein of photosystem II. Therefore, the trypsin inhibitor in chickpea may probably play a major role in defence against pathogens and insects. On the other hand, cysteine proteases in chickpea share similar set of binding site residues and three-dimensional structure like papain and thus chickpea protease inhibitor has a role in inhibiting its own cysteine proteases too.

All the five docked complexes were subjected to a simulation of 10ns time duration to explore the changes in the structures. The RMSD graph was drawn by assigning time in ps on the X-axis and RMSD values of the Cα atoms in nm on the Y-axis. From the graph, we can conclude that the RMSD of Cα atoms of the generated structures over the complete trajectory is stable (Fig. S9). The Cα RMSD between the initial and final conformation after the simulation of each docked complex was ~1Å (Fig. S10). After 10ns, O16 atom of ZPR was involved in hydrogen bonds with Tyr482, Ser563 and His696 with a distance of 2.95, 2.80, and 2.70Å. In the initial structure, prior to the simulation, a hydrogen bond was seen between the catalytic Ser563 and His696 residue which at the end of the simulation was lost and involved in the hydrogen bond interaction with the inhibitor. The inhibitor ZPR obstructed the binding site cavity by blocking the active site residues (Ser563 and His696). Even the hydrogen bond with Trp604, which was observed in the initial structure, was also lost (
                        Fig. 11). Similarly after 10ns, the final conformations of CPI, BBI, and PI-I complexes revealed formation of more stable complex as an increase in number of intermolecular hydrogen bonds was observed (
                        Table 3). The two highly conserved arginine residues in the PI-I family are important to support the reaction site loop with respect to the main body of the inhibitor. The two arginine residues in chickpea PI-trypsin complex were involved in an intramolecular hydrogen bonding with Asp60 (
                        
                        
                        Figs. 12–14).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Developing disease resistant and stress tolerant varieties of plants is an important objective of breeding crops. Therefore, to help developing stress tolerant and pathogen resistant varieties, we have studied proteases and PIs in chickpea genome. A large fraction of chickpea genome encodes proteases and PI genes which provide resistance against various environmental stress conditions. A differential pattern of gene expression was observed in more than one plant tissue under study. The expression values showed that most of the genes express at basal level in normal condition though they may express when encountered by adverse environmental conditions. The expression information reported here will be useful for further investigation of the functional characterization of these genes under various stress conditions. Structural studies have shown the high binding affinity and formation of more stable complex of protease inhibitor and target protein. These studies could increase our understanding of the roles of these genes in chickpea, but further functional analysis of stress-responsive proteases and protease inhibitors is required to confirm their role in stress tolerance.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

Being sessile, plants are often exposed to a wide range of detrimental environmental conditions which adversely affect their growth and productivity. However, they have developed distinct mechanisms to perceive environmental changes and respond to such complex stress conditions, thus minimize damage and conserve the valuable resources required for the growth and reproduction. Proteases and protease inhibitors are one of the important classes of enzymes which play an important role during abiotic and biotic stress conditions. In this report, a genome-wide characterization of proteases and PIs has been carried out in chickpea genome and their structure-function studies were performed. A significant number of genes coding proteases and PIs present in the genome imply the important role performed by them. These genes showed differential expression pattern in multiple tissues. The 3-D structure of prolyloligopeptidase, cysteine protease inhibitor, and serine protease inhibitors were modelled and their binding mode or affinities with the cognate molecules were evaluated. Subsequently, the molecular dynamics studies revealed strong interactions between certain target molecules. Thus, the findings might help selecting genes, for functional characterization experimentally and improve stress tolerance capacity of chickpea crop against abiotic stresses and biotic agents by manipulating these genes and their expression.

The authors have no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

RS thanks Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India for Senior Research Fellowship. This work is carried out under CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory Centre of Excellence in Scientific Computation (CoE-SC) project.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.10.019.


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

