@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The qualitative detection of decreases in cardiac output

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We collected routinely monitored data from patients during anaesthesia.


                        
                        
                           
                           We determined when significant changes in variables occurred using runs analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           Significant changes in multiple variables were used to suggest possible diagnoses.


                        
                        
                           
                           End-tidal carbon dioxide decreased when a fall in cardiac output diagnosed.


                        
                        
                           
                           End-tidal carbon dioxide did not decrease significantly without this diagnosis.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Anaesthesia

Non-invasive monitoring

Cardiac output

End-tidal carbon dioxide

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               Graphical abstract
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Cardiac output (CO), the most fundamental of circulatory parameters, is difficult to measure. When comparing new devices for cardiac output measurement Cecconi et al. [1] stress the importance of knowing the precision and accuracy of the ‘gold standard’ reference technique; the most common referenced ‘gold standard’ technique being intermittent thermodilution (ITD) using an averaged set of measurements.

Critchley and Critchley [2] suggest that ITD measurements have a precision of 10–20% and the view of Cecconi et al. [1] is that the error associated with a measuring technique is related to the size of the smallest change, that can be measured by the device, that can be recognised as a real change. The usually accepted 10% CE [coefficient of error] for ITD means that a change can only be trusted as real only if it is greater than 28.3%. However, a study by Nilsson et al. [3] showed that to be 95% confident of accuracy within 5% an average of four measurements are required and two sets of such measurements need to differ by at least 7% before a change in cardiac output can be accepted.

Using ITD, Weil et al. [4] studied post cardiac arrest cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) in pigs and reported that, in the presence of constant ventilation, the mean end-tidal CO2 (EtCO2) and cardiac output (CO) decreased to 21% and 33% respectively during CPR, and they showed a correlation of 0.79 (p<0.001) between CO and EtCO2. Omato et al. measured cardiac output (ITD) and EtCO2 during controlled arterial haemorrhage [5]. They suggested a logarithmic relationship between CO and EtCO2 (r=0.91, p<0.001). Idris et al. in 1994 [6] confirmed a close relationship between CO and EtCO2 in a well-controlled study of ventilation and cardiac output. The cardiac index (CI) ranged from 0 to 5.37mL/min/m2 and correlated significantly (p<0.0001) with PETCO2.

If physiological changes in blood pressure, heart rate and pulse amplitude suggest hypovolaemia and there is a concurrent decrease in EtCO2 then it is possible to deduce that the cardiac output has possibly decreased secondary to the hypovolaemia (this is exemplified by a study by Jones et al. [7]); assuming no change in ventilation or metabolic rate.

The purpose of this study was to demonstrate how routinely monitored physiological variables may detect changes that are indicative of a fall in cardiac output associated with hypovolaemia.

@&#METHODS@&#

With ethical committee permission (F13/003, University of Otago Human Ethics Committee) and patient consent, physiological data were collected from patients during surgery for hepatic resection and colonic surgery, anaesthesia being a combination of epidural blockade, remifentanil infusion and inhalational general anaesthesia.

The physiological variables (including intra-arterial pressure measurements) were downloaded from GE AS5 monitors with updates of values at 10s intervals. Intra-operative notes were kept of significant events and the trend analysis was completed in real-time using Evidence-Based Monitoring (interactive) (EBMi, www.custos.co.nz) software.

The trends of changes in systolic blood pressure (SBP), heart rate (HR), pulse amplitude (PA) and EtCO2 were determined by runs analysis, using a ‘length of run’ of at least four (Appendix A). A decrease in blood pressure was also considered significant if blood pressure fell at least 2SD (SBP–SD) using the normalisation technique as described by Harrison and Connor [8]. If four parameters (HR, SBP, PA and SBP–SD) changed appropriately hypovolaemia was notified (‘HYPO’), if five parameters (HR, SBP, PA, EtCO2 and SBP–SD) changed appropriately hypovolaemia with a possible fall in cardiac output was notified (‘HYPO+CO’).

The statistical analysis was performed using SAS version 9.3. A mixed linear model with a simple random effect for individual patients and the Satterthwaite approximation for the degrees of freedom was used. Two other random effect specifications; a compound symmetry model and an autoregressive model, did not have a markedly improved measure of model fit (Akaike׳s information criterion) and the simplest random effects specification was used.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Thirty-one data sets were complete and from those sets 22 patients had 11 different combinations of events. There were a total of 23 HYPO events in 13 patients, 34 HYPO+CO events in 18 patients and nine patients had both sorts of events.

Examples can be seen in 
                     Fig. 1. Patient 2 and patient 9׳s events were associated with a decreased central venous pressure and an increase in the rate of infusion of metaraminol. Patient 15׳s event was associated with a decreased central venous pressure and total inflow occlusion of the portal vein and hepatic artery (this is the Pringle manoeuvre used during hepatic resection which is associated with a decrease in cardiac output). Patient 25׳s event was associated with increased doses of vasopressor.

The maximum SBP in the 5-min period before the notification of hypovolaemia (HYPO) was 106.6mmHg (±23.8SD), for the HYPO+CO group it was 103.7mmHg (±17.3SD).

Changes for each variable for each notification are tabulated in 
                     
                     Tables 1 and 2. Plots of changes in EtCO2, SBP, change in SBP and lowest SBP post event are shown in 
                     Fig. 2.

The results of the mixed linear model are presented in 
                     Table 3. Only the difference in the changes in EtCO2 reaches a level of significance.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

There are many devices that attempt to measure cardiac output, some invasive, some non-invasive. Their accuracy and precision is widely discussed but the consensus is that they are inaccurate [9–13]. The gold-standard technique for measuring cardiac output has a precision that depends on multiple measurements (4×2 Nilsson et al. [3]) and requires a change of ±7–28%, depending on which published source is considered correct, to be considered reliable. These measurements take time and are by definition intermittent. Because of the complex nature of ITD with its associated potential for patient harm its use is restricted to those patients who have some form of cardiovascular compromise or having major surgery. Non-invasive techniques have been developed for use in less risky situations but their accuracy and precision is less than ITD.

Because of inter-patient variability, absolute accuracy is not clinically necessary but precision is; that is the ability to repeat a measurement and get a closely similar result. Repeatability allows the following of trends and could answer the question ‘Is the cardiac output changing?’ The method described, using the evidence of changes in physiological parameters, can indicate that hypovolaemia is possible and, that if this is accompanied by appropriate changes in EtCO2, that a decrease in cardiac output has also occurred. Those events where a decrease in cardiac output was suggested had a decrease in EtCO2 that was significantly different to those where the diagnosis was not suggested. The assessment is continuously updated every 10s with a moving window of 40s.

The requirement of an early warning system is that the alert should be activated before a significant change has taken place. This means that current gold standard methodology is an inappropriate comparison as the cardiac output has to fall significantly before it can be assumed a real change has taken place.

With steady state ventilation EtCO2 is closely related to cardiac output and could be used as an indicator of change in cardiac output. Body temperature could also change the metabolic rate, and hence EtCO2, but the changes over the short periods, in this case 40s, are very small. Core body temperature normally falls over the first hour of anaesthesia – a 1°C fall over an hour, equivalent to an 8% reduction in metabolism and CO2 production, would result in a miniscule change in EtCO2.

The EtCO2 of anaesthetised patients will depend on the ventilatory strategy of the anaesthetist. However, the average (SD) EtCO2 of a set of 30 patients over a total of 50h was 4.34(0.51)kPa, the average of changes over 10s was 0±0.15kPa, over 30s was 0±0.18kPa, over 60s was 0±0.21kPa, over fiveminutes was 0±0.26kPa (unpublished data from study U1111-1139-2577, ANZCTR 363646). These are small values and would be difficult to detect by eye.

These data could be used to indicate a change in cardiac output. A decrease of 0.3kPa (–2SD) over 10s could be clinically significant. However, a single lower value is not a trend and the next value for EtCO2 could be higher. Changing values over a longer time-frame is required.

To avoid the problem of different ventilation strategies, a trend can be detected by runs analysis using an historical median value as the baseline. This is independent of absolute values and units of measurement. In a completely random system the ‘next’ value (of EtCO2) has a 1 in 2 chance of being below the recently historic median, a second value below the median 1 in 4, a third value 1 in 8. How many consecutive values below the median are required to denote a trend depends on the sensitivity required by the clinician. Physiological values are not completely random but the autocorrelation is low enough to allow the use of this technique [14]. Using this method, if the EtCO2 has fallen below the median value in four consecutive measurements (that is over a period of forty seconds in this study) the likelihood of this happening by chance is 1:16. This is not a strong indication that cardiac output has decreased but if it is combined with other supportive evidence then the argument becomes much more compelling.

Progressive hypovolaemia eventually leads to a fall in cardiac output and so if signs of hypovolaemia co-exist with a downward trend in EtCO2 then the case for a decrease in cardiac output is strengthened. A synchronous downward trend in blood pressure and pulse volume (amplitude) and an upward trend in heart rate suggests hypovolaemia, together with a downward trend in EtCO2 is strong evidence of a decrease in cardiac output; a decrease that may not be measurable with current mechanical/electronic devices.

It can be seen from the data collected that some changes, particularly in heart rate, are small and would not be considered clinically significant. This is typical of patients receiving high dose opiates or beta-blockers, or in the extreme situation, a patient with a fixed rate pacemaker. However, using runs analysis these small trends can be detected and may reflect physiological homeostatic mechanisms that are trying to compensate for loss of blood volume. In the presence of a fixed rate pacemaker, the EBMi software omits the evidence of heart rate. This does lessen the strength of the evidence. In a situation where all four variables are considered independent then the trend of four consecutive measurements moving about the median in the appropriate direction (each variable has a likelihood of this happening of 1:16 individually) has a total likelihood of (1:16)4, 1:65,536. The actual likelihood will be less than this because the variables are not in fact completely independent. However, the principle of detecting signals of change by using multiple variables still applies. In addition to these odds the change in the SBP is also analysed using a normalisation technique.

The notifications produced by this software indicate ‘A fall in cardiac output is possible’ and as such leaves the clinician to review the status of the patient and to consider whether intervention is required. It is unlikely that a device will be designed in the near future that can detect the early changes in cardiac output that precede those changes in cardiac output that may be harmful. The downside is that the ability to detect early changes in cardiac output may not be amenable to objective measurement. Although the changes in SBP in both groups are similar, the decrease in EtCO2 in the HYPO+CO group suggests that these patients have passed the point where compensatory mechanisms can maintain normal homeostasis.

Accuracy describes how close a measurement is to the real value; for this qualitative technique, which generates an alert indicating change following a 40s trend, this is difficult to gauge; only a technique that can show a change over 40s could be used for comparison; some ultrasound cardiac output monitors claim beat-to-beat measurements. Precision describes the closeness of repeated measurements; given the same, or very similar, circumstances, i.e. changes in all four variables, this technique would produce the same outcome. However, it is an assessment of change rather than providing an absolute value for cardiac output and so repeat measurements would only be valid if the same change took place. It is a very safe technique, involving no additional monitoring than that used during many moderate to major procedures. The danger associated with a rare false positive is minimal as the generated alert just notifies the clinician of the possibility of an adverse change; it is up to the clinician to then assess the situation. False negatives (the failure of detection of change in one or more variables) are likely to be due to artefacts; sampling from the arterial cannula, repositioning of the pulse-oximeter probe or disconnection of the respiratory hose. Heart rate/pulse rate artefacts are minimised as there are three sources – electrocardiograph, arterial line and pulse-oximeter. Determination of the rate of clinically significant false positives and negatives requires further work.

One limitation of the method is, at present, related to the necessity for an intra-arterial cannula for pressure measurement; a non-invasive blood pressure based algorithm is an easy modification but using the trending methodology used here the time lapse for alerts would be extended to at least four times the time gap between measurements. Because of the importance of the EtCO2 in the assessment of a change in cardiac output, it is also necessary for constant pulmonary ventilation; spontaneous ventilation and changes in intermittent positive pressure ventilation are detected and any alerts generated are suppressed.

Rules of evidence can be fine-tuned to give certain variables more power, this may be a way forward to refine this technique but at present it is probably the only way of continuously detecting early changes in cardiac output in a non-invasive manner.

Michael Harrison owns the intellectual property of the software used in the study and is involved in a company involved with its development. Mathew Zacharias and Ross Scott-weekly have no conflicts of interest.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

Cardiac output (CO), the most fundamental of circulatory parameters, is difficult to measure accurately and with precision. Intermittent thermodilution is the gold standard but requires multiple measurements over time and is associated with potential harm to the patient.

End-tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO2) is physiologically linked to pulmonary blood flow and therefore to cardiac output. If physiological changes in blood pressure, heart rate and pulse amplitude suggest hypovolaemia and there is a concurrent decrease in EtCO2 then it is possible to deduce that the cardiac output has possibly decreased secondary to the hypovolaemia assuming no change in ventilation or metabolic rate.

The purpose of this study was to demonstrate how routinely monitored physiological variables may detect changes that are indicative of a fall in cardiac output associated with hypovolaemia.

Physiological data were collected from patients during surgery for hepatic resection and colonic surgery. The trends of changes in systolic blood pressure (SBP), heart rate (HR), pulse amplitude (PA) and EtCO2 were determined by runs analysis ( using a ‘length of run’ of at least four) and a decrease in blood pressure was also considered significant if blood pressure fell at least 2SD (SBP–SD) using a normalisation technique. If HR, SBP, PA and SBP–SD changed appropriately hypovolaemia was notified (‘HYPO’), if EtCO2 also changed appropriately hypovolaemia with a possible fall in cardiac output was notified (‘HYPO+CO’).

In thirty-one data sets there were a total of 23 HYPO and 34 HYPO+CO. The only significant difference between the two types of notification was the change in EtCO2.

The requirement of an early warning system is that the alert should be activated before a significant change has taken place. This means that current gold standard methodology is an inappropriate comparison as the cardiac output has to fall significantly before it can be assumed a real change has taken place. This novel assessment is virtually continuous being up-dated every 10s with a moving window of 40s. The methodology allows a calculation of the probability that the change is due to chance.

The notifications produced by this software indicates ‘A fall in cardiac output is possible’ and as such leaves the clinician to review the status of the patient and to consider whether intervention is required.

Although the changes in SBP in both groups are similar, the decrease in EtCO2 in the HYPO+CO group suggests that these patients have passed the point where compensatory mechanisms can maintain normal homeostasis.

Rules of evidence can be fine-tuned to give certain variables more power and this may be a way forward to refine this technique but, at present, it is probably the only way of continuously detecting early changes in cardiac output in a non-invasive qualitative manner.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Our thanks go to Dr M Weatherall for help with the statistical analysis.

Classical runs analysis involves the use of time series data where the data points are not correlated. However, physiological data is autocorrelated but not to a significant degree. Wieringa J. Statistical Process Control for Serially Correlated Data. http://irs.ub.rug.nl/ppn/180435140.

No knowledge of measurement units is required, no upper or lower limits and the probability of event occurring is known. The number of times a value is above (or below) the median is counted and the detection of an event (a trend) is set by the length of the run, see below. Sensitivity of the system can be adjusted by altering the length of run that acts as the trigger.

In a time-series of data a moving window of recent values is used to determine a median value. The ‘next’ value is compared with this median value and it is determined whether it is above or below the median. The moving window is advanced one increment and again the ‘next’ value is again assessed against this median (above or below). The number of consecutive ‘aboves’ or ‘belows’ is counted. The ‘length of run’ (LOR) is the number of ‘aboves’ or ‘belows’ and if the LOR exceeds a set number a notification is generated. In a completely random set of data a LOR of 4 has a probability of 1:16; the simultaneous change of four random sets has a probability of (1:16)4, which is 1:65536.

Computing combinations of variables (HR, BP, PA, and EtCO2) may detect compensatory responses before they are clinically obvious. This is because the magnitude of change does not have to be large; it is the pattern of the combinations that reflect physiological responses.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

