@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Informatics can identify systemic sclerosis (SSc) patients at risk for scleroderma renal crisis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Electronic medical records provide an opportunity to improve patient care.


                        
                        
                           
                           Natural language processing allows the identification of patients potentially at risk.


                        
                        
                           
                           Informatics provides the opportunity educate providers when patients at risk are identified.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Informatics

Systemic sclerosis

Scleroderma

Renal crisis

Prednisone

Steroid

Blood pressure

Hypertension

Natural language processing

Management

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Electronic medical records (EMR) provide an ideal opportunity for the detection, diagnosis, and management of systemic sclerosis (SSc) patients within the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). The objective of this project was to use informatics to identify potential SSc patients in the VHA that were on prednisone, in order to inform an outreach project to prevent scleroderma renal crisis (SRC).
               
               
                  Methods
                  The electronic medical data for this study came from Veterans Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI). For natural language processing (NLP) analysis, a set of retrieval criteria was developed for documents expected to have a high correlation to SSc. The two annotators reviewed the ratings to assemble a single adjudicated set of ratings, from which a support vector machine (SVM) based document classifier was trained. Any patient having at least one document positively classified for SSc was considered positive for SSc and the use of prednisone≥10mg in the clinical document was reviewed to determine whether it was an active medication on the prescription list.
               
               
                  Results
                  In the VHA, there were 4272 patients that have a diagnosis of SSc determined by the presence of an ICD-9 code. From these patients, 1118 patients (21%) had the use of prednisone≥10mg. Of these patients, 26 had a concurrent diagnosis of hypertension, thus these patients should not be on prednisone. By the use of natural language processing (NLP) an additional 16,522 patients were identified as possible SSc, highlighting that cases of SSc in the VHA may exist that are unidentified by ICD-9. A 10-fold cross validation of the classifier resulted in a precision (positive predictive value) of 0.814, recall (sensitivity) of 0.973, and f-measure of 0.873.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our study demonstrated that current clinical practice in the VHA includes the potentially dangerous use of prednisone for veterans with SSc. This present study also suggests there may be many undetected cases of SSc and NLP can successfully identify these patients.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Systemic sclerosis (SSc; scleroderma) is a rare, complex autoimmune disease in which a poor prognosis is most closely related to organ fibrosis and/or hypertensive crisis. Hypertension is the key factor in the development of sudden kidney failure in SSc, which is called scleroderma renal crisis (SRC) [1]. SRC is characterized by malignant hypertension and oliguric/anuric acute renal failure, and occurs in 2% to 5% of patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc) [2]. If SRC occurs there is a 5-year survival rate of 65%, thus this condition is important to identify and prevent in SSc patients.

Several retrospective studies have found that a significant, but perhaps not widely recognized risk factor for SRC is recent use of prednisone [2,3]. The use of prednisone for any indication in SSc remains controversial, but should only be used at the lowest possible dose (ideally<10mg) and reserved for myositis, arthritis, interstitial lung disease, and inflammatory skin disease [4]. SSc patients should be educated to monitor their blood pressure and to take the new onset of hypertension seriously [5]. It is critical to detect SRC in its earliest stages because prompt treatment with the BP-lowering class of drugs called angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-inhibitors) can help to prevent progression to serious kidney failure [6].

Unfortunately, over half of cases of SRC have a delay in diagnosis, require dialysis and long-term mortality remains significant [7]. Use of prednisone in a SSc patient and/or a delay in diagnosis of SRC unfortunately can result in high morbidity and mortality due to unnecessary delays in the referral process [8].

Electronic medical records (EMR) provide an ideal opportunity for the detection, diagnosis, and management of SSc patients within the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). The VHA has one of the largest integrated healthcare systems in the United States with 8.6 million total enrollees in 2012. The VA Health Services Research and Development (HSR&D) office funded the Veterans Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI), which began operations in June 2008. VINCI is collaboration between the Office of Information and Technology (OI&T) and the Office of Research and Development (OR&D). VINCI was created to serve the data and Information Technology (IT) needs of the VA research community. The VINCI database is an excellent example of big data, a massive volume of both structured and unstructured data that is so large that it׳s difficult to process using traditional database and software techniques. At the time of this study, VINCI provides access to structured and unstructured electronic medical data on 17,543,172 unique patients. VINCI and Consortium for Healthcare Informatics Research (CHIR) have shown that the EMR can be effectively utilized in a de-identified manner for patient safety and quality measurement [9].

The objective of this project was to use informatics to identify SSc patients in the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) that were prescribed prednisone in order to inform an outreach project to prevent SRC. The investigators had two goals with this informatics project: (1) to identify current SSc patients that may be inappropriate therapy, and (2) to identify if there are potential SSc patients that are not identified by ICD-9 code in order to better understand the potential impact of an outreach project.

@&#METHODS@&#

The electronic medical data for this study came from VINCI and was approved for use by the Institutional Review Board. No human subjects were contacted during this research. The data consisted of structured (i.e. problem lists, medication lists, lab reports, demographics) as well as unstructured (i.e. clinical notes) data. For natural language processing (NLP) analysis, a set of retrieval criteria was developed for documents expected to have a high correlation to SSc. These criteria were: patient had at least one systemic sclerosis diagnosis by a rheumatologist or at least two diagnoses by a primary care provider and the document written by that provider contained the text “systemic sclerosis” or “scleroderma.” Snippets containing “systemic sclerosis” or “scleroderma” were extracted from these documents, manually reviewed by two annotators, and assigned ratings of “Yes”, “No”, or “Uncertain” for the positive indication of SSc. In rating the snippets, additional terms that are strong indicators of SSc based on the classification criteria for this condition [10]: “skin thickening of fingers”, “digital tip ulcers”, “fingertip pitting scars”, “telangiectasia”, “abnormal nailfold capillaries”, “pulmonary arterial hypertension”, “interstitial lung disease”, “Raynaud׳s phenomenon”, “anticentromere”, “anti-topoisomerase”, “anti-RNA polymerase III”, or “scleroderma-related autoantibodies” were used. The antinuclear antibody (ANA) status was not reviewed.

The two annotators reviewed the ratings to assemble a single adjudicated set of ratings, from which a support vector machine (SVM) based document classifier was trained. Any patient having at least one document positively classified for SSc was considered positive for SSc. Once a patient was confirmed as definite SSc, the use of prednisone≥10mg in the clinical document was manually reviewed to determine whether it was an active medication on the prescription list.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In the VHA, there were 4272 patients that have a diagnosis of SSc determined by the presence of an ICD-9 code; all of these patients records were available for review. From a search of these patients, 1118 patients (21%) had the use of prednisone≥10mg documented in the EMR. Of these 1118 SSc patients on steroid, 26 had a concurrent diagnosis of hypertension and no clear plan educating the patient to monitor their blood pressure confirmed by manual review. Thus, these 26 patients were potentially being managed inappropriately.

From this manual review, the average age of the sample was 63 years. In this population 63% were confirmed to be on prednisone. Three patients were prescribed this therapy for gout; all others were prescribed this medication “for SSc” per the medical record. Only in 11 cases was indication specified as lung disease, tenosynovitis, or arthritis. No cases of myositis were identified. Prednisone doses as high as 60mg were recorded in the EMR. The indication for the use of high rather than low dose prednisone was not clear. In the medical records of 37% of the SSc patients that were not on prednisone, phrases such as “allergy to prednisone,” “localized scleroderma,” “patient advised not to use prednisone,” or “past use of prednisone” were documented. Document types including anesthesia notes and disability forms were universally not accurate due to negation terms used, such as “this patient does not have scleroderma.”

There are limitations to our approach. We did not specifically look at ANA status because it is not a part of systemic sclerosis classification criteria, however this would have been helpful for understanding potential SSc cases. For the manual review, if scleroderma specific antibody information did not appear in the note, we could not confirm this data. Thus, low dose prednisone use in an anti-centromeric antibody SSc patient with long standing disease may not be a dangerous practice pattern, but is not captured by our study. Additionally, the study design does not adequately capture the prevalence of hypertension in this SSc population since we did not adjust for age, gender, and race/ethnicity. Patients that had both SSc (ICD-9 710.1) and localized scleroderma patients (ICD-9 701.0) coded were not excluded until NLP was applied. In this stage, only 3 patients were identified as having localized scleroderma. Thus this present study which suggests there may be many undetected cases of SSc and NLP can successfully identify these patients does not adequately exclude localized SSc. However, we demonstrated that NLP does have the ability to distinguish between these two diseases by negation terminology.

By the use of NLP an additional 16,522 patients were identified as possible SSc from all VHA records all multiple centers. From these 16,522 patients, the two annotators reviewed and rated 244 snippets. Snippets were selected by chronological date and were from multiple VAMC throughout the United States. A 10-fold cross validation of the classifier resulted in a precision (positive predictive value) of 0.814, recall (sensitivity) of 0.973, and f-measure of 0.873. Using this classifier the entire set of documents meeting the criteria was classified.

Conclusions: Current rheumatology guidelines emphasize early detection and effective management of SRC and highlight the risk of prednisone for SSc patients [3,11]. Our study demonstrated that current clinical practice in the VHA includes the potentially dangerous use of prednisone for veterans with SSc, including the use of high dose steroid as well as unclear indications for its use. Medical plans from providers managing SSc patients with hypertension and on prednisone, did not document that patients were informed to track their blood pressure. Our study also identified many additional patients by NLP that may have a diagnosis of SSc, but were not identified by ICD-9 coding. While the absence of serology, skin score information, and patient reported outcomes in the standard note structure is a limitation to this study, the snippets of diagnostic information, did allow for identification of SSc patients. This study suggests that there may be an unusually high prevalence of SSc among veterans, which warrants further investigation.

Advances in informatics allow identification of SSc patients potentially at risk for SRC and provides the opportunity to improve quality of care in these patients through education to clinical providers. This present study also suggests there may be many undetected cases of SSc and NLP can successfully identify these patients. Manual review of cases can help providers restrict the search terms to train a classifier which will recognize phrases, such as “patient advised not to use prednisone”, in order to implement alerts appropriately. NLP may allow better identification of possible SSc patients and aid providers in the care of US veterans.

The authors have no conflicts of interests.

All of our authors Doug Redd, Tracy M. Frech, Maureen A. Murtaugh, Julia Rhiannon, and Qing T. Zeng have declared no conflicts of interest.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

