@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effect of prosthodontic planning on intercuspal occlusal contacts: Comparison of digital and conventional planning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Wax-ups can improve the occlusal contacts.


                        
                        
                           
                           The two wax-up had provided a comparable outcome.


                        
                        
                           
                           The practicality of digital wax-up is yet to be investigated.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Digital dentistry

Wax-up

Contact number

Contact area

Articulation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Adequate occlusal contacts are critical for masticatory function. The aim of this study is to evaluate the intercuspal occlusal contacts following conventional and digital wax-ups.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Stone casts of 15 patients undergoing prosthodontic treatment were gathered. Each cast was duplicated twice, so that conventional and digital wax-ups could be performed. To assess the occlusion, the following variables were evaluated: contact number per tooth (CNT), contact area per tooth (CAT) and contact accuracy. Further, the impact of tooth location in the arch was assessed.
               
               
                  Results
                  The CNT and CAT after the wax-ups increased significantly following each wax-up, and this increase was more prominent for the posterior teeth than the anterior teeth. The conventional wax-up was associated with lower CNT than the digital wax-up, especially for the posterior teeth. On the other hand, the CAT was greater for the conventional wax-up than the digital wax-up for the anterior and posterior teeth. In terms of accuracy, the two wax-ups showed greater discrepancies than the pre-treatment casts, however, the magnitude of discrepancy was greater for the digital wax-up.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The two wax-ups improved the contact number and area. Despite the statistical variation between the wax-ups, the actual difference was minimal. Therefore, it could be speculated that the two wax-ups produced a similar outcome.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In many instances, diagnostic wax-up is advocated to determine the viability of any proposed prosthodontic treatment [1,2]. The wax-up is a useful tool for selecting the ideal treatment, enhancing communication with the patient and for provisional restoration construction. Subsequently, a good wax-up will dictate the final prosthesis fabrication [1]. Any diagnostic wax-up should be accurate, aesthetic and feasible. Traditionally, the tooth surface is designed with a conventional wax-up technique as part of prosthodontic planning. The tooth contour and occlusion are modified by the addition of wax on the external tooth surface [2]. Recently, virtual designing of the tooth surface with digital techniques was proposed as an alternative method for prosthodontic planning [3]. It entails altering the tooth contour of a virtual stone cast. To facilitate the contour alterations, several authors had proposed applicable approaches and algorithms [4–7]. To ensure the usability of the digital wax-up, the alteration process is followed by production of a physical cast by subtractive of additive computer aided manufacturing [8]. Alternatively, provisional restorations can be produced according to the digital wax-up [9].

The digital wax-up has the advantages of not permanently altering the stone cast, quantifying the dental modifications, simplicity of execution, and the possibility of trying different treatments. Further, as the digital wax-up is performed using specialised software, more clinicians can provide a wax-up, even without artistic technical abilities. However, the digital wax-up should at least exhibit a similar accuracy to conventional wax-up.

Regardless of the type of diagnostic wax-up, the static and dynamic occlusal contacts should be of adequate quality and accuracy. The occlusal contacts will eventually contribute to the functional benefit and comfort of the prosthesis [10,11]. Experimentally, the quality of the occlusal contacts can be determined by the number of contacts, the area of the contacts and the accuracy of the contacts. Therefore, the aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of the conventional and digital wax-ups on occlusal contacts in terms of number, area and accuracy. The null hypotheses are that the wax-ups will alter the occlusal contacts and that there is no difference in occlusal contacts between the conventional and virtual techniques in designing of the occlusal surface.

A human research ethics approval was granted from the Human Research Ethics Committee of the University of Western Australia (RA/44/1/5079). Stone casts of 15 patients who required fixed prosthodontic treatment were retrieved for the study. The inclusion criterion was necessity of diagnostic wax-up prior to prosthodontic treatment that will influence the dental occlusion. The patients were under care at the Oral Health Centre of Western Australia.

For each arch, an irreversible hydrocolloid impression (Alginate, GC America, IL, USA) was made. An occlusal relation record was obtained using polyvinyl siloxane registration material (GC Exabite, GC America, IL, USA) according to the centric relation position. The impressions were poured by type III dental stone (Buff Stone, Adelaide Moulding & Casting Supplies, South Australia, Australia). These casts comprised the pre-treatment casts. All the casts were duplicated twice by reversible hydrocolloid duplicating materials (Magafeel, MKM System, Haanova, Slovakia). One cast received conventional wax-up and the other cast was used for the digital wax-up (
                     Fig. 1).

Semi-adjustable articulator (Whip Mix, Louiseville, KY, USA) with pre-determined values was used in this study for the wax-up as advised by some authors [12]. One set of casts were articulated according to the maximal intercuspation position and the other set of casts were articulated according to centric relation position with the aid of the intra-oral record. The maximal intercuspation position was used to relate the pre-treatment casts. This position will reflect the habitual relationship which is more relevant for function prior to the treatment [13]. On the contrary, the centric relation position was used to relate the arches prior to the wax-ups. Therefore, after the wax-up, there will be a coincidence between centric relation and maximal intercuspation positions [13]. Following the articulation, silicone material putty (Dental Speedex Putty, Coltene/Whaledent AG, Altstatten, Switzerland) was applied on the buccal aspects of the posterior teeth of the mounted casts. This silicone index was used for the digital articulation of the pre-treatment casts.

The conventional wax-up was completed by inlay wax (VITA Zahnfabrik, Bad Sackingen, Germany) addition on the external tooth surface. In some areas, the external tooth surface was modified by trimming. The wax-up aimed to rectify the defective tooth structure, establish natural and aesthetic tooth morphology, and achieve symmetry between the two sides. As the occlusion of all the teeth were altered, the alteration mechanism involved obtaining even bilateral occlusal contacts and a physiological lateral occlusal scheme (canine-guided or group function occlusion) [13,14]. All the conventional wax-ups were completed by an experienced dental technician. On the completed wax-up casts, silicone indices were formed on the buccal aspect of the posterior teeth.

The pre-treatment and conventional wax-up casts and the associated silicone indices were scanned by a Micro-CT scanner (SkyScan, Bruker micro CT, Kontich, Belgium) (12μm resolution, 360° scanning, 70KV source voltage, 1.0mm Al filtration). The reported advantage of Micro-CT scanning is the possibility of producing an accurate image that exhibits a dimensional error of 0.1% [15]. Subsequently, virtual 3D Stereolithography (STL) images of the maxillary and mandibular casts were constructed from the Digital Imaging and Communication Medicine (DICOM) images using a DICOM viewing programme (CTvox, Bruker microCT, Kontich, Belgium). The construction procedure was based on model surface extraction from the stacked series of DICOM images. The virtual image of the conventional wax-up was used for the subsequent analysis (Fig. 1b).

The virtual silicone indices were used to articulate the pre-treatment and the conventional wax-up casts digitally, using the process of image registration as illustrated by DeLong et al. [16]. A 3D rendering software package (Geomagic Studio, Raindrop Geomagic Inc., www.geomagic.com, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA) was used for the registration process. The purpose of the registration process is to precisely align the models that share common surfaces. As discussed by several authors [17], the registration process involved two sequential steps: (1) point-to-point registration and (2) global registration. The point-to-point registration is based on coarse registration between two similar surfaces. This step was completed manually by selecting points on common surfaces of the virtual cast and the silicone index. As a result, the virtual models translate spatially until they reach a reach position. In this experiment, the cusp tips and the most cervical gingival margins were selected. After the initial superimposition of the two meshes, an automated global registration was completed. This step aimed to approximate the best alignment of virtual cast against the virtual silicone index according to the Iterative Closest Point Algorithm. The registration process was executed between each arch and the corresponding virtual silicone indices. Subsequently, the virtual silicone indices were deleted digitally, and the two virtual casts were digitally articulated.

The virtual pre-treatment casts were articulated according to centric relation position. This was achieved by superimposing the virtual pre-treatment casts on the virtually articulated conventional wax-up casts. The unaltered tissues were used for the registration. A 3D rendering software (Geomagic Studio) was used to execute the digital wax-up. Virtual physiological tooth (Phonares Teeth, Ivoclar Vivadent AG, Schaan, Liechtenstein) moulds were used as mentioned by earlier investigation. The virtual tooth alignment involved size alteration, rotation and translation. Each virtual tooth was fitted manually on the virtual cast with the aim of obtaining an ideal teeth arrangement, emergence profile, symmetry and aesthetics. Accurate occlusal interdigitation with the antagonist teeth was planned. This was achieved by locating the cusps within the opposing fossae. For each set of casts, a similar occlusion scheme was established to mimic what would have been implemented in the conventional wax-up. After the completion of the wax-up, the scanned cast and the virtual teeth were merged to formulate a single model (Fig. 1c), which improved the computation speed of the subsequent analysis. To ensure uniformity of the comparison between the pre-treatment and the wax-up casts, all the casts were remeshed with a density of 0.1mm.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

The casts were imported to mesh measurement software (Meshlab Software, meshlab.sourceforge.net, Visual Computing Lab, University of Pisa, Italy) to analyse the occlusal contacts. Only the affected teeth or pontics by the prosthodontic treatment were considered for the analysis. This involved the restored unit and the opposing unit.

A threshold of 200μm was selected to visualise the contacting surfaces [16,18]. The surfaces that are opposing within a distance of 200μm are thought to be critical surfaces for occlusion [16]. As a function of the Meshlab software, the opposing cast surfaces were converted to the color-coded 3D models according to the Hausdorff Distance between the two meshes. This feature was used to visualise the occlusal relationship of the opposing occlusal surfaces according to the inter-occlusal distance, where the yellow colour indicated a 200µm distance and the red colour indicated a 0µm distance (
                        Fig. 2). Therefore, the number of occlusal contacts was based on the number of spots coloured with yellow (
                        Fig. 3a). The contact area was quantified by measuring the area with yellow boundaries (Fig. 3b). Since only the affected teeth were considered for the analysis, the contact number per tooth (CNT) and contact area per tooth (CAT) were measured. Therefore, these variables ensured the comparison between pre-treatment and post-treatment casts would not be influenced by the alteration of the occlusal unit number. The following equations were implemented:
                           
                              
                                 CNT
                                 =
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Total
                                       
                                       number
                                       
                                       of
                                       
                                       contacts
                                    
                                    n
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 CAT
                                 =
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Total
                                       
                                       contact
                                       
                                       area
                                    
                                    n
                                 
                              
                           
                        where n is the number of affected teeth.

For each detected contact, the contact accuracy was measured by the digital ruler of the software (
                        Fig. 4). This was executed by measuring the distance between a point of one mesh and the corresponding point of the opposing mesh. The purpose of measuring the contact accuracy is to evaluate the relationship of the opposing surfaces. Ideally, the surfaces should be contacting without overlapping. If the meshes were not contacting, the measured discrepancy was the least perpendicular distance between the two surfaces, and the value was labelled with a negative mark. If the meshes were overlapping, the discrepancy was determined by the greatest perpendicular distance, and the value was labelled positive. Thus negative values mean that the surfaces are not contacting, while the positive values indicate contact interference.

For the pre-treatment, conventional and digital wax-up casts, the average CNT, CAT and accuracy were calculated. The Mann-Whitney test was performed (P=0.05) to determine the significance of the difference between the pre-treatment casts and each wax-up cast, and between the conventional and digital wax-ups. The anterior and posterior dental units were separated. For all the variables, the impact of each wax-up procedure on the anterior and posterior teeth was evaluated. Further, the difference between the anterior and posterior teeth was determined.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A total of 310 units were analysed for the pre-treatment casts of which 112 were anterior unit and 198 were posterior unit. Following each wax-up procedure, a total of 464 units were included for the analysis (144 anterior units and 320 posterior units).

The CNT differed significantly between the casts. The pre-treatment casts exhibited a significantly lower CNT (mean=1.08, SD=0.55) than the conventional wax-up (P=0.03) and digital wax-up (P=0.00) casts. The digital wax-up casts had greater CNT (mean=1.58, SD=0.61) than the conventional wax-up casts (mean=1.37, SD=0.49), however, this difference was insignificant (P=0.07).

For all the casts, the posterior teeth had a significantly greater CNT than the anterior teeth (P=0.00) (
                        Table 1). 
                        Fig. 5 illustrates the influence of tooth location on the CNT. Overall, there is similarity in the CNT pattern between all the casts. On the anterior teeth, the pre-treatment casts showed similar CNT to the conventional casts (P=0.36). However, the pre-treatment casts had significantly less CNT than the digital wax-up casts (P=0.03). There was no statistical difference between the conventional and digital wax-up casts (P=0.29). For the posterior teeth, the pre-treatment casts and the two wax-ups for the posterior teeth (P=0.00). The conventional wax-up casts and digital wax-up casts had similar CNT for the posterior teeth (P=0.20).

The pre-treatment casts had lower CAT (mean=2.95mm2, SD=1.75) than conventional (mean=5.43mm2, SD=3.48) or digital wax-ups (mean=4.26mm2, SD=2.86). This difference was statistically significant between the pre-treatment and conventional wax-up casts (P=0.01), but not between the pre-treatment and digital wax-up casts (P=0.07). The two wax-ups had similar CAT (P=0.11).

All the casts had a significantly greater CAT for the posterior teeth than anterior teeth (P=0.00) (
                        Table 2), and exhibited generally a similar CAT pattern (
                        Fig. 6). For the anterior region, there was an insignificant difference between the pre-treatment casts and the conventional wax-up (P=0.72) and the digital wax-up (P=0.28) casts. The conventional wax-up casts had similar CAT to the digital wax-up (P=0.20). The posterior teeth had significantly lower CAT than the conventional wax-up (P=0.00) and digital wax-up (P=0.00) casts. The two wax-ups did not differ significantly at the posterior region (P=0.18).

For the whole arch, the mean contact accuracy for pre-treatment casts, conventional wax-up and digital wax-up casts were 0.01mm (SD=0.16), 0.08mm (SD=0.15) and 0.11mm (0.21), respectively. The pre-treatment casts had significantly more precise contacts than the two wax-up casts (P=0.00). Overall, the two wax-up casts had similar contact precision (P=0.70). However, the digital wax-up casts appeared to have more occlusal overlap that the conventional wax-up casts (
                        Fig. 7).

The posterior teeth of the pre-treatment and conventional wax-up casts had significantly less contact discrepancy than the anterior teeth (P=0.01) (
                        Table 3). On the contrary, the digital wax-up casts had significantly more contact discrepancy for the posterior teeth than the anterior teeth (P=0.00). Anteriorly, the pre-treatment casts had significantly less discrepancies than the conventional wax-up casts (P=0.00) but insignificantly less than the digital wax-up casts (P=0.19). The anterior teeth of the conventional wax-up casts had significantly more discrepancies than the digital wax-up casts (P=0.00). For the posterior teeth, the pre-treatment casts had significantly less discrepancies than conventional and digital wax-up casts (P=0.00), and the digital wax-up had significantly greater discrepancies than the conventional wax-up (P=0.01).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The outcome of this study indicates that regardless of the wax-up method employed, the planned prosthodontic treatment positively influences the number and area of occlusal contacts. Therefore the hypothesis that the contact quality is improved by the wax-up is accepted. The lower occlusal contact number and area for the pre-treatment casts could be attributed to the pre-treatment dentition׳s tendency to suffer from dental problems that influence the morphology, such as large restoration, tooth wear and chipping. Such abnormalities can affect the quality of the occlusal contact and contact area.

As this study is early in the field, it is difficult to compare its outcome with the findings of previous studies. Instead, the obtained outcome of this study was compared to the observations of the studies that quantified the contact number and area of ideal young dentitions which might constitute the benchmark [16,19–21]. The earlier studies on intercuspal occlusal contacts evaluated the total contact number and areas for intact dentition of young individuals. In this study, it was necessary to measure the contact number and area per tooth to compensate for the effect of missing teeth. To compare the outcome of this study with earlier studies, approximate contact number and area per tooth was calculated from the earlier studies by dividing the reported total contact number or area on the number of teeth per arch.

Overall, the studies on natural and intact dentition revealed that the occlusal contact number was similar to the contacts obtained following the wax-up treatment of this study [16,19–21]. Therefore, it might be reasonable to assume that the planned prosthodontic treatment will restore the occlusal anatomy to a more natural anatomy and the occlusal relationship might return to the baseline relationship. Such an observation is attributed to the more natural dental anatomy that can be generated following the wax-up. This is in accordance with the clinicians׳ recommendations on idealising intercuspal occlusal contacts with prosthodontic treatment [11,22]. The envisioned improvement of occlusal contacts will potentially contribute to a more stable and functional occlusion [10]. Therefore, in addition to aesthetic improvement following the prosthodontic treatment, the oral function is more likely to improve as well.

There was a marked variation in the reported CAT from previous studies. After manual evaluation of the contact area, Alkan et al. found less area than what has been reported in this study for all the casts [23], while Hidaka et al. reported outcome was similar only to the pre-treatment casts [24]. Conversely, in a digital study, Iwasa et al. recorded a relatively large CAT (about 5mm2 per tooth) [18] which was similar to the wax-up casts of this study. The variation in the outcome of the studies could be related to the method of area quantification [10]. It has been acknowledged that a slight vertical discrepancy of the maxilla-mandibular tooth relationship will cause an exponential reduction of the recorded area [16,24,25]. Several of the earlier studies have applied occlusal medium to quantify the area, in such cases, vertical displacement of the jaw will likely have occurred, resulting in an underestimation of the contact area. On the other hand, in this study and the study by Iwasa et al., a threshold of 200µm was applied [18], which was likely to overestimate the contact area due to the risk of the models overlapping. Nevertheless, it is clear that the wax-up process increases the CAT, which is indicative that the planned prosthodontic treatment will increase the contact area at the occlusal phase of chewing, hence resulting in more efficient chewing.

For all the evaluated casts, the location of the tooth in the arch appeared to be a strong determinant of the quality of the occlusal variables evaluated in this study. There was a dominance of contact number and area on the posterior teeth (two times the anterior teeth), which corroborates several earlier investigations [26,27]. On natural young individual dentition, McNamara and Henry found 8 times more contact on posterior teeth than anterior teeth [21]. Similarly, Ciancaglini et al. found the number of contacts to be 3 times greater for posterior teeth than anterior teeth [19]. On the restored dentition, Yi and Carlsson [28] found the posterior teeth had twice the contact number than the anterior teeth, which was similar to the pre-treatment and post-treatment casts of this study. In relation to the posterior teeth contact area, Yurktas and Manly found that the CAT on the posterior teeth tended to be 6.96mm2-per-tooth [29], which was close to the wax-up casts of this study. On the other hand, Owens et al. found the contact area on posterior teeth tended to be less than the wax-up casts of this study (3.16mm2-per-tooth), and close to the pre-treatment casts [10]. In similarity to what has been mentioned earlier, it is likely that the participant selection and the implemented methodology influenced the area outcome. The more profound contacts on the posterior teeth are due to greater area, cuspal morphology and interdigitation of the opposing teeth. The anterior teeth, on the other hand, have more confined surfaces and incisal edges. Further, this finding fits with the mutually protected occlusion concept, where the posterior teeth prevent excessive contact of the anterior teeth at maximum intercuspation [30]. Although this finding is correct for the pre-treatment and the wax-up casts, the difference between the anterior and posterior teeth is greater following the prosthodontic treatment, which indicates the idealisation of the occlusion scheme following prosthodontic planning. Thus, it could be speculated that the posterior teeth receive greater benefit in terms of contact number and area following the prosthodontic treatment. This is advantageous from the functional perspective, as the posterior teeth are responsible for food chewing and grinding.

Despite the similarity between the two wax-ups, there is tendency for the digital wax-up to exhibit greater CNT than the conventional wax-ups, while for the CAT, the conventional wax-up was associated with greater area. Since this difference is not statistically significant, the hypothesis that there is no difference in occlusal contacts between the two wax-ups is accepted. The observed slight difference is most likely related to the differences between the occlusal morphology generated by each wax-up. As the digital wax-up utilises an average tooth form, the final tooth morphology tends to exhibit more defined and steeper anatomical features [4]. This means greater cuspal angle, more pointy cusps and deeper grooves and fossae. The more defined occlusal anatomy could explain the greater contact number and the lower area of the posterior teeth for the digital wax-up casts that was observed in the current study. Nevertheless, in terms of occlusal contact number and area, it is reasonable to state that the two wax-ups generated a similar outcome and the clinical difference is likely to be insignificant.

The occlusal accuracy after each wax-up was lower than the pre-treatment casts, and this inaccuracy was more prominent for the digital wax-up. Although the occlusion of the conventional wax-up casts was established on physical casts, there has been greater occlusal inaccuracy than for pre-treatment casts. This is likely to be related to the mathematical determination of the model surface after scanning, which is associated with inevitable inaccuracies [31]. The external surface is formed of vertices connected by accumulating triangles of polygonal mesh. This polygonal mesh is composed of flat triangles which approximate the curved surfaces of the dental restoration [32,33]. As the conventional wax-up casts exhibit more prominent occlusal curvature than pre-treatment casts, they will be more prone for occlusal discrepancy. On the contrary, the pre-treatment casts have more flat surfaces, which are easier to represent digitally. As the digital teeth have more defined occlusal anatomy for the posterior teeth, they might be more vulnerable to loose surface accuracy. This might explain the slightly greater discrepancy of the digital wax-up casts than the conventional wax-up casts on the posterior teeth.

Many researchers have developed computer algorithmic systems for tooth surface design. This includes occlusal generated path, the approximation of cavity margins, fitting normalised intact tooth surfaces [5], the fitting of an average tooth [4,6,7], and scanning a manually waxed tooth or the mirror image of the contralateral tooth. Regardless of the technique, virtual reconstruction generally was found to cause up to 0.5mm vertical discrepancies of the completed restoration and in many cases, the operator is expected to manually adjust the occlusal contacts [4]. In addition, as the digital wax-ups are yet to be produced by computer-aided manufacturing processes, the accumulated final inaccuracy will be greater to what has been observed in this study. Nevertheless, since in clinical practice the wax-ups are used primarily for provisional prostheses, minor occlusal discrepancies can be modified easily in the clinic, with no major consequences on the definitive prostheses.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Within the limitations of this study, it could be concluded that in terms of occlusal contact number and area, the wax-up procedures significantly improved the intercuspal occlusal morphology. For all the evaluated casts, the posterior teeth experienced greater benefit in occlusal contact number and area. Between the two wax-ups, there were some variations in occlusal contact number and area; however, the obtained figures were very similar. In terms of occlusal contacts accuracy, the digital wax-up seems to be less accurate than the conventional wax-up on the posterior teeth. Although the implication of this inaccuracy is yet to be determined, it is likely that continuous technological improvements will enhance the digital wax-up outcome. Therefore, the digital wax-up appeared to be comparable to conventional wax-up. However, the production of physical models from the digital wax-up and the clinical implications should be subjected to additional investigations.

I wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.

I confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all named authors and that there are no other persons who satisfied the criteria for authorship but are not listed. I further confirm that the order of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all of them.

I confirm that I have given due consideration to the protection of intellectual property associated with this work and that there are no impediments to publication, including the timing of publication, with respect to intellectual property. In so doing we confirm that we have followed the regulations of our institutions concerning intellectual property.

I further confirm that any aspect of the work covered in this manuscript that has involved human patients has been conducted with the ethical approval of all relevant bodies and that such approvals are acknowledged within the manuscript.

I understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole contact for the Editorial process (including Editorial Manager and direct communications with the office). He is responsible for communicating with the other authors about progress, submissions of revisions and final approval of proofs. I confirm that I have provided a current, correct email address which is accessible by the Corresponding Author and which has been configured to accept email from Jaafar Abduo (Jaafar_abduo@hotmail.com).

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This research is supported by the Research Development Award from the University of Western Australia, and the Australian Prosthodontic Society. The authors acknowledge the facilities, the scientific and technical assistance of the National Imaging Facility at the Centre for Microscopy, Characterisation & Analysis, University of Western Australia; a facility funded by the University, State and Commonwealth Governments. The authors would like to thank the staff at the technical facility of the Oral Health Centre of Western Australia.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

