@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Quantification of the acute effect of a low dose of red wine by nonlinear measures of RR and QT interval series in healthy subjects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We compared the acute effect of red wine and control alcoholic drink on the heart rhythm properties.


                        
                        
                           
                           Nonlinear analysis of RR and QT series reveals the difference between the effects of wine and the control drink.


                        
                        
                           
                           Wine changed the complexity of series, while the control drink prolonged QT and RR intervals.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Heart rate variability

QT variability

Blood pressure

Red wine

Sample entropy

DFA

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The measures of nonlinear properties of RR interval and QT interval time series are sensitive to physiologically- or pathologically-induced complexity/regularity changes, but were not used to estimate the effect of alcohol intake. We wanted to examine the potential of these measures to quantify the acute effect of a low dose of red wine in healthy subjects. In separate experiments, fourteen young volunteers drank 200ml of red wine and a control drink with equal concentration of ethanol. ECG in supine position was recorded 20min before and 60min after drink intake. RR interval and QT interval series were extracted from ECG and we calculated variability, scaling exponents (α
                     1 and α
                     2) and sample entropy (SampEn) for both series. Systolic and diastolic blood pressures (BP) were measured every 10min. The immediate effect of both the drinks was equal: HR, BP and QT variability exhibited a sudden increase and then a decrease. However, the prolonged effect of wine and the control drink was different. Wine decreased both BP (p<0.05) and reduced complexity of RR and QT series (increased scaling exponents and decreased SampEn). The control drink prolonged QT and RR intervals (p<0.05). These results point out that the nonlinear properties of RR and QT interval series could be used to differentiate the effect of wine and ethanol. Changes in RR and QT interval series induced by a low dose of red wine are more detectable by methods that quantify the structure of the series than by methods that quantify their variability.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the last few decades, studies revealed the beneficial effect of low doses of alcoholic drink [1,2]. In particular, the effect of “a glass of red wine” was found to improve the function of cardiovascular system and to have other benefits. However, the beneficial effect of small amounts of alcohol is not fully understood. One approach to this problem is to estimate the response of the heart by analysis of quantities extracted from ECG. The acute effect of a low dose of red wine was found to be associated with acute prolongation of various electrographic time intervals [3–5]. Spaak et al. [6] showed that the acute effect of red wine and ethanol on heart rate variability (HRV) was similar and dose-related; one standard drink (155ml) had no influence on HR and HRV measures, but two alcoholic drinks did. Cameli et al. [7] reported that a low dose of red wine acutely slows cardiac conduction and prolongs repolarization in normal individuals. One of the causes that limit our knowledge is the difficulty to quantify small changes, those close to the threshold of the effect. An approach to this problem, which has not been used, might be nonlinear analysis of ECG derived quantities. In fact, nonlinear measures of HRV have gained recent interest as powerful methods for quantification of integrated cardiac control in various clinical settings [8].

We hypothesized that the acute effect of a small amount of alcohol is reflected on nonlinear properties of heart-interbeat (RR) interval series and ventricular repolarization (QT) interval series. We wanted to estimate whether methods of nonlinear analysis are sensitive to reveal small changes induced by a low dose of alcohol and the potential of these methods to discriminate between the effect of pure alcohol and the effect of alcohol modified by components of red wine.

The study group comprised of fourteen men aged (26±1) years with BMI=(24.5±0.5)kg/m2. They were apparently healthy, with no history or symptoms of heart disease, hypertension, or diabetes, with normal findings at clinical checks, and with no alcohol or drug related problems. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine of University of Belgrade, and each subject signed an informed consent to the study protocol.

Subjects attended two sessions that were one month apart. At the first session, they drank 200ml of red wine, (Cabernet Sauvignon Réserve, Radovanović, berba 2008), and the second time 200ml of a control drink with the same alcohol volume concentration (13.5%). The control drink contained drinking water, molasses-derived alcohol (96% v/v), citrus and raspberry aroma, acesulfam K (100mg/l) and aspartame (100mg/l). The subjects were instructed to eat nothing in the morning of the study and to abstain from caffeine and alcohol from the afternoon of the day before each session. Each session started at 11.00AM at the Institute of Biophysics, Belgrade Faculty of Medicine. All the drinks were taken within a 5min time frame.

Subjects׳ ECGs were taken with sampling frequency of 1000Hz by a Biopac MP100 system with AcqKnowledge 3.9.1 software (BIOPAC System, Inc., Santa Barbara, CA, USA) in supine position: 20min before the drink intake (relaxation) and 60min after the intake of each drink, but not during the actual intake. QT intervals were determined by our own software based on tangent method estimation [9]. According to this method, the end of the T wave was defined as the point where the line from the peak of the T wave to the steepest point of the descending limb of the T wave intersected the isoelectric baseline. The R peaks and RR intervals were determined by Origin (Microcal Software, Inc., Northampton, MA, USA) software. Mean RR, mean QT, HRV indices, and QT variability were calculated from non-overlapping segments of 256 points. The number of these 256 points segments was 5 in the period of relaxation and 15 after drink intake. Power spectrum densities and spectral components were calculated as reported previously [10]. QT variability (QTV) was calculated as square of QT standard deviation. Blood pressure and HR were recorded by automatic wrist blood pressure monitor (Geratherm Medical AG, Germany) at the end of relaxation, immediately after the drink intake and then every 10min until the end of the recordings.

The DFA, modification of random walk model analysis, has been used to quantify the fractal-like scaling properties of time series [11]. The root mean-square fluctuations of the integrated and linearly detrended data were calculated in observation windows of varying sizes and then plotted against the size of the window on a log–log scale. Power-law behavior was quantified as the slope of the linear regression line. Slopes, short-term scaling exponent α
                        1 and long-term scaling exponent α
                        2 were calculated over the window size n<32 and n>32 intervals. The values of scaling exponent indicate the type of noise: α~0.5 (uncorrelated white noise), α~1 (correlated 1/f noise) and α~1.5 (strongly correlated noise). Scaling exponents were calculated from the whole time series of RR and QT in relaxation and after the drink intake. At relaxation there were approximately 1000 and in the period after drink intake 3500 points.

Sample Entropy (SampEn) was computed according to the procedure published by Richman and Moorman [12]. SampEn quantifies the irregularity of a time series and estimates the conditional probability that two sequences of m consecutive data points, which are similar to each other (within given tolerance r), will remain similar when one consecutive point is included. The SampEn algorithm considers two parameters: tolerance level r and pattern length m. According to the authors׳ recommendation, we chose a tolerance level of r=0.15 times standard deviation of the time series and m=2. SampEn was also calculated from the whole time series of RR and QT in relaxation and after the drink intake.

Data are presented as mean±SE. Due to their skewed distribution, powers of RR intervals and QT variability were analyzed after natural logarithmic transformation. For all quantities, statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA for 4 repeated measurements. The time course of the effect of wine compared to control drink was analyzed for all values of HR and BPs, as well as for every segment (RR, lnHF, QT, lnQTV) with one-way ANOVA for 2 repeated measurements. Dunnett׳s test for multiple comparisons was used for HR and BPs to compare values after drink intake with the baseline values (at the end of relaxation). Two-way cluster analysis of normalized values y
                        
                           n
                        , calculated as y
                        
                           n
                        =(y
                        
                           drink
                        −y
                        
                           relax
                        )/y
                        
                           relax
                        , was performed. For each cluster, mean values after drink intake and at relaxation were compared by one-way ANOVA for 2 repeated measurements. A p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. Analyses were performed using the SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, Chicago, IL) software release 15.0.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The data obtained by wrist monitor show the effect of both wine and the control drink on widely used quantities, HR and BP (
                     Fig. 1). Immediately after intake, wine and the control alcoholic drink induced equal significant jump of heart rate and systolic and diastolic blood pressures. However, after 10min these quantities returned to initial values or even dropped below them. Compared to the control drink, wine induced a larger decrease of blood pressures (Fig. 1B, 
                     Table 1).

The quantities calculated from ECG recordings were analyzed using three approaches. We considered (i) the measures determined from segments (RR, spectral components of RR, QT and QTV) as functions of time, (ii) the effect of drinks on mean values of all variables, and (iii) the variety of responses within the group.

Changes of measures determined from segments as functions of time are shown in 
                     Fig. 2.Values of RR and QT intervals are mean values from each segment averaged over subjects (Fig. 2A), while lnHF and lnQTV were calculated from each segment and averaged over subjects (Fig. 2B). Changes of mean RR and QT intervals point out to the different effects of the control drink and wine. There is a prolongation of RR and QT interval after intake of the control drink, but not after wine intake. QTV was significantly increased immediately after the intake of both drinks and during the whole 60-min period. Neither of drinks changed significantly heart rate variability indices; in Fig. 2 only lnHF is shown.

Nonlinear measures were calculated from the whole recording before and after drink intake. Their mean values (averaged over subjects) at relaxation and after drink intake are in Table 1. Mean values of other variables in Table 1 were obtained by averaging over subjects and over time. The difference in the effects of wine and the control drink is apparent in the changes of mean values. While common effect of wine and the control drink is increased α
                     1 of RR series and QTV, the control drink also induced prolongation of RR and QT intervals, but wine increased α
                     2 of RR series and α
                     2 of QT series and decreased SampEn of QT series.

Since we investigated a small effect, we considered the difference in individual responses. We also wanted to take into account the possible effect of different individual baseline values. Hence, we applied cluster analysis of normalized quantities (see Section 2). In this way, we extracted clusters of responses to both drinks for each measure. In 
                     Table 2 are the results of cluster analysis: clusters and percentage of all subjects in a cluster (in the brackets) and absolute mean values for each measure (for comparison with values in Table 1).

Three types of responses to drinks were detected by cluster analysis. One is a uniform response, one cluster or one main cluster (over 90% of the group). The other type is the response of two clusters, one cluster without change, the other with a significant change in one direction. In the latter case, it is possible that an increase of drink would lead to a significant uniform effect. The third type consists of two clusters with opposite responses which might indicate that the effect could be drastically different between individuals. However, all the significant effects deduced by changes of mean values were in agreement with clusters of responses. For the control drink there was one cluster of response in RR and QT intervals. The response in α
                     1 consists of one cluster with a tendency to increase and one subject cluster with a strong increase. The response of QTV to the control drink was more heterogeneous, but without opposite effects. In one cluster a significant increase was determined (like in Table 1), and in the other cluster there was no change. For wine, there was one cluster of response in α
                     1 of RR series and in lnQTV, but in α
                     2 of RR series the response was more diverse; one cluster showed an increase and the other a nonsignificant change. Similarly, the two clusters׳ response to wine was found in α
                     2 and SampEn of QT series. In these cases of two clusters׳ response, the cluster with a significant change is small probably because of the small dose. Cluster analysis pointed out that in the case without significant change of mean values all three types of responses were possible. The response of two clusters with opposite change is of special interest. This was found after wine intake for RR and after the control drink intake for SampEn of RR series and α
                     1 of QT series.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, the acute effect of “a glass of red wine” and the equivalent dose of alcoholic drink was quantified for the first time by the analysis of linear and nonlinear properties of RR and QT interval series. In addition, we recorded the effect of drinks on blood pressure. Two phases could clearly be distinguished after the intake of both drinks. The first phase is the same for both drinks and presents immediate effect of ethanol on cardiovascular system. In the second phase different prolonged effects of wine and the control alcoholic drink on the dynamics of heart rhythm become prominent.

We detected the immediate effect of wine and the control drink intake on the cardiovascular system as significant peaks of heart rate, systolic and diastolic blood pressures. It is well known that a few minutes after intake, alcohol enters the bloodstream through stomach wall and circulates to all parts of the body. Some studies indicate that oral or intravenous alcohol administration induces direct short-lived pressor effect through sympathetic activation [13,14]. Other studies suggest that this effect is not sympathetically mediated, but may be due to direct immediate vasoconstrictor effect of alcohol-induced shift in intracellular calcium [15,16]. We also observed a transient increase in QTV in the first ten minutes after drinks intake. Exact mechanisms that generate and modulate QTV are unknown. It is probably influenced by both the intrinsic adaptation of the action potential duration and the autonomic nervous system activity. Cardiac norepinephrine spillover, the direct index of cardiac sympathetic activity, was related to QTV in patients with hypertension [17], but not in normal conditions [18] or in patients with panic disorder and depression [19]. Since there was no difference between the effects of the two drinks, we concluded that wine did not modify the action of ethanol in the first 10min.

Our results point out that wine modifies the effect of ethanol on prolongation of RR and QT intervals and that a specific effect of wine is the change of dynamics of RR and QT series. Also, only wine had a prolonged effect on blood pressure.

Regarding the acute effect of wine on BP, conflicting results were reported. Some studies reported an increase [13,14], others a decrease [20,21] or no change in BP after wine or ethanol intake [22]. Tawakol et al. [16] pointed out that ethanol has complex direct vascular effects, which include basal vasoconstriction as well as potentiation of both endothelium dependent and independent vasodilatation. Agewall et al. [23] demonstrated that the acute effect of red wine ingestion resulted in vasodilatation and that this effect is more pronounced in de-alcoholized red wine. In vitro studies showed that red wine is capable of reducing endothelin-1 synthesis, which is the most powerful vasoconstrictor, leading to enhanced vasodilatation [24]. However, it has not yet been elucidated how red wine affects the endothelium in the immediate postprandial state [25].

How alcohol prolongs RR and QT intervals and how wine interferes with these effects are not understood and we can only indicate some elements of these processes. Lorsheyd et al. [26] reported that the acute ingestion of alcohol in healthy population could induce prolongation of QTc interval (QT interval corrected for HR). These authors concluded that prolonged QTc interval reflects abnormal repolarization and may increase the risk of ventricular arrhythmias. The same effect was found for a low dose of red wine in the study of Cameli et al. [7]. The mechanism causing QT prolongation originates from changes in the duration of ventricular action potentials. Since QT-prolongation is a consequence of calcium overload of cardiac cells and the reduced counterbalancing HERG-current that causes early after depolarization, calcium channel blocking agents can successfully reduce its occurrence. The effect of alcohol is in its ability to block the HERG potassium channels [27]. Liu et al. [28] reported that resveratrol reduced calcium influx of action potential in guinea pig papillary muscles. Also, Dobrydneva et al. [29] showed that resveratrol could directly block calcium channel and inhibit calcium influx in human platelets. It seems that a low dose of red wine hindered alcohol effect on QT length due to resveratrol and maybe other components of wine. It is very interesting that RR interval response to wine consisted of two clusters with opposite changes. It seems that a low dose of wine, because of complex processes induced by alcohol and wine components, can lead to prominent individual differences.

We demonstrated that nonlinear measures differentiate prolonged effect of ethanol and wine on RR and QT dynamics. Pentila et al. [30] showed that cardiac vagal outflow influenced complexity and correlation properties of heart rate dynamics. They found that vagal blockade resulted in an increase of both scaling exponents and a decrease of approximate entropy. Other studies also suggested that a breakdown of scaling behavior indicated disturbances in the overall control of the heart [31]. While the control drink changed only short-term correlations of RR intervals connected with breathing [32], the effect of wine on heart control was more profound, affecting short- and long-term correlations and complexity of the series. An increase in correlations, combined with a reduced complexity (tendency of decrease in SampEn) of RR interval series after wine intake, indicate temporary vagal induced changes in integrated cardiac control. The effect of wine was on regulatory mechanisms of QT dynamics in the same direction as on RR intervals. It should be noticed that baseline QT interval series, compared to RR interval series, are more irregular, characterized by a higher SampEn and lower scaling exponents. Wine increased correlations and reduced the complexity in both series, although not to the same effect.

The limitations of this study, which prevent us from better explaining the changes that we quantified, are the lack of simultaneous biochemical data and a small group of subjects. The complexity of the response to a threshold effect (only one glass) includes individual differences. The individual differences might be better understood if further studies are carried out with a broader scope.

In conclusion, acute effects of a glass of red wine and control alcoholic drink were not the same even when individual different responses were taken into account. The main effect of the control drink was prolongation of RR and QT intervals with a minor change of RR dynamics. On the contrary, wine changed “inner properties” of RR and QT time series: it increased correlation and reduced complexity. Wine did not change mean QT interval and it had a diverse individual effect on RR interval. In addition, only wine decreased blood pressure. The changes induced by wine indicate a modification of heart control and response of vasomotor control.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This work was supported by the Serbian Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development (TP 31020).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

