@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#In vitro evaluation of basal shapes and offset values of artificial teeth for CAD/CAM complete dentures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We evaluated optimal shape of artificial teeth for CAD/CAM complete dentures.


                        
                        
                           
                           We examined the optimal offset values required for teeth positioning.


                        
                        
                           
                           The structures in the basal areas showed accurate positioning for molars/premolars.


                        
                        
                           
                           The structures appeared to restrain motion during bonding.


                        
                        
                           
                           The optimal offset value was .20mm for molar and premolar teeth.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Complete dentures

Accuracy

CAD/CAM

Artificial teeth

Offset

Basal shapes

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Statement of Problem. Artificial teeth are bonded onto the recesses of a milled denture base in a complete denture prepared using computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM). Little is known, however, about the effects of basal shapes and offset values on the accuracy of positions of the bonded artificial teeth.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Recently, computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacture (CAD/CAM) technologies were applied to the field of complete denture prosthodontics [1,2]. Several fabrication methods for CAD/CAM fabricated complete dentures have been reported [3]. Among these methods, the laboratory procedures are subdivided broadly into 2 categories. One involves fabrication of denture bases using computerized-numerical-control milling [1,4], and the other is a hybrid of rapid prototyping (RP) and conventional laboratory procedures [5]. The abovementioned reports, however, described the fabrication methods and did not mention the accuracy of the finished dentures.

The development of the system for fabricating CAD/CAM fabricated complete dentures was reported previously [6,7]. In this system, artificial teeth are bonded onto the recesses of a milled denture base. The authors previously reported that the polished surface of dentures shows high accuracy, whereas the occlusal surface shows low accuracy [8]. This is because artificial teeth are occasionally not returned to the specified positions during the bonding process, when there is no space between artificial teeth and the recesses. The authors also reported previously that in CAD/CAM fabricated complete dentures, recesses require an offset for precise positioning of teeth [9].

However, in the abovementioned study [9], the displacement of bonded artificial teeth to the buccal surface was observed. This problem is because of the horizontal movement of artificial teeth during the bonding process. Furthermore, the study results showed a wide range of offset values of .10–.25mm and did not specify the optimal offset value. In addition, cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) was used for analysis of bonded artificial teeth. In a previous report, Yamashina stated that CBCT is inaccurate [10].

In order to solve these problems, in the present study, basal shapes of artificial teeth were developed from scratch; these shapes are intended to prevent the horizontal movement. Three offset values that were specified in a previous study were selected. A 3-dimensional (3D) laser scanner was used for accurate scanning of the prototype [11]. Thus, our null hypothesis was that, in this preliminary study, among 3 types of basal shape and 3 offset values, there are no differences in positioning of the artificial teeth.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

The flow chart used in this study is described in 
                        Fig. 1. The denture base model was designed in CAD software (FreeForm; Geomagic, Morrisville, NC, USA; Fig. 1a). The standard triangulated language data on artificial teeth (SURPASS G; GC Corp., Tokyo, Japan) were obtained using a non-contact optical 3D scanner (ATOS Triple Scan; GOM, Braunschweig, Germany; Fig. 1b) based on the principle of triangulation. The mandibular left first premolar (LL4) and mandibular left first molar (LL6) were used for the experiments. The data on artificial teeth served as the Control group. Using the CAD software, the basal shapes of the Control group were changed as follows. The Type 1 group had projections in the lingual area, whereas the Type 2 group had dimples in the basal area on the mesial and distal side (
                        Fig. 2). In both groups (Types 1 and 2), the edges of the basal area were changed to a smooth curve. On the occlusal surface of each tooth model, a reference point (“A” in 
                        Fig. 3) was designed. On the basis of these data, a five-axis computerized numerical control machining center (GM-1000; GC Corp., Tokyo, Japan) and a ball-end mill (.5mm in diameter) were used to mill polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) disks (Aadva PMMA disc; GC Corp., Tokyo, Japan) to prepare the artificial teeth (Fig. 1c). Three types of artificial teeth were arranged on the denture base model in the CAD software. Each type of artificial teeth for LL4 and LL6 was set at regular intervals on the denture base model; these data were defined as the master data (
                        Fig. 1d and 4).

The artificial teeth were subtracted from the denture base model by means of Boolean logic operations in order to produce recesses (Fig. 1e). The recesses were then offset with 3 values (Fig. 1f). The offset values were .15, .20, and .25mm. During this process, offset recesses for the artificial teeth were prepared on the denture base model. According to these data, the machining center was used to mill 3 translucent PMMA disks to prepare denture base prototypes with recesses for LL4 and LL6 (
                        Figs. 1g and 5). A quickly self-polymerizing acrylic resin (UNIFAST III; GC Corp., Tokyo, Japan) was used for bonding the artificial teeth onto the base prototype containing the recesses. An examiner with >5 years of clinical experience in prosthodontics at the Dental Hospital, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, bonded the sample piece (Fig. 1h, 
                        Fig. 6). These denture base models with bonded artificial teeth were analyzed using the 3D scanner. These data were defined as the scanned data (Fig. 1i).

The scanned data were superimposed on the master data in accordance with the flat plane part of the denture base model using the CAD software (Mimics; Materialise, Leuven, Belgium; Fig. 1j). The deviation comparison between the master data and the scanned data was performed on the artificial teeth. Mean deviations were calculated as absolute values according to the method described previously [9]. However, in the color-coded maps of deviations, positive and negative values were used instead. This format was necessary to understand the direction of deviations visually. After that, distances between the master and scanned data at reference point A were calculated. CAD software (CATIA V5R19; Dassault Systemes, Vélizy-Villacoublay, France) was used for all analyses.

Mean deviations and 3D distances at the reference point were assessed using 2-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey test. The 2 factors used in the analysis were the offset value and basal shape. The statistical software SPSS, version 16.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) was used, and the level of statistical significance was set to P=.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results of the 2-way ANOVA for offset values and basal shapes (mean deviations) are shown in 
                     Table 1. Further analysis using Tukey test is shown in 
                     Table 2. The results of 2-way ANOVA for offset values and basal shapes (mean distances) at reference point A are shown in 
                     Table 3. Further analysis by means of Tukey test is shown in 
                     Table 4.


                     
                     Fig. 7 shows the mean value of mean deviations for LL4. The Type 1 and Type 2 groups showed a significantly smaller mean value of mean deviations than the Control group (P<.05). The .20-mm-offset group and the .25-mm-offset group showed a significantly smaller mean value of mean deviations than the .15-mm-offset group (P<.05). 
                     Fig. 8 shows mean distances between the master and scanned data at reference points A. The .20-mm-offset group showed significantly smaller mean distances than the .15 and .25-mm-offset groups (P<.05). 
                     Fig. 9 shows the color-coded maps of deviations. In these maps, the deviations get smaller as the color changes from red to blue. The Control group rose towards the buccal surface. In contrast, the Types 1 and 2 groups rose towards the occlusal surface.


                     
                     Fig. 10 shows the mean value of mean deviations for LL6. The Type 2 group showed a significantly smaller mean value of mean deviations than Control group (P<.05). The .20-mm-offset group showed a significantly smaller mean value of mean deviations than the .15 and .25-mm-offset groups (P<.05). 
                     Fig. 11 shows mean distances between the master and scanned data at reference points A. The .20-mm-offset group showed a significantly smaller mean value of mean deviations than .15 and .25-mm-offset groups (P<.05). 
                     Fig. 12 shows the color-coded maps of the deviations. Large deviations in the buccal surface of the .15-mm-offset Control group were observed.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Our results support the rejection of the null hypothesis stated in Section 1. The occlusal contacts of complete dentures are believed to affect chewing ability [12]. When there is a displacement of bonded artificial teeth in a CAD/CAM fabricated complete denture, it is difficult to reproduce the occlusal contacts designed with CAD software. Thus, a longer period of denture adjustments may be needed as the displacement of bonded artificial teeth increases. In the present system of a CAD/CAM denture, occlusal adjustments by remounting are difficult in a pre-insertion procedure. This problem might be solved by means of taking check-bite records and remounting in a laboratory. However we choose to skip this step in order to reduce clinical and laboratory procedures. In this study, the factors affecting the accuracy of bonded artificial teeth were assessed. The findings seem to be relevant clinically.

For LL4, judging by the data on mean deviations, the Type 1 and Type 2 groups are more accurate than the Control group. This is probably because the form of the basal shape, projections, and dimples restrain horizontal rotation. However, for LL6, the Type 2 group was more accurate than the Control group. This is because the original shape of LL6 is round, and mesiodistal dimples effectively inhibit rotation of the tooth. With regard to the Type 1 group, the dimples were relatively small for the basal area of the molar. Therefore, dimples may not restrain the rotations of an artificial tooth. For both LL4 and LL6, the Control group has sharp edges, whereas the Type 1 and Type 2 groups have a rounded basal shape. These rounded basal shapes may lead to removal of interference inside the recesses [13]. Regarding the offset values, according to the color-coded map, the .15-mm-offset groups rose, whereas the .25-mm-offset groups sank. This is because a .25-mm space was designed all around the recesses, including the basal area of the artificial teeth. It seems that the recesses with a .15-mm offset are too tight for bonding and the .25-mm offset is too loose. In this preliminary study, the optimal offset value was found to be .20mm.

According to 1 study [9], the smallest mean deviation is .08mm for the maxillary left first premolar and .05mm for the maxillary left first molar. Compared with these results, the mean deviations approximately .03mm for LL4 and approximately .02mm for LL6 were obtained in the present study. Although there is a difference between upper posterior teeth in the previous study and lower posterior teeth in the present study, the newly developed basal shapes show mean deviations (.05mm and .03mm) that are superior to those of conventional shapes of artificial teeth.

Offset curves/surfaces are defined as locations of the points that are at a constant distance from the normal generator curves/surfaces [14]. In the present study, the spaces between artificial teeth and the recesses of the denture base were created by offsetting the recesses data. In the abovementioned study, the values of offsets differ among various types of teeth and have ranges [9]. In contrast, the offset value that was obtained in the present study is within a narrow range. Because a 3D scanner is more accurate than CBCT, the surfaces of the scanned data are smoother. An offset value of .2mm appears to be optimal regardless of a tooth type.

The sample size was determined by the previous study [9]. To evaluate the sample size, post-hoc power analysis was performed in mean deviations for LL4 and LL6. The results showed values >.9 in 2 main effects: the basal shape and offset value. Thus, the number of sample groups is considered to be appropriate.

The PMMA disks were highly polymerized in high temperature and high pressured conditions. In addition, we used disks a certain amount of time after polymerization. Hence, the effect of shrinkage after polymerization was considered to be small.

Our study has some limitations. For instance, the effects of a luting agent, for example, film thickness of a luting agent, flow of a luting agent, and hand pressure during bonding need to be evaluated in the future. The shrinkage of the UNIFAST III during polymerization is reported as .3% [15]. In the present study, only the posterior artificial teeth, which are important for occlusion of complete dentures, were analyzed. Testing of suitable basal shapes for every type of artificial teeth would be warranted, including canine and incisor teeth. In addition the effect of adjacent and opposing teeth should be evaluated. At the same time, in the design phase, limitations of computerized-numerical-control milling and a tool path need to be considered [16,17].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Within the limitations of this preliminary study, both the offset values and the shapes of the basal area of artificial teeth can be optimized to improve the accuracy of positioning of artificial teeth in a CAD/CAM denture. The optimal offset values are .20mm for LL4 and LL6. The optimal basal shapes are Types 1 and 2 for LL4 and Type 2 for LL6.

None declared.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

The authors are grateful for the design and fabrication of the artificial teeth used in this study, which were provided by GC Corp., Tokyo, Japan.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

