@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Influence of computer work under time pressure on cardiac activity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Computer work stress under time pressure and its effect on the cardiac activity were investigated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Heightened vagal tone was noted in the relaxation computer work without time pressure.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stressful computer tasks caused decreased HRV and activated sympathetic activity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Poincaré plot analysis outperforms power spectral analysis.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Stress

Computer–mouse work

Electrocardiogram (ECG)

Heart rate variability (HRV)

Spectral analysis

Poincaré plot

Cardiac activity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Computer users are often under stress when required to complete computer work within a required time. Work stress has repeatedly been associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular disease. The present study examined the effects of time pressure workload during computer tasks on cardiac activity in 20 healthy subjects. Heart rate, time domain and frequency domain indices of heart rate variability (HRV) and Poincaré plot parameters were compared among five computer tasks and two rest periods. Faster heart rate and decreased standard deviation of R–R interval were noted in response to computer tasks under time pressure. The Poincaré plot parameters showed significant differences between different levels of time pressure workload during computer tasks, and between computer tasks and the rest periods. In contrast, no significant differences were identified for the frequency domain indices of HRV. The results suggest that the quantitative Poincaré plot analysis used in this study was able to reveal the intrinsic nonlinear nature of the autonomically regulated cardiac rhythm. Specifically, heightened vagal tone occurred during the relaxation computer tasks without time pressure. In contrast, the stressful computer tasks with added time pressure stimulated cardiac sympathetic activity.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The use of computers is becoming an essential part of industrial, office and daily life. Computer work with clicking and moving a mouse generally involves a high demand of visual, motor and cognitive coordination. In many situations, the users are under stressful pressure to complete the computer work within a required time. The consequences of such mental stress include tension, irritability, inability to concentrate and a variety of physical symptoms usually reflected by a headache or an increased heart rate (HR). Porges described stress as an autonomic state that reflects a disruption of homeostasis due to depressed parasympathetic tone [1]. Workload-related stress often produces changes in behavioral (e.g., higher error rates) [2,3] and physiological (e.g., faster heartbeat) functions [4,5]. Thus, the degree of stress can be mirrored from behavior performance and can be quantified on a physiological level.

HR and HR variability (HRV) allow the discrimination among levels of mental stress induced by workload [6–11]. Although HRV analysis has been a popular tool for assessing mental stress, the conventional spectral analysis in HRV has not yet reached a conclusion regarding the frequency components specific to the time pressure [7,9,10]. It still remains unclear how could HR change without an appropriate and assessable change in its autonomic modulation reflected on the spectral characteristics of HRV [7,9,10]. Heiden et al. [7] investigated the influences of time pressure and precision demands during computer-mouse work on muscle oxygenation and position sense in the upper extremity and found that HRV did not differ in the low and high frequency bands [7]. Garde et al. demonstrated that carrying out computer tasks under mental pressure did not result in any changes in the low and high frequency components in the normalized power spectra [10]. Similar results were reported by Wahlström and colleagues [9], where no significant difference in the ratio of low and high frequency components was noted between the control and stress conditions in the Stroop colour word test under time pressure and verbal provocation. Nevertheless, some studies have reported that the frequency components of HRV changed as a result of adding memory demands to a computer task [6,8,11,12].

One possibility for such an inconsistency is the nonlinear properties of HRV [13–15]. Consequently, the linear spectral analysis may not be able to uncover subtle but important alterations and anomalies in HR time series. Searchable literatures have reported the advantages of nonlinear methods, such as detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA), approximate entropy (ApEn) and Poincaré plot analysis, over the linear spectral analysis [16–19]. Nonlinear techniques are able to distinguish groups that have no differences in their spectra [17,19]. However, the physiological connection between the scaling factor of DFA or information entropy and the cardiac activities is indirect. Moreover, a larger data length was required for some nonlinear indices, such as DFA and ApEn [20]. Thus, an efficacious nonlinear measure is required for better physiological understanding of cardiac activities during lab experiments. As a simple yet powerful nonlinear measure, the quantifications of the Poincaré plot have recently been proposed to characterize the vagal modulation of R–R interval dynamics [18,19,21,22]. The Poincaré plot provides a useful visualisation of HRV by representing both short- and long-term variations in the R–R intervals, and its geometrical representations can reflect the cardiac behavior, e.g., a normal or reduced cardiac autonomic modulation [23]. Meanwhile, a physiological model for the Poincaré plot has been established and tested by Brennan and colleagues, in which the Poincaré plot is linked to the weighted combination of low and high frequency components in HRV [24].

The aim of this study was to investigate the cardiac activities during computer work under time pressure. Additionally, we attempted to analyze the reason for the failure of spectral measures in discriminating the levels of computer work stress under different time pressures.

@&#METHODS@&#

In total, 20 subjects (male/female: 10/10; age: 23.0±2.6 years; height: 168.4±5.0 cm; weight: 57.6±7.9kg) participated in this study. No subjects had a history of cardiovascular abnormality or were taking medication. All subjects were right-handed experienced computer users without musculoskeletal problems. The subjects were requested to avoid strenuous exercise physical exercise for 24h prior to the participation in the experiments and were not allowed to consume hot drinks or those containing caffeine or eat a substantial meal for 1h before the test. All participants gave their informed consent to participate in the study which was approved by the local ethics advisory committee.

Each subject was seated comfortably with arm supports and asked to perform a standardised digit input test in five 8-min sessions. Each session was comprised of serially inputting six-digit sequences using a 3×3 numeric keyboard specifically designed for the test on the computer display. The sequences presented on the computer display were randomly generated. The ECG signals were continuously recorded with electrodes (Mode: 915S50, Shengfeng Strongest, China) attached on the inner sides of the participants’ two forearms and the right ankle, according to the driven-right-leg system. The ECG signals were amplified (ML135 Dual Bio Amp, ADInstruments Pty Ltd., Sydney, Australia) before the A/D conversion using a recording system (PowerLab 4/26, ADInstruments Pty Ltd., Sydney, Australia) at a sampling rate of 1000Hz. The five sessions are detailed below:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 Non-stress session (NS): The subjects were asked to input each sequence at their normal speed under no time pressure. The next six-digit sequence did not start until the current one was completed. The average time (unit: seconds per sequence) was used as the reference in the following stressful sessions;


                                 High-level pressure session (HS): The subjects were asked to input each sequence within 80% of the average time. A timing bar over the input area indicated the remaining time. The next sequence task started at the end of 80% of the average time regardless of the completion of the current one;


                                 Standard session (SS): It was similar to HS. However, the subjects were required to complete the input within 100% of the average time;


                                 Low-level pressure session (LS): It was also similar to HS, but the sequence had to be input within 90% of the average time;


                                 Relaxed session (RS): The subjects were given a longer time than in the SS, i.e., 150% of the average time, to input each sequence.

There was a 5-min break interval between two consecutive sessions. The ECG signals were recorded in two 8-min sessions before and after the computer work when the subjects were in rest, i.e., REST1 and REST2, respectively. The digit correct rate and sequence correct rate for each subject were recorded automatically and simultaneously throughout the experiments as the behavior performances outcome. The digit correct rate was calculated as the ratio of the digits correctly input over the total digits displayed, and sequence correct rate was defined as the sequences correctly input over the total sequences presented.

HR was extracted from the ECG signal to directly reflect the cardiac response to the computer work under time pressure. As a measure of the fluctuation of beat-to-beat differences, HRV is a reliable, noninvasive marker of cardiac activity. HRV characterizes the variations in the intervals between consecutive heartbeats, that is, the variations in the duration of R–R intervals between consecutive QRS complexes, as measured by ECG. The standard deviation of R–R interval (SDRR), was used to quantify HRV [25].

Power spectral analysis of the beat-to-beat fluctuations in R–R intervals was performed via fast Fourier transformation (FFT). Two frequency bands were defined as follows [25]: a low frequency (LF) band from 0.04 to 0.15Hz and a high frequency (HF) band from 0.16 to 0.4Hz. Within each frequency band the spectral power was expressed in normalized units (n.u.), where LF (n.u.) and HF (n.u.) represent the relative power component to the total power of HRV. Finally, the low-to-high ratio (HF/LF) was calculated. HF power is almost entirely mediated by the parasympathetic activity to the sinus node, which is directly associated with respiratory activity, whereas LF power reflects the mixed modulation of parasympathetic and sympathetic activities. Changes in the ratio LF/HF were taken to be an indication of changes in sympathetic activity, although this ratio may also be an index of sympathovagal balance [25,26].

The Poincaré plot is the scattering outline of the current R–R intervals plotted against the preceding R–R intervals, which includes both the outline and the detailed beat-to-beat behavior of cardiac-physiologic information. Tulppo et al. [19] proposed to fit an ellipse to the Poincaré plot (
                        Fig. 1). The dispersion of the points perpendicular to the line-of-identity measures the width of the Poincaré cloud, and reflects the level of short-term HRV (SD1), whereas the dispersion of points along the line-of-identity measures the length of the cloud and indicates the level of long-term HRV (SD2) [19,27]. SD1 is equivalent to the standard deviation of differences between adjacent R–R intervals (SDSD), and SD2 reflects the proportional weighted SDRR and SDSD as follows [27,28]:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       [
                                       SD
                                       1
                                       ]
                                    
                                    2
                                 
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       1
                                       2
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       SDSD
                                    
                                    2
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       [
                                       SD
                                       2
                                       ]
                                    
                                    2
                                 
                                 =
                                 2
                                 
                                    
                                       SDRR
                                    
                                    2
                                 
                                 −
                                 
                                    
                                       1
                                       2
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       SDSD
                                    
                                    2
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

SD1, SD2 and their ratio SD1/SD2 have previously been applied in the measurement of nonlinear cardiac activities [18,19,22,23,29]. For instance, lower SD1 and SD2 often imply the decrease of HRV.

All data were presented as the mean±standard deviation. The significance of difference between sessions was compared using one-way ANOVA with repeated-measures. A p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. The statistical analyses were run in MATLAB software (MathWorks Inc., MA, USA).

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        
                        Fig. 2 shows the performance of the computer-mouse work in the aspects of digit correct rate and sequence correct rate. Both digit correct rate and sequence correct rate decreased significantly in the sessions with higher pressure (HS and LS) compared to the non-stressful and less stressful sessions (NS, SS and RS) (all p<0.01). The digit correct rate and sequence correct rate of the SS session were significantly lower than those of NS and RS (all p<0.01).

The HR and the HRV indices are listed in 
                        Table 1. During the five computer task sessions, the most stressful session (HS) resulted in a faster HR than the other computer tasks (all p<0.01) and the computer work under the relaxation state (RS) resulted in a lower HR than the other tasks (all p<0.05). HR significantly slowed down after the computer work (REST2) compared to other sessions (REST1, NS, SS LS, [all p<0.05] and HS [p<0.01]) except RS. SDRR in HS was significantly lower than that in LS (p<0.05). SDRR in REST2 significantly increased compared to those in NS, SS, LS (p<0.05) and HS (p<0.01). There were no significant differences for the normalized LF and HF between sessions (p>0.05).


                        
                        Fig. 3 shows the Poincaré plots in each session for one representative subject throughout the experiment. The shape of the plot concentrated evidently under time pressure (HS and LS) and expanded when the subjects were in the relaxation states (REST1, RS and REST2). 
                        Table 2 summarizes the average SD1 and SD2 of the Poincaré plots for all subjects in each session as well as their ratio, SD1/SD2. The SD1 in RS significantly increased compared to those in REST1, NS and HS (all p<0.05). SD2 was significantly lower in the most stressful session (HS) than in LS (p<0.05), RS (p<0.05) and REST2 (p<0.01). SD1/SD2 was lower in REST2 than in the time pressure sessions (HS and LS, all p<0.05).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The behavior performance confirmed that the designed protocol successfully created a pressure for the subjects (see Fig. 2). Work stress affected several physiological processes in the subjects. The results from the present study indicate that the effects of work stress are partly mediated through (1) the increased HR reactivity to the stressful computer work and (2) the lower SDRR implying the decreased HRV. These two characteristics of work stress are associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease [30,31]. Meanwhile, the decreased HRV during the stressful computer tasks suggested a higher cardiac sympathetic activity or a lower vagal tone [32].

However, no significant differences in either LF or HF components were identified between any two sessions (see Table 1). The inability of spectral analysis to distinguish groups has also been reported in the literature [13,33,34], where an evident increase in HR was not followed by changes in the spectral characteristics of HRV in mental stress performed with verbalisation. In the present study, the spectral results suggest that an alternative method is required to investigate computer work under time pressure. Over recent years, short time Fourier transform and wavelet transform have been used to examine the mechanisms controlling HRV. Although these advanced spectral techniques has been suggested to be good indicators for distinguishing patients from healthy subjects, the correlation between the control of the autonomic nervous system and these advanced spectral techniques has not been well established [35,36].

It has been demonstrated that the Poincaré plot can provide useful physiological information of R–R interval dynamics during exercise, which is not easily detected using linear measures [19]. Similarly, in the present study, the Poincaré plot analysis showed its sensitivity in distinguishing subtle variations. The meaning of the Poincaré plot parameters was specified in the work from Tulppo and his co-workers [19]. As stated in their work, SD1 quantifies the vagal modulation of HR, whereas decreased SD2 and increased SD1/SD2 suggest sympathetic activation. In the present study, RS and REST2 with higher SD1 and SD2 are consistent with heightened vagal tone, perhaps as a result of sustained sympathetic activation or accentuated antagonism [37] after a series of relatively stressful work sessions. The time pressure tasks with lower SD1 and SD2 were associated with sympathetic activation and reduced vagal tone. Meanwhile, HS and LS with higher SD1/SD2 and with lower SD1/SD2 were related to the excitement of the sympathetic nerves during the two sessions of pressure computer tasks and sustained vagal activity during the rest after the computer work.

Why the Poincaré plot performs better than spectral analysis is an interesting question. The time series of heart beats exhibits the pattern of a nonlinear process [38]. Due to the nonlinear components, the R–R interval time series signal cannot be properly assessed using linear techniques such as spectral analysis [38]. In the search for improved methods for decoding hidden information in the R–R interval dynamics, the parameters arising from nonlinear methods were identified. A Poincaré plot of HRV, consisting of plotting each R–R interval as a function of the previous interval, is such a nonlinear method that can be used to evaluate changes in heart dynamics with its trends. Poincaré analysis is used to assess the qualitative (nonlinear interactions between regulatory mechanisms) rather than the quantitative (time- or frequency domains) properties of HR dynamics. In addition to its sensibility to the nonlinear phenomena of HRV genesis, the combinational and weighted contributions of LF and HF to the Poincaré index (SD1 or SD2) [24] are supposed to make the Poincaré analysis technique more insightful to the subtle differences that are difficult to detect using LF or HF separately.

Nonlinear indexes, such as DFA and ApEn, are recently introduced methods for measuring HRV and have been shown to be powerful tools for the characterization of various complex systems. However, no systematic study has been conducted to investigate the use of these methods in large patient populations, and no physiological connection between these methods and cardiac activities has been well established. Specifically, an association between sympathetic activity and the shape of the Poincaré plot has been established. where the narrower the pattern is observed, the larger the sympathetic activity was [39–41]. The visual pattern presented in this study agrees with this association. Fig. 3 shows the visual changes of SD1 and SD2 from the Poincaré cloud shape of one subject during the whole performance. The narrowing scatter induced by the augmentation of sympathetic activities could be noticed in the stressful computer work (HS and LS), as well as the increased scatter due to the enhanced parasympathetic activity in the relaxation computer work (RS) and two relaxing states (REST1 and REST2). The patterns of the Poincaré plots can reflect a normal or reduced cardiac autonomic modulation. The comet patterns, as shown in Fig. 3 (a) and (g) for REST1 and REST2, respectively, express an augmenting variability with an increasing R–R interval. The torpedo patterns or a pattern tending to torpedo shape, as shown in Fig. 3 (c)–(e) for HS, SS and LS, respectively, indicate a low beat-to-beat variability with the same dispersion along the diagonal irrespective of the mean R–R interval. Because the Poincaré scattergram gives a visually distinguishable pattern for the sessions, it can be considered to be a useful tool for describing the autonomic activity effect over the R–R interval dynamics.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Stress is induced by an imbalance between external demands and the individual’s ability to meet those demands. The evaluation of stress is difficult due to the interpretation of behavioral and physiological reactivity. The present study shows the effectiveness of the Poincaré plot method for assessing the HRV changes during computer-mouse work under time pressure. Heightened vagal tone occurred during relaxation work without time pressure, and the stressful computer tasks with added time pressure stimulated cardiac sympathetic activity. Poincaré analysis possesses the features of nonlinear measures, allowing it to perform better than spectral analysis. Moreover, compared to the numerical information from the time and frequency domains, the Poincaré plot provides a more global look and a visual contact for changing HRV, and it could be used to interpret the physiological phenomena in a straightforward manner.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (Grant no. 14YZ091).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

