@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The identification of the relationship between chemical and electrical parameters of honeys using artificial neural networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Relationships between chemical and electrical parameters of honeys were modeled.


                        
                        
                           
                           The neural networks sensitivity analysis was conducted.


                        
                        
                           
                           The influence of chemical on electrical honeys parameters depends on frequency.


                        
                        
                           
                           Electrical parameters suitability for honey quality assessment depends on frequency.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Mathematical modeling

Honey quality

Electrical parameters measurement

Sensitivity analysis

Variable contributions

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A number of significant scientific studies have confirmed the health benefits of honey. Due to the high price of natural honey, it is a common target for adulteration which reduces its medicinal value. Adulteration detection methods require specific laboratory equipment and are very expensive. The development of measurement techniques enables the measurement of electrical characteristics of strained honey. Honey electrical parameters can possibly be used for its quality assessment. The identification of the relationship between chemical and electrical parameters of honeys and analysis to determine if there are frequency-dependent changes, can help in developing of that group of methods. The aim of this research was to determine how the chemical parameters of certain honeys influence the dielectric loss factor and the permittivity of strained honey measured in various frequencies. Another aim was to determine whether the percentage influence of certain chemical parameters of honeys on electrical characteristics significantly depends on frequency value. The research was based on neural network models and sensitivity analysis. The percentage influence of certain chemical parameters on electrical characteristics significantly depends on frequency value.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Honey is a natural, liquid food product produced by honeybees (Apis mellifera) from nectar of plants or from honeydew. In the European Union the composition and manufacture of honey is regulated by Community Directive 74/409/EEC [1]. Since ancient times, honey has been known, for its significant therapeutic effects in medicine. At present, honey composition and the influence of its various compounds on human health is the subject of many studies. It follows immense health benefits of honey as an antibiotic, anticancer, anti-oxidative, antibacterial and preserving activity, resulting in positive effects on the immune system [2,3]. Natural compounds of honey are carbohydrates, amino acids and proteins, volatile compounds, vitamins and minerals [4]. Health benefits of honey are very well-known and recently, the demand for natural honey has increased [5,6]. In the case of therapeutic and medicinal applications, the quality and origin of honey is of great importance.

Natural honey which is properly processed and stored is an expensive product and therefore, it is more and more common target for adulteration. The adulteration leads to reducing or depriving nutritional and therapeutic value from honey. Adulteration of honey can occur by feeding bees with sugar (cane sugar) or adding inexpensive sweeteners such as corn syrups, high fructose corn syrups, invert syrups or high fructose inulin syrups. Furthermore, honey can be adulterated by mixing many varieties of honey or declaring false information concerning geographical origin. The expensive honeys, which are considered to have the most significant therapeutic effects, are the largest target for adulteration [7,6].

Another example of negative honey processing is overheating. It is necessary to heat up the honey during the packaging process. However, heating up to a temperature exceeding 40°C causes a significant decline in the quality of the honey. Storage temperature of 70–80°C destroys diastase and invertase within less than 24h [8]. Heating up to temperature 85°C causes amylase activity loss [9].

Many various methods for the assessment of honey authenticity can be used. The first method employed to determine the botanical origin of honey was pollen analysis (microscopic method). Chromatographic and spectroscopic methods are used as well. Measurements of the humidity, ash content, conductivity, acidity, enzymatic activity and many other parameters are taken [6]. For most of these methods, specific and very expensive laboratory equipment is required and therefore they can’t be commonly used. Methods for the assessment of honey authenticity based on measurement of electrical characteristics can be a very interesting alternative to time-consuming and expensive methods. So far, measurements of the conductivity of an aqueous solution of honey have been taken. Unfortunately, in this method, time-consuming laboratory samples preparation is required. However, relationships between the conductivity and honey chemical content, its origin [10], long-term storage, storage conditions and measurement temperature [11] have all been investigated. Measurement techniques are developing year by year and currently, methods for measurement of electrical characteristics of strained honey are available. However, results of these investigations have not been published separately [12].

Honey adulteration methods are developing very fast, therefore searching for fast, easy and low-cost procedures for the assessment of honey quality is needed [13]. Methods based on electrical parameters measurement (conductivity, impedance) can be of use for adulteration detection. In the case of some electrical parameters (e.g. dielectric loss factor or permittivity), during honey authenticity investigation methodology development, the information of measurement frequency range is required. Therefore, the identification of the relationships between chemical and electrical parameters of honeys as well as analyzing, whether the relationships change depending on the frequency, can help in development of that group of methods. The interrelations between chemical and electrical honeys features are multidimensional and their highly nonlinear nature can be assumed. Therefore their modeling with the use of coventional methods is complicated. Many authors use Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) for modeling this sort of relationship. One can find the applications of ANNs in a very large set of fields, including chemistry, medicine, engineering, ecology [14–17].

The multilayer perceptron (MLP) is the most commonly used neural network and many examples of its use in food technology can be found. MLP was employed for anti-glycated activity prediction of polysaccharides from guava fruits [18], prediction of viscoelastic behavior of pomegranate [19], carotenoid content estimation during ripening in tomato fruits [20], modeling and optimization of ultrahigh pressure extraction of green tea polyphenols [21] and prediction of antioxidant activity in extract of Pegaga [22]. MLP has been also used for honeys classification [23,24]. Recently, the new concept can be added to the prediction approach of ANNs. Scientists use neural networks not only as “black-box” type models for describing of multivariate non-linear relationships, but also for evaluating the relative importance of the parameters. The group of sensitivity analysis methods has been proposed to explain the contributions of variables in ANN models. Sensitivity analysis has been employed in simulation of the evaporation process at different climatologic regimes [25], in fish guilds composition modelling [26] and in estimation of power losses in magnetic cores [27].

The aim of this research was to use the MLP neural networks for developing mathematical models describing the interrelations between chemical and electrical honeys features in various frequencies. Afterwards, on the basis of the sensitivity analysis, the contribution of the input factors was determined and then its dependence on frequency was verified.

A total of 50 honey samples were used for this study. Honey samples were directly obtained in 2011 from the private producers located in the whole territory of the Republic of Poland. The honey samples with different production origin and varieties have been collected. Regarding the type of honey, thirty nine samples were nectar honeys, four samples were nectar-honeydew honeys and seven samples were honeydew honeys. In the nectar honeys group, the variety of types had been investigated: acacia, rape, phacelia, goldenrod, buckwheat, heather, willow and many multiflower honeys. In the honeydew honeys group, both, conifers and deciduous have been collected. During sample collecting, their variety was very important.

Honey types verification was based on pollen analysis accomplished in accredited laboratory. The pollen analysis result was the percentage concentration of 42 various plants pollen. The classification of honey sample to nectar-honeydew or honeydew honey group was based additionally on the value of 20% honey aqueous solution conductivity. For each sample, the oxygen, nitrogen, ash and protein content as well as the fructose, sucrose, maltose, maltotriose and oligosaccharides content have been determined. For each parameter, its weight was measured. Afterwards, for each sample, two electrical parameters have been determined: the dielectric loss factor and the permittivity (both of strained honey). Electrical characteristics have been obtained for frequency from 500Hz to 10kHz using an indirect method. Measurements of impedance (as complex function) have been taken by means of ATLAS 0441 HIA apparatus with electrode installed in a climate chamber. Based on frequency values, the dielectric loss factor and the permittivity values have been calculated.

The composition of honey has been considered as a tool for its characterisation. Yücel and Sultanoğlu reported physicochemical parameters are quite sufficient to achieve discrimination of the eight different honey type classes [28], Mateo and Bosch–Reig as well as Bogdanov et al. used the sugar profiles for the classification of unifloral honeys [29,30]. Information about high degree of correlation between chemical and electrical honeys features can be found in papers describing the use of electrical parameters as a simple floral origin classification method [10]. Devillers et al. reported 100% good floral origin predictions based on conductivity, pH, free acidity and sugars content [31]. Interesting results were also reported for Polish honeys [32,33].

Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are considered as a useful tool for modeling of the complex, multidimensional and highly nonlinear interrelations. ANNs are composed of artificial neurons linked by weighted connections. The main advantage of ANNs is the possibility of training them using the raw, experimental data. By adjusting the weights of artificial neurons, output signals values expected for specific inputs can be obtained. The theory of ANN has been described in several papers [34–36].

A multilayer perceptron with one hidden layer as network topology was chosen in this work. For each frequency, the two separate neural models were developed. The models described the interrelations between chemical parameters and dielectric loss factor and permittivity, respectively. The number of nodes in the input layer was adequate to the number of chemical parameters. There was one neuron with a linear activation function in the output layer. In the hidden layer, neurons with sigmoidal activation function were implemented.

During preliminary tests, the proper network structure (the number of neurons in hidden layer) has been obtained. Initial weights values were selected randomly. The group of backpropagation algorithms was used for the net topologies training. Experimental data (150 data vectors for each frequency) were divided into learning (80% of data vectors) and testing (20% of data vectors) sets. Data vectors were a subject of a scaling procedure into a new range of 〈0.1–0.9〉. Simulations were executed using Statistica v. 10 environment. For each model, 150 various network configurations were examined by changing the number of nodes in the hidden layer and training algorithm. Afterwards, for the best network configurations, the sensitivity analysis was executed. The sensitivity analysis was performed by deleting an input unit from the input vector and retraining the network. The network error was compared with the error obtained when all input units were used. The input parameters importance was determined on the basis of the errors ratio value. Afterwards, the errors ratio values were used for calculating of the percentage influence of input parameters on the dielectric loss factor and the permittivity for various frequencies. Similar sensitivity analysis method was employed by Hadzima-Nyarkoa et al. in the modelling of damage ratio coefficient [37] and Pastor-Bárcenas et al. in surface ozone modelling [38].

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Before building the ANN-based prediction model, a correlation matrix was calculated to present the linear relationships between the explanatory variables. If there are two variables in the input vector with a high correlation coefficient, one of them must be excluded from the candidates for building the prediction model. Leaving both of the interdependent input parameters is a methodological error. Furthermore, sensitivity analysis methods can be ineffective, when inputs are interdependent [39,40]. 
                     Table 1 presents the correlation coefficients among the nine explanatory variables.

The highest correlation found in Table 1 is between nitrogen and protein content (correlation coefficient equals 1). This fact is obvious because nitrogen is the main protein component. The methods of protein content determination in a sample involve nitrogen measurement. The nitrogen content was excluded from the input variables vector. Also maltotriose content was eliminated due to its high correlation coefficients with other explanatory variables. Maltotriose is one of oligosaccharides, therefore maltotriose content can be excluded from the input variables vector with no model deterioration when oligosaccharides content is in input vector. Despite relatively high correlation of ash content with fructose and maltose content, the ash content was taken into account during sensitivity analysis. Minerals content in a sample is described by this parameter and it can influence on electrical characteristics. Therefore, the input parameters vector for ANNs training included the content of oxygen, protein, fructose, sucrose, maltose, ash and oligosaccharides. The sensitivity measurement calculated for only one network can lead us to unreasonable conclusions [36]. Therefore, for each model, the sensitivity analysis was performed for five best ANNs configurations indicated by Statistica environment. 
                     Table 2 presents the structures of neural networks used for sensitivity analysis (the number of neurons in layers: input-hidden-output), RMSE (root mean squared error) for testing set and correlation coefficients between the neural network outputs and targets for testing set. The information presented in Table 2 was limited to the best and the worst of five neural networks used for sensitivity analysis.

On the basis on the average errors ratio value for the five ANNs, the percentage influence of each input parameter on the electrical features was calculated as follows:
                        
                           (1)
                           
                              %
                              
                                 
                                    I
                                 
                                 
                                    i
                                 
                              
                              =
                              
                                 
                                    E
                                    
                                       
                                          r
                                       
                                       
                                          i
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          ∑
                                       
                                       
                                          j
                                          =
                                          1
                                       
                                       7
                                    
                                    
                                       E
                                       
                                          
                                             r
                                          
                                          
                                             j
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              ×
                              100
                           
                        
                     where %I
                     
                        i
                      is the percentage influence of ith input parameter (from seven chemical parameters) shown in Table 2 and Er
                     
                        i
                      is the average errors ratio for ith input parameter, calculated on the basis of errors ratio values from five neural models. 
                     Table 3 presents the results of sensitivity analysis performed for ANNs modeling the relationships between chemical and electrical honey parameters for various frequencies.

To prepare results presentation in graphical form, chemical parameters were divided into two separate groups: oxygen, protein and ash content; sugars content (fructose, sucrose, maltose and oligosaccharides). In 
                     
                     Figs. 1 and 2 the percentage influence of parameters from each group on the dielectric loss factor for various frequencies is presented.

The influence of protein content on the dielectric loss factor is in the range of 2.5–14% and does not significantly depend on frequency. For frequency within 2–3kHz range, oxygen content influence equals 14% and 11%, for other frequencies it is lower and does not exceed 8%. Only for the frequencies equal to 500Hz and 10kHz, did the sensitivity analysis show that the influence of oxygen content on the dielectric loss factor is not statistically significant. In Table 3 and on the figures, statistical non-significance is represented by influence of 0%. The influence of ash content on the dielectric loss factor is greater for lower frequency range (below 4kHz) and exceeds 10%. For frequency range above 4kHz, the influence of ash content is lower (5–8%). For frequency within the 2–10kHz range, the influence of maltose content on the dielectric loss factor is significantly greater than other input parameters. For frequency equal to 500Hz, the similar influence of all sugars content on the dielectric loss factor can be observed (approximately 17%). The influence of fructose, sucrose and oligosaccharides content on the dielectric loss factor does not significantly depend on frequency. In 
                     
                     Figs. 3 and 4 the percentage influence of chemical parameters from each group on the permittivity for various frequencies is presented.

For frequency within the 3–8kHz range, the similar influence of the content of all chemical parameters on the permittivity can be observed (approximately 15%). For the frequency range below 3kHz, the influence of oxygen content on permittivity decreases and for the frequency range above 8kHz it is statistically non-significant. For lower frequencies, fructose and maltose content have significantly greater effect on permittivity than other sugars, and for frequency within the 9–10kHz range, the influence of fructose content is statistically non-significant.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The Artificial Neural Networks are a very useful tool for identifying of the influence of chemical parameters on electrical characteristics due to its advantage of an easy modeling of the multidimensional and nonlinear interrelations. ANNs also enable the performance of the sensitivity analysis. Calculation of correlation coefficients between explanatory variables before sensitivity analysis performance allowed to avoid the incorrect results of this method caused by inputs interdependence. Based on the results showed in Table 1, nitrogen and maltotriose content were excluded from the input variables vector. ANNs used for sensitivity analysis were accurate mathematical models of the relationships between chemical and electrical parameters of honeys, as evidenced by low values of RMSE error for testing set and high values of correlation coefficients between the neural network outputs and targets for testing set, shown in Table 2.
                        
                           •
                           The level of percentage influence of certain chemical honeys parameters on electrical characteristics significantly depends on frequency value.

It may be assumed that the frequency of electrical parameters measurement has significant influence on the suitability of certain electrical parameter for honey quality assessment.

The dependence of contribution of the input factors on frequency can change itself for a certain set of parameters used for honey characterization. That fact should be taken into account when one develops the honey authenticity investigation methodology with the use of electrical parameters.

None declared.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This study was performed as part of project supported by Polish National Science Centre (grant no. N N313 766640).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

