@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Practical use of medical terminology in curriculum mapping

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We review the existing and widely-accepted medical terminologies and coding systems.


                        
                        
                           
                           We design and implement a web-based system for medical curriculum management.


                        
                        
                           
                           A practical use of the MeSH thesaurus in a curriculum mapping application is showed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Two data-analytical reports based on the MeSH thesaurus are described in detail.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Medical informatics

Medical coding

MeSH

Medical education

Curriculum management

Visual analytics

Association analysis

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               Graphical abstract
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Medical coding and classification systems are used in a variety of applications in medicine, public health, education and medical informatics, including their use in statistical analyses, data mining, and expert and decision support systems or knowledge engineering. Creation and maintenance of the coding systems, nomenclatures and standardized vocabularies involves the processes of transforming descriptions of diagnoses and procedures into a universal medical standardized scheme [1]. When talking about standardization, it is necessary to mention also ontologies, which formalize the meaning of terms used in practice, expected to play a major role in the automated integration of medical data with relevant information to support basic discovery and clinical research, drug formulation, and drug evaluation through clinical trials [2]. If we want information systems in health care to process data automatically, to sort them and produce correct statistics and if the principal data should be understood globally, it is necessary to use international coding systems and nomenclatures in the process of data acquisition [3]. From the perspective of medical informatics, the topic covering the broad use and global acceptance of medical coding standards still involves two main unresolved challenges: (i) the number of coding standards developed for medicine and health care is high, whereas their widespread adoption has been rather slow; (ii) the developed standards and vocabularies vary in their coverage, often being contradictory and competing. The basic principles of medical informatics and discussions on medical coding can be found in books and guides, such as [4] or [5]. One working group inside the European Federation for Medical Informatics (EFMI) is focusing on codes, classifications, terminologies and nomenclatures in their overview article [6]. They provide definitions and history of the International Classification of Primary Care (ICPC), and of the Read code and the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT). The review [7] analyses the use of SNOMED CT over time from 1966 until June 2006. A more recent review [8] then reports on the increasing use of SNOMED CT in literature, showing that the adoption of the nomenclature needs additional efforts toward harmonization with other standardized terminologies.

Medical education is an active area of education research, the importance and value of which has been demonstrated by Harden [9,10] and later by Wartman [11] already in the late eighties and the early nineties of the previous century. Medical curriculum development, mapping and harmonization are the natural components of medical education, regardless of whether the underlying model is systems-based [12], outcome-based [13] or different (competency-based, socially accountable, distributed, etc.). Increasing variety in the form and resulting proficiency of different curriculum models has recently prompted the medical education community to introduce curriculum mapping guides [14] and interoperability standards [15]. The MedBiquitous Curriculum Inventory Standard [16], approved by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), provides the technical syntax through which a wide range of different curricula can be expressed and subsequently analysed.

While there are a plethora of references, surveys and books on medical coding and classification for healthcare informatics applications, much less can be found on standardized vocabularies employed in medical education. The existing cataloguing schemas and thesauri relating, at least partly, to medical education are reviewed in [17] by the Medical Education Taxonomy Research Organization (METRO). Following the results of their research among stakeholders, METRO uses two existing thesauri: (i) the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) thesaurus, being generic for medicine, and the British Education Thesaurus (BET), being generic for education. The thesaurus of descriptors for topics in medical education resulting from METRO׳s efforts is not available today, but their set of descriptors for assessment in medical education [18] using as much as possible from the MeSH and BET thesauri is still a living project with results available on-line. The need for identifying a suitable ontology or taxonomy for annotating the content of medical educational resources is emphasized in the systematic review [19], and especially from the perspective of sematic interoperability of information systems used in medical education and the potential of the semantic web (Web 3.0) to support medical curriculum mapping. The review provides a tabular overview of all existing standardized vocabularies, including their features, such as language, scope and the underlying structure, dividing them according to their context into biomedical, educational and administrative. Education resources shared through social media platforms such as YouTube have undergone exponential growth in recent years. Annotating education videos from YouTube and enriching them with other resources through Linked Data approach [20,21] is the main focus of research presented in [22]. SNOMED CT nomenclature is used to bridge YouTube tagging data and the metadata of enriching education resources. The resulting web-based architecture includes also the application interface (API) of BioPortal providing services from the National Center for Biomedical Ontology [23].

In this research, we focus on exploiting the well-known polyhierarchical MeSH thesaurus while helping the medical curriculum designers and innovators to navigate through multidimensional and extensive datasets embedded in the curriculum mapping systems. We are building on our previous experience with various nomenclatures and standards used in the development of the education web portal platform [24] and its extensions [25] adopted by all medical faculties in the Czech Republic and Slovakia under the umbrella of the MEFANET network [26]. In terms of methods and tools for curriculum mapping and reengineering, we are using our original web-based OPTIMED platform [27] and the recently adopted visual analytics tools [28–30] with the aim to develop new insights into curricular datasets and to demonstrate that the use of standardized thesaurus can facilitate curriculum reengineering processes as well as inter-institutional curriculum comparisons. In short, this paper shows an innovative way how to easily identify all essential components of a medical curriculum by adopting the MeSH biomedical nomenclature.

The remainder of this paper is as follows. In the methods section, detailed information is provided regarding: (i) existing and widely-accepted medical terminologies; (ii) our implementation of a web-based system for medical curriculum management; (iii) background and statistical methodology used to develop analytical reports over curricular datasets. In the following section, two data-analytical reports are shown, depicting the results obtained from frequency and association analyses of the particular medical curriculum while employing the MeSH thesaurus. The importance of these achievements together with their current limitations and future prospects are discussed and concluded in the final sections.

The main contribution of this paper lies in the use of a standardized medical thesaurus in the analyses of a dataset extracted from a curriculum mapping system. We believe that our approach can be generalized, although we present results obtained from data stored in a particular curriculum mapping system, OPTIMED, and a specific thesaurus, MeSH. The selection of this specific thesaurus is the result of our scoping review carried out according to the principles laid out in the framework for scoping studies by Arksey and O’Malley [31] and recently extended and clarified elsewhere [32,33].

In this subsection, we refer to the summary overview relating to the up-to-date use of various specialized terminologies in information sciences and education. Our close attention is primarily focused on medically oriented fields where these taxonomies promote an efficient way of organizing and understanding data. It is clear that specialized vocabularies matter, not only in the traditional library and information sciences world and but also for many different digital information stakeholders [21]. For instance, the use of the vocabulary of a particular domain is an important initial step in creating formalized knowledge representations as an essential part of the education process. These vocabularies follow the ratchet principle: it moves from basic understanding to thorough understanding, from simple to complex education [34]. When a virtual learning environment (VLE) turns to the task of consolidated education data collection (for instance content management, curriculum mapping and planning, student engagement and administration, communication and collaboration domain), these vocabularies will present considerable challenges to standardizing medical education. A prerequisite to more comprehensive categorization of the education content is the implementation of standardized terminology directly in the VLE systems. One of the primary aims is to overcome two significant barriers to effective retrieval of machine-readable and processable information: (i) the variety of names used to express the same concept, (ii) the absence of a standard format for distributing terminologies [35]. The purpose of medical vocabularies is to embody what has been known in the past about every phase of medicine [36]. These vocabularies continue to increase and grow, not only in its technological aspects, but also from the perspective of medical education quality, which is logically reflected at the global level of health care. Below, the most widespread, suitable and commonly used standardized methodologies are introduced.

Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) brings together many health and biomedical vocabularies, ontologies and standards to enable interoperability between computer systems. It was developed by the National Library of Medicine and covers the entire terminology domain by integrating more than 60 families of biomedical vocabularies. The three major components of UMLS are the Metathesaurus (repository of inter-related biomedical concepts covering extensive list of terms and codes from various vocabularies), the Semantic network (high-level categorization of Metathesaurus concepts) and the Specialist Lexicon (generating the lexical variants of biomedical terms) [37–39]. For illustration, 
                           Fig. 1 shows UMLS Metathesaurus integrated sub‐domains.

Although geared specifically for information retrieval, MeSH can almost be seen as a general purpose vocabulary with concepts from all segments of the biomedical domain. This classification is a rich and controlled vocabulary generated through an intense indexing process performed by examiners. Terms (namely descriptors) are assigned to documents to delineate their content at 16 different branches of specificity. The 2014 MeSH vocabulary is specifically composed by more than 27 thousand descriptors, which are organized in a tree-like structure. Descriptors may be also complemented by one or more qualifiers. These terms further contextualize the meaning of the descriptors to which they are assigned in relation to the content of the considered document. The MeSH vocabulary is often used to delineate samples of documents in a number of medical areas and, as discussed, at various levels of specificity [40–42].

International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is used to classify and code mortality information worldwide. The tenth revision (ICD-10) is more complex than the previous one (ICD-9). Specifically, ICD-10 contains more codes as well as re-structured chapters and changes in rules for coding. ICD-10 as a whole is designed to be the core classification for a family of disease- and health-related classifications. Some members of the family of classifications are derived by using a fifth or even sixth character to specify more detail. In others, the categories are condensed to render the broad groups suitable for use, for instance, in primary health care or in general medical practice [43,44].

SNOMED CT as a coding system for clinical problems was created by the merger, expansion and restructuring of two large-scale terminologies: SNOMED RT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Reference Terminology) and CTV3 (Clinical Terms Version 3). Since it contains more than 380 thousand concepts, with a total of about 800 thousand descriptions or terms, the practical use of SNOMED will demand new types of tools to search and navigate intuitively in the term “collection”. It is probably the most comprehensive clinical healthcare terminology in the world because it systematically supports the development of comprehensive high-quality clinical content for health records and provides a standardized way of representing clinical phrases captured by the clinician, enabling automatic interpretation. SNOMED CT is a clinically validated, semantically rich, controlled vocabulary that facilitates evolutionary growth in expressivity to meet the emerging requirements [45,46].

Emtree is a hierarchically structured and controlled terminology for biomedicine and related life sciences, developed by Elsevier as a biomedical and pharmacological online database. It includes a whole range of terms for drugs, diseases, medical devices and essential life sciences concepts. Emtree thesaurus contains about 48 thousand preferred terms and 200 thousand synonyms in 15 main domains of drugs and diseases, organized in a multilevel hierarchy. All terms, strictly synonymous, are organized in a concept-based structure [47–49].

RadLex [50] is a standardized vocabulary of radiological terms, which includes highly detailed terms for anatomy, pathology, and radiological observations. It already contains over 8000 anatomic and pathology terms, many of which are not currently available in other controlled medical terminology systems. Generally, RadLex was designed to fill the gaps in other medical terminology systems, thereby creating a single source for medical imaging terminology. Another key distinguishing feature of RadLex is that it is designed to be continuously supplemented and updated with the incorporation of new concepts, including harmonization with other popular medical vocabularies and term sets. The goal of this method is to establish a uniform, consistent terminology to improve communication of results and to better integrate clinical practice with education and scientific literature [51].

@&#SUMMARY@&#

The integration of various specialized nomenclatures, vocabularies, and terminologies allows more precise analysis and improvement of the education data content. Furthermore, automated systems can apply the knowledge encoded with the use of mentioned taxonomies and human users can easily search and browse the available data in a simple and straightforward manner. It will have both academic and clinical implications by enhancing the retrieval as well as the indexing of information. Besides the introduced approaches, there exist many other vocabularies that are specifically focused on a particular biomedical discipline. Examples include Gene Ontology (GO), Gene expression data (eVOC), Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM), Merged Disease vocabulary (MEDIC), London Dysmorphology Database (LDDB), Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA), Logical Observation Identifier Names and Codes (LOINC) and the NCI thesaurus for cancer research. Contrary to these approaches, other concepts are strongly related to administrative data, i.e. when was what created by whom and who is the intended audience - examples: Dublin Core [52] as a pioneering standard for metadata about electronic resources; Learning Object Meta-data (LOM) ontology developed by IEEE association for describing the learning resources [53]; Shareable Content Object Reference Model (SCORM) representing a widely adopted collection of specifications for web-based e-learning systems [54]. On the grounds of our scoping review and composed requirements, we chose the most suitable thesaurus for the complex process of medical curriculum harmonization.

For the purposes of enhancing the long-term process of medical curriculum mapping and harmonization, we decided to design, develop, implement and run our original web-based OPTIMED platform (http://opti.med.muni.cz/en). This system describes and categorizes all learning activities (lectures, seminars, clinical practices and self-study) in the theoretical and clinical sections of medical curriculum. We have aimed to capture the systematic transmission of medical/clinical knowledge to students during their courses in General Medicine at the Faculty of Medicine of the Masaryk University. By development we refer to the Extreme programming methodology [55], which is a popular agility-oriented framework. Based on the gathered requirements, a modular structure of the OPTIMED system was proposed. It consists of three fundamental modules, which provide easy management as well as fast and transparent browsing through the extensive domain of curriculum metadata: (i) Learning outcome register, (ii) Learning unit register, (iii) Curriculum browser. Overall, OPTIMED gives students, teachers, guarantors, curriculum designers and the faculty management a detailed look at where specific topics and learning outcomes are addressed and how education objectives are being met.

We have processed in-depth analysis on medical curriculum data supported by standardized vocabulary. We came up with a systematic approach that allows formally describing and effectively optimizing the education structure through appropriate metadata attributes, and provides direct interconnection to essential terms in the thesaurus. The mentioned analytical outputs can significantly assist in detecting potentially problematic areas and subsequently, compile comprehensive reports or instructions for onwards in-depth global inspection, which is necessary for maintaining continuity of the process of first-rate and guaranteed studies at higher education institutions. The derived aggregated and comprehensible information, such as clear tables, transparent graphs and other interactive visualizations, serve as supporting material for the long-term evaluation process under the supervision of senior guarantors and the faculty management. Moreover, the integration of proper vocabulary also provides a unified terminology for instituting curricular change and innovation.

We based all reports on a set of proven analytical and statistical techniques encompassing robust computational and visualization software. The occurrence of MeSH terms and linked categories in the description of learning units were described by absolute and relative frequencies (percentage representation). Associations among all MeSH keywords were computed using the Jaccard similarity coefficient, which represents a statistic method for comparing the similarity and diversity of data sets. It provides robust measurement of the association widely used in ecology (measuring biodiversity) or market research (market basket analysis). This coefficient is based on positive similarity (subject to co-occurrence) and not negative similarity (based on double absence) and we used it in order to avoid the double-zero problem. All data merging, manipulation, transformation and computations were conducted by IBM SPSS Statistics version 22.0.0. For interactive visualization of association maps, we used the yEd Graph Editor version 3.10.2, a freely available desktop application developed by yWorks GmbH typically used for diagramming large adjacency matrixes with automated layout.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Since the coding systems, nomenclatures and standardized vocabularies can be used for formal content description of any object, they may be also utilized together with traditional education resources such as books, media, and programmes – to annotate courses, learning units and outcomes, exam questions, or any other form of online resource. Thus, they allow searching for thematically related objects [19]. From the perspective of the education process, implementation of controlled vocabularies significantly influences normalization of the achieved results, because students and teachers very often use different theoretical and clinical terms that in fact mean the same. For example, the terms heart attack, myocardial infarction, and MI abbreviation may represent the same meaning to academics, but, to a computer, they are different. The main purpose of the thesaurus concept integration is allowing users to search one term and to find and retrieve learning activities that use synonymous terms. It also enhances the indexing and aggregation process of data across various medical fields of study. In our particular case, we introduce the practical use of medical terminologies, namely the MeSH thesaurus, in medical curriculum harmonization. We have developed a web-based curriculum management system supporting correctly compiled and balanced structure of obligatory and optional courses across medical fields. We have also adopted the MeSH nomenclature for standardizing metadata stored in the system database, which provides a set of descriptive attributes of the whole curriculum with respect to international framework.

The outputs of this case study represent systematic identification of content related items across curriculum boundaries and bring an effective and proven approach enabling us to better understand the domain of continual improvement of medical education using modern information and communication technologies. As stated above, the implementation of standardized vocabulary can significantly improve the quality of further analytical processing in order to understand stored data. We adopted the MeSH biomedical dictionary, where the main objective is to classify learning activities appearing in the curriculum. In the past, keywords were defined and structured in many forms and there was a growing need for their unification with respect to international framework. The main requirement for standardized dictionary integration was regular updates of the Czech version, which MeSH fulfils as the only available solution. No other language mutations are foreseen at the moment, but a possible change should not bring too many complications in terms of the proposed structure. The National Library of Medicine produces annual editions, including the development and implementation of a concept-centred vocabulary maintenance system for MeSH. This system has been extended to create a multilingual database of translations and allows continual updating of the translations, as well as facilitating tracking of the changes within MeSH from one year to another. In this way, the vocabulary is useful for the non-English user and enables potential connection between various languages (e.g. Czech and English).

MeSH is a controlled vocabulary thesaurus comprising over 27,000 primary terms called descriptors, which are arranged in hierarchical structure and permit searching at various levels of specificity. More specific headings are found at narrow levels of the twelve-level hierarchy. Currently, the MeSH hierarchy is divided into 16 categories (A for anatomic terms, B for organisms, C for diseases, D for drugs and chemicals, etc.). Each category is further divided into subcategories (117 in total). For instance, category B consists of the following subcategories: eukaryota, archaea, bacteria, viruses, organism, and forms. These hierarchies are extremely valuable as they allow associated data to be viewed at various levels of granularity, with data annotated to children of a branch to be aggregated at each higher level of the hierarchy [42]. Generally, the entire MeSH vocabulary is available for download in XML, ASCII or MARC formats. In order to better understand the thesaurus construction, we decided to model a complicated structure of the descriptors, concepts and terms. Using the diagramming framework Visual paradigm, we carefully identified all important entities and attributes of spreading the MeSH structure and transformed the XML form into a set of entity-relationship models, thus describing the data in systematic and more transparent manner. 
                           Fig. 2 represents a conceptual data model covering all essential MeSH parameters for curriculum description.

Implementing MeSH vocabulary into the OPTIMED system requires specific validation tasks based on standardized terms that we tried to resolve by curriculum data analyses. There are several interesting domains that the selected statistic and analytical methods may answer: coverage and relations between learning activities and the MeSH classification, objective evaluation of the MeSH keywords occurrence, model term integration into education, etc. Two particular reports based on MeSH classification, introduced below, assist in finding potentially problematic areas in the curriculum and provide a comprehensive overview for subsequent in-depth global medical curriculum inspection. The extracted information from the OPTIMED curriculum management system serves as supporting material for the evaluation process under the supervision of the expert committee and the faculty management.

We have already designed and implemented formal specification of the database scheme as a basic building element of the OPTIMED platform, which covers all elements pertaining to global curriculum harmonization including detailed metadata arrangement down to the level of learning units, interconnections to the learning outcomes in accordance with Bloom׳s taxonomy and direct interconnection to specialized MeSH nomenclature. The Bloom׳s taxonomy is often used when designing educational and learning processes, where educational objectives are divided into three domains: cognitive (mental skills known as knowledge), affective (growth in feelings or emotional areas known as attitude or self), and psychomotor (manual or physical skills known as skills). We proposed a special script for transforming the MeSH tree structure to linear representation of individual terms. The main reason was to simplify the links between the keywords and the particular learning units. For the purpose of further analysis, we merged the data (see 
                           Table 1) about learning units (unitName, unitSection, unitClass) with data describing MeSH keywords (meshName, meshPreferred, meshSemanticType, meshTreeId, meshTreeLevel, meshCategory, meshSubcategory). The final dataset contains information about 1347 learning units, which were described by 3224 varied MeSH terms (from one to five terms per learning unit) and classified into 133 categories and subcategories.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Two reports relating to MeSH categories in accordance with the created learning units are described here. The primary motivation of our effort was to allow medical curriculum designers, senior guarantors and the faculty management answer questions based on aggregated data from the OPTIMED portal platform. Several analytical dashboards were built and prepared for further review and evaluation. The implications of these findings can help academics in their curriculum redesign activities, and provide a clear overview of the curriculum structure.

The first analytical output is a view of the representation of categories and subcategories according to the MeSH biomedical dictionary based on learning units, which have been created with the aim of describing in detail the education in General Medicine field of study at the Faculty of Medicine of the Masaryk University. In the OPTIMED project, the study of medicine was systematically divided into four sections (theoretical sciences, surgical sciences, diagnostics and neurosciences, internal medicine). With respect to the fact that suitable MeSH classifiers must be obligatorily assigned to each learning unit, the available links to a tree structure and to multilevel categorisation make it possible to draw summarising graphs. 
                           Fig. 3 shows the comparison of two sections of education (surgical sciences and theoretical sciences) according to the most frequent subcategories.

The main MeSH categories are very general (only 16 areas); in this case, therefore, we decided to work with subcategories (a total of 117 subcategories), which are more detailed and thus make it possible to define clearer and more understandable reports. Similar to other outputs of this analysis, a fully standardised dictionary is employed containing set phrases and specialised terminology commonly used in medicine. These features provide a simple overview to the guarantor of a given section, describing the thematic categorisation of all learning units belonging to his/her expertise; the guarantor should, therefore, be able to define potential discrepancies very quickly, on relatively general level of curriculum description, without the necessity of performing in-depth analysis. A view across sections, such as the comparison of categorizations between selected sections, can be classified as outputs primarily intended for the faculty management. Like in the first case, potential overlaps—whether more or less desirable—can be identified at first glance.

The second analysis consists in identifying links based on the assigned MeSH keywords in order to reveal the structure of individual sections. At the present time, the OPTIMED portal contains a very comprehensive description of the entire curriculum. It is, thus, not humanly possible to go through the entire contents or to imagine how the individual learning units, courses, or branches of medicine are interrelated. We have, therefore, again used the MeSH classification to suggest a report displaying the so-called association maps, i.e. links among MeSH keywords according to their use in individual learning units. For the sake of clarity, each of the resulting visualizations is divided according to the four above-mentioned sections. The graphs are interactive, making it possible to zoom in on a selected segment, up to the level of a specific MeSH keyword. This feature makes it very simple for an expert in a given field to critically evaluate whether the coverage of a given section makes sense, and whether all relevant areas are represented. 
                           
                           Figs. 4 and 5 demonstrate the association map of the Theoretical Sciences section. The first view is mostly general, showing all connections. As an example, the term “inflammation” is marked in red. The second view corresponds to a several-fold zoom that, however, is still illegible, and it is not obvious how the terms are interconnected. By contrast, 
                           Fig. 6 represents the most detailed view of a given element of the graph. At maximum zoom, the user can easily reveal all terms that have been used to describe the same or related learning units. In this specific case, the term “inflammation” is directly linked to 10 other MeSH terms. Generally, these association maps visualize interconnections among the standardized MeSH classification used for describing the medical curriculum. Each node represents one keyword and its size is calculated from an absolute sum of associations (measured by the Jaccard coefficient) for the given keyword. Since an association between two terms is always reversible, also each edge is doubled. At the bottom of this visualization are located the MeSH keywords, which are used only for describing a single learning unit and are not, in our data set, associated with any other MeSH keyword.

For the purposes of optimizing medical education encompassing a correctly compiled and balanced curriculum, we proposed the formal database metadata arrangement including standardized MeSH vocabulary, which was chosen in accordance with the proven scoping review. In our particular case, the database of medical curriculum contains more than 140 courses, which are described by 1347 learning units and 7075 learning outcomes, i.e. more than 2500 pages of text. From the perspective of human cognition abilities, it is not possible to carefully read and verify all of the medical curriculum content. Classification by standardized medical vocabulary can significantly influence effectiveness and shorten the total time requirements placed on curriculum inspection. Before we integrated the MeSH thesaurus, we had to take into consideration the fundamental properties and characteristics of potential candidates such as linear/branched structure (how the terms are organized and interconnected), annual updates and multilingual translation at regular intervals, scope (specific focus or general purpose), data format and licensing. MeSH fully met our visions and fulfilled the requirements. Two analytical reports show different unique approaches on how to clearly visualize a completed structure and the relations between the vast seas of data. By applying the described dashboards, we are able to determine the similarity between individual sections of medical education explored at the level of selected attributes, such as MeSH keywords or subcategories. We have also classified the set of learning units into one of several predefined classes according to Bloom׳s taxonomy, which represents intellectual behaviour into three various levels: cognitive, affective, and psychomotor.

In the future, the idea of Automatic Term Mapping (ATM) of medical curriculum data is planned. The ATM technique [56] was developed by the US National Center of Biotechnology Information for mapping end-user queries to the MeSH thesaurus and other search fields. The basic aim will be to improve information retrieval as structured information: searching indexes instead of only the free text. Furthermore, with proper use of structured vocabularies and medical curriculum standards, which define the core curriculum data for education programmes in health professions, we will be able to automatically compare and exchange data between various educational systems. For example, a particular comparative analysis of a medical curriculum against topics in the MeSH (or other) lexicon, where the number of articles is rapidly increasing, could help to identify areas within the already crowded curriculum that may need more (or less) emphasis, or perhaps just a mention to students as an area to watch.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In this paper, the global summary of specialized medical terminologies, nomenclatures, coding and classification systems was introduced. We identified the significant problem of selecting and integrating proper vocabulary for computer-processable description in compliance with particular requirements. Based on the scoping review, we adopted the MeSH biomedical dictionary, where the main objective was to classify learning activities appearing in the medical curriculum of General Medicine. Thus, we have integrated MeSH into our original web-based system for innovating and harmonizing the medical curriculum. Currently, this system provides search assistance through a rich set of lexical look-up facilities, which are based on MeSH׳s complex structure including terms with tree structured contexts. Moreover, two data-analytical reports depicting the results obtained from frequency and association analyses of the particular medical curriculum while employing the MeSH thesaurus are described. They represent the aggregated tabular and graphic outputs including interactive visualizations, which play an essential role during evaluation of the whole curriculum. The main aim is to identify information rich data relations and offer clear and transparent overview for simpler and easier understanding of the curriculum structure. We believe that our approach can be easily generalized and used by any higher education institution without any methodological or technological restrictions.

None.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

The authors were supported from the grants project OPTIMED - OPTImized MEDical education: horizontal and vertical connections, innovations and efficiency in practice reg. no: CZ.1.07/2.2.00/28.0042, which is funded by the European Social Fund and the state budget of the Czech Republic. Special thanks are dedicated to the management of Faculty of Medicine at Masaryk University represented by a vice-dean for education in clinical branches prof. Jaroslav Štérba and dean of the faculty prof. Jiří; Mayer.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

