@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A TRIZ-based Trimming method for Patent design around

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Establish an integrated TRIZ-based framework for Trimming strategy to design around competitive patent.


                        
                        
                           
                           Present a step by step Trimming Technical Features process to generate Trimming scenarios and Trimming problems for innovation inspiration.


                        
                        
                           
                           Generate two Trimming scenarios for Core Ejector System improvement.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Patent design around

TRIZ

Trimming

Inventive problem solving

Innovation design

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Patent design around is an effective way to walk around competitive patents and avoid patent infringement. This paper proposes a TRIZ-based Trimming method for Patent design around. The 4 stages of Patent design around include design around target definition, design around problem identification, problem solving, and solution evaluation. In the 4 stages, Technical Features (TF) are identified to define design around target based on patent claim decomposition. In order to avoid literal infringement and doctrine of equivalents, the design around problem identification process of Trimming one or more patent Technical Features is developed. Then, the problem solving tools based on Modern TRIZ tools (such as Physical Contradiction resolution, and Function-Oriented Search) are introduced to solve the design around problem. Two Trimming scenarios of Core Ejector System is investigated to illustrate the method. The project successfully circumvents target patent and generates several new granted patents in China.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the global businesses market, patents are used as a weapon to achieve competitive advantages  [1]. However, existing patents often form a high barrier against other competitors  [2]. In fiercely competitive market, a low cost and less time-consuming way is to imitate and copy competitors’ products technology to develop identical or similar products  [3]. Besides, the design problem constantly facing across industries may not be innovative design during product development  [2–4]. Therefore, when imitating products or solving problem, it is necessary to adopt competitors’ products technology while avoiding infringement risk.

In order to avoid infringing risk, Patent design around (also called as “Patent Circumvention”) is used for designing similar solution based on competitive patent but not equivalent to the existing patents  [3,5,6]. It can be achieved in the following ways: Trimming (Eliminating) one or more technical feature(s) (TF) claimed in the claims, substituting one or more technical features of the claims or using evolution trends of technical features to achieve same or better function. TRIZ (Theory of Inventive Problem Solving), developed by Genrikh Altshuller, is a problem-solving, analysis and forecasting tool derived from the study of patterns of invention in the patent literature  [7,8]. TRIZ helps to systematically solve product design problems and develop next-generation technologies and products with less risk  [9,10]. There are some key concepts which make TRIZ very valuable for innovative design: Ideality (the sum of desirable functions over the sum of undesirable functions and cost)  [11], which describes the technical system development direction. Resources, which inspires us to use existing resources (Internal and External, Readily-available and Derived, etc.) and to turn harm into help  [12,13]. Contradiction, which helps to eliminate the contradiction and avoid the conventional trade-offs  [14–16]. Trends of Engineering System Evolution (TESE) (also can be called as Laws of technological system evolution), which provides a means to reveal how systems evolve, predict the directions of evolve, and ultimately control the evolution  [9,17]. For the purpose of design around Patent, TRIZ is one effective way.

However, TRIZ has some deficiencies in solving problem. Firstly, TRIZ is a very complex system that contains numerous problem analysis and concept generation tools, and few researches presented a structured way step by step to guide innovative design process using these numerous tools. For example, many Modern TRIZ tools, like methods of Physical Contradiction resolution in Modern TRIZ and Function-Oriented Search (FOS), etc., are developed after Classic TRIZ tools. Classic TRIZ is the tools and work developed or supervised by Altshuller  [18], such as Contradictions (Engineering Contradictions and Physical Contradictions), Su-field Analysis, and Algorithm for Inventive Problems Solving (ARIZ). Secondly, TRIZ solutions are stated in terms of general principles and does not provide with an innovative concrete structural design  [19,20]. When applying the principles to search for concrete solutions, designers’ knowledge level and ability still need to be depended on. For example, when inventive principles or standard solution in TRIZ are suggested, the designer will have to understand and apply general principles for the specific problems. Besides, some tools used in TRIZ are not adequate and need to be improved or integrated with other effective tools for different problem situation. When identifying the opportunities of system evolution, voice of customer and voice of manufacturing process, etc. should also be considered. In order to evaluate the feasibility of solution, TRIZ need to be integrated with Design of Experiment (DOE), Robust Design, Reliability Design, or Design for Six Sigma (DFSS), etc.

Patents contain valuable information (such as creative design solutions) for engineering design  [21]. Patent design around is designed for walking around a competitive patent and develop substantial difference design in the scope of patent claims but not infringing the original patent  [2,5,22,23]. It provides generally two advantages. Firstly, it could adopt technology of competitive patent to reduce R&D cost. Secondly, companies could use the technique to enhance their own patent protection strategy and avoid designed around by other competitors.

Based on three Patent design strategies (Trimming, Substitution, and Evolution) in our prior work  [6], this paper mainly focuses on the Trimming strategies and proposes TRIZ-based Trimming approach for Patent design around to walk around existing patents that are in period of protection. In particular, we additionally consider (1) An integrated TRIZ-based framework for Trimming strategy. (2) A detailed Function Model process including function levels and function rank for Trimming Technical Features priority ranking. (3) A step by step Trimming Technical Features process to generate Trimming scenarios and Trimming problems for innovation inspiration. (4) A structured infringement evaluation process based on literal infringement, doctrine of equivalents, and patent prosecution history estoppel analysis. (5) Two Trimming scenarios for Core Ejector System improvement, and more detailed step by step Trimming process form Trimming scenario generating to inventive principles suggesting.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section  2, we give a brief review of related works about TRIZ and Patent design around. Section  3 describes the framework, detailed step by step Trimming process and problem solving of our approach. In Section  4, two scenarios of Core Ejector System of Injection Mold improvement design is investigated. Finally, Section  5 concludes this paper and discusses our future work.

TRIZ discovered patterns of technological systems’ evolution and way to invention based on numerous patent analysis, therefore the creativity can be managed and many fruitless trials and errors can be avoided  [11,15]. TRIZ provides tools of problem analysis and problem solving, which can effectively help to adopt ideas from other domains and apply them to new domains. Many literatures present TRIZ theories and successful applications  [9,14,15,24–26]. These literatures seldom effectively utilize patent knowledge and provide general roadmap for innovation. TRIZ is still in developing stage. The research of TRIZ for innovative design generally focuses on the following aspects: 
                        
                           •
                           Problem Identification. The initial problems are often superficial or complex, and it does not mean that this particular problem should be dealt with. Constructing, growing, and building absolutely new types of problems are one more promising directions in TRIZ development. There are two subgroups to generate new problems. The first subgroup is to identify root cause of the initial and target problem  [27]. For example, it is a critical problem for air conditioning industry that maximum reduce the noise of air conditioning. In order to solve this problem, Function analysis and Cause–Effect Chain Analysis can be used to identify the root cause of the noise problem. However, it may lead to time-consuming technology development. The second is to construct problems that would improve a required characteristic or parameter of the initial Engineering System (ES)  [27]. If we change the initial problem above to “how to make people not hearing the noise of air conditioning”. Many innovative and less cost solution can be found. For example, the component that generate noise can be placed far away from people (like outside the room). Therefore, the initial problem is transformed to a new type problem and achieve the same or better goal. Solving these different problems may help to get innovative design that never thought before. The following TRIZ tools are helping to generate new types of problems, such as Value Engineering Analysis (VEA), Flow Analysis, Cause–Effect Chain Analysis, Feature Transfer, Super-Effect, and Trends of Engineering System Evolution  [18,27].

Opportunity Identification. These researches generally focus on identifying opportunities from technology and market aspects. More concrete sub-trends in TRIZ are developed to guide the evolution of Engineering System  [17,28,29]. Function-Oriented Search (FOS) provides more concrete and feasibility solutions based on the same or similar functions analogy that adopts an already existing technology from remote technology area to the initial problem area  [30]. Main Parameters of Value (MPV) are the critical features and functionality that differentiate products and drive customer purchasing decisions, which help to identify the most significant parameters for customers  [27].

Integrated with other innovative methods, like Design for Six Sigma (DFSS)  [31], Theory of Constrains (TOC)  [11] and Quality Function Deployment (QFD)  [32].

Utilizing TRIZ in new application, like Patent strategies [3,33,34], Technology Forecasting  [35,36], and Service Design.

Computer-aided innovation (CAI). Combined TRIZ with various computer technologies (such as Ontology, Text Mining and Natural Language Processing) to support computer-aided inventive problem solving  [21,37,38].

Discuss the design around strategies. Katz and Riddle  [23] reviewed legal aspect in determining infringement and illustrated basis for non-infringing design around. Chunlin and Lee  [40] researched strategy of designing around based on patents infringement judging principles. Hung and Hsu  [3] proposed a process which integrates Patent design-around strategies and TRIZ to design around existing patents.

Reduce the number of elements of the patent. Dr. S. Ikovenko   [39] first introduced TRIZ and Trimming for patent circumvention in 1991. Jiang Ping  [41] researched integrated process for designing around patents though function trimming.

Achieve the required function with technical evolution trends. Shpakovsky  [29] used Evolution Trends by passing washing machine competing patents. Yanmin, Ping, Wei and Runhua  [5] combined function requirement with the trends of system evolution to design around powder washing machine.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

General process of Patent design around consists 4 stages (Fig. 1
                        ), which are design around target definition, design around problem identification, problem solving and solution evaluation. Algorithm for Inventive Problem Solving (ARIZ) is a powerful tool to solve complex problems.

This stage focuses on target patent definition. It includes three steps: Initial Problem analysis, Target Patent Search, Technical Features Identification. Initial Problem analysis is to identify engineering system category, main function and system defects. It is the base of searching for target patent with similar or same function. Claim interpretation for protection scope may different in each country’s patent law. However, In order to conduct infringement analysis, it is necessary to compare the Technical Features (TFs) described in the patent claims technology solutions with all the Technical Features of the infringing technology (product or process) one by one. Therefore, Technical Features Identification is very important for walking around patent and avoiding infringing. The patent claims defines the protection scopes by law. The target of a design around analysis is the independent claims of the patent  [23]. Independent claim and dependent claim are the two types of claims. Those claims that do not refer to any other claim are independent claims, while those claims that refer to another claim are dependent claims. Technical Features identification mainly depended on what is claimed in independent claims, while the dependent claim refine and describe additional details of the Technical Features. In order to evaluate patent protection scopes, Technical Features could be identified based on the process of Patent Claim Decomposition. The process of TFs Identification for Claim Decomposition is present in Fig. 2
                        . Then, the Technical Features can be represented as Technical Feature A, B, C, D, etc. Technical Features identification is input of design around problem identification in next stage.

This stage includes three steps: Function Model of Technical Features, Trimming and Design around Problems analysis. Design around Problems identification come from Function Model and Trimming problems.


                        
                           
                              (1)
                              Function Model of Technical Features.

The step by step of Function Model process is as follows  [42]: 
                           
                              •
                              Component Analysis. All the relate Component from Engineering System and Supersystem are identified in this step.

Function relationship analysis.

Function Modeling. This step identifies the function levels, function ranking, and build up Function Model diagram.

Performing function rank for Trimming Technical Features priority is introduced. Firstly, each component’s functionality is defined by the total Function performance level points of the component over its costs of components  [43]. It should point out that the costs of components in Function rank analysis is not necessary of the actual cost of the component. The relative cost (the ratio cost of the total engineering system components) of each component can be used for Function rank analysis. Then, to calculate the Function level points of each component, we can assign the function level score. For example: Useful function (5 point), Harmful function (−5 point), Insufficient function (3 point), Excessive function (−3 point). Besides, the importance factor of each function level can be assigned based on expert’s opinion and practical situation. If one component performs 3 useful functions, 1 harmful function and 2 insufficient function to other components, and the importance factor of each function level are all equal to 1. Therefore, the component Function level points are 16 points (
                           3
                           ∗
                           5
                           ∗
                           1
                           −
                           1
                           ∗
                           5
                           ∗
                           1
                           +
                           2
                           ∗
                           3
                           ∗
                           1
                        ). Supposed the total cost of the system is 100, the cost ratio of this component is 10%. So the component relative cost gets 10. At last, by calculating each component functionality points (Function performance level points over relative cost), the function rank of the engineering system components can be calculated. The higher score indicates that the component has more functionality. The lower score means that the component has not so much functionality, which gives a higher priority for Trimming.
                           
                              (2)
                              Trimming Technical Features.

Firstly, three Trimming rules for Trimming Technical Features are introduced in Fig. 3
                           [42,44]. The Trimming candidates may come from the lower function rank scores of Technical Features in the claims, or the Technical Features that generate key disadvantages (key disadvantages could be harmful/insufficient function, etc.). Once a Technical Feature is trimmed, the useful functions of the component should be assigned to other new function carrier components to perform the functions. Because these functions are valuable for the operation of engineering system. Trimming Technical Features can be less or more conservative depending on the number and the relative importance of the trimmed Technical Features.

In general, new function carrier selection still rely on expert knowledge in the specific problem area. However, new function carrier identification should be as much open mind as possible in the Trimming process. Once the new function carriers are identified, the Trimming problems are generated for the corresponding function carrier. In this stage, the main task is to generate as much Trimming problems as possible. The Trimming problems will be solved to generate innovative design at next stage based on many TRIZ problem solving tools.

The following components have the most priority to be identified as new function carrier.
                           
                              •
                              The component that performs an identical or similar function of initial Technical Feature.

The component that performs some functions or interacts with function object of initial Technical Feature.

The component that has the necessary resources to perform the function of initial Technical Feature, such as substances resources, and energy resources.

The Technical feature(s) that could be adopted from the patent solution should be identified at first, then the remaining Technical feature(s) component could generate various Trimming combination for Trimming. For example, there are 4 Technical features in one patent claims, which are Technical feature (TF) A, TF B, TF C, and TF D. If we want to adopt TF A in our new design based on patent solution, TF B, TF C, and TF D are candidates for Trimming. Various Trimming combinations can be formulated, such as Trimming TF B, Trimming TF C, Trimming TF D, Trimming TF B and TF C, Trimming TF B and TF D, Trimming TF C and TF D, and Trimming TF B, TF C and TF D.

In order to implement eliminating of Technical Features, the Trimming process is as follows. 
                           
                              1.
                              Identify the Technical feature(s) that could be adopted from the patent solution, and select one or more Technical features from the remaining Technical feature(s) as Trimming candidate, which can be called as one Trimming combination.

Select one function of one Technical feature in the Trimming combination to be trimmed.

Apply Trimming rule for the selected function.

Identify a new function carrier to perform the initial function of the trimmed Technical feature.

Build the new function model.

Formulate the Trimming problem.

Repeat steps 2 through 6 for all functions of the Technical feature selected in step 2.

Repeat steps 2 through 7 for all Technical features to be trimmed in the Trimming combination, generate Trimming scenarios and Trimming problems.

Repeat steps 1 through 8 for another Trimming combination, generate Trimming scenarios and corresponding Trimming problems.

The output of Trimming process is Trimming problems, these Trimming problems may lead to different types of problem for design around, such as Engineering Contradictions problems, Physical Contradictions problems and Su-Field problems.

Meanwhile, even one same Trimming problem may inspire to generate various solution for design around. For example, if we want to design around the solution of Flash disk in Fig. 4
                        (a). Supposed a Technical feather Cap is trimmed, the function of the Technical feather is to protect the USB connector of Flash disk. The outer case is identified as new function carrier. Then, the Trimming problem is that how to make the outer case to perform the function of protects the USB connector. Six or even more design solution may be generated in Fig. 4(b) based on the same Trimming problem. This case indicates that Trimming problem is valuable for innovative thinking and inspires us to find more innovative solutions.

According to different types of problem, the corresponding problem solving tools of TRIZ in Fig. 1 are used to solve the problems.


                        
                           
                              (1)
                              Contradictions problems.

Engineering Contradictions (also can be called as Technical Contradictions) involves two different parameters of the system that improving one parameter of an Engineering System leads to the worsening of another parameter. The corresponding tools to solve Engineering Contradictions are Contradictions Matrix and the Inventive Principles.

Physical Contradictions indicate two opposite requirements on a single physical parameter of the system. The methods of Physical Contradiction resolution in modern TRIZ are  [43]:

(a) Separation. Separation in Time, Space, Relations, System level and Direction.


                        Table 2
                         presents Inventive Principles Recommended for Resolving the Corresponding Separation principle.

(b) Satisfaction. Which means to satisfy both Contradiction demands simultaneously. Inventive Principles Recommended for Satisfying Contradictory Demands are principles 13, 28, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

(c) Bypass. It suggests bypass the contradictory demands.

It should point out that the Inventive Principles recommended for resolving the Physical Contradictions may be the most related Inventive Principles. However, it does not mean that the remaining Inventive Principles cannot solve the Contradiction. Therefore, the remaining Inventive Principles can still be used for more innovative solution suggestion. 
                           
                              (2)
                              Su-Field problems.

There are five classes of Standard Inventive Solutions including 76 Standard solutions model to solve Su-Field problems, which are  [9,25,45]:

Class 1: Building and Destruction of Substance—Field Models.

Class 2: Development of Substance—Field Models.

Class 3: Transition to Supersystem and Micro level.

Class 4: Standards for Detection and Measuring.

Class 5: Standards on Application of Standards. 
                           
                              (3)
                              “How to” problems.

The step of FOS includes  [30]: 
                           
                              •
                              Identifies the key problem of the Initial Problem in specific domain;

Formulates necessary function for Key Problem;

Generalizes the specific function;

Identify leading areas solution based on the generalized function where such types of functions are vitally important;

Adopts the leading areas solution to the Initial Problem and solve the specific problem.

Complex problems.

Solution Evaluation includes generate design solution, infringement evaluation and implement Solutions. This stage is to evaluate the feasibility and infringement risk of the solution. If the solution is not feasible or exits infringement risk, it may need to go through Trimming process again or try to solve other design around problems, and generate new feasible solutions. At first, design solutions transform abstract solution suggested by TRIZ to concrete design solution. Then, Infringement evaluation goes through the evaluation process depicted in Fig. 5
                         to examine the risk of infringement. At last, implement solutions to solve the secondary problems and optimize the solution. In general, secondary problems reflect the side effects or other drawbacks associated with the obtained solution  [46]. For example, it may generate problems of undesired effects, means to achieve the required result, or potential failure risk for the solution.

If patent claim consists of TFs A, B, C with characteristic of 
                           f
                        .


                        
                           
                              •
                              When the TFs of new solution are A, B, C or A, B, C, D, it will result in literal infringement.

When TFs of the solution are A, B, E with characteristic of 
                                    k
                                 , and TF E is not essentially the same as D, this solution is not infringement applying doctrine of equivalents.

In potentially, TF E with characteristic of 
                                    k
                                  the same as C with characteristic of 
                                    f
                                 , however, in order to obtain granted patent, the patent abandoned the protection scope of TF E with characteristic of 
                                    k
                                  and narrowed down the protection scope to characteristic of 
                                    f
                                 . Then applying principle of Patent Prosecution History Estoppel, the new solution is not infringing the patent. Otherwise, if principle of Patent Prosecution History Estoppel is not used and TF E is substantial the same as TF C, it will infringing the patent applying doctrine of equivalents principle.

Injection mold’s Core Rod system mold plastic part with free undercut of monitors. The initial design of engineering system is presented in Fig. 6
                     . The top of Incline Core Rod mold free undercut. Then Ejector Assembly pushes Core Ejector Rod upward. Incline Core Rod movement along incline direction in guide slot of Stationary Mold Half and exit molding position of free undercut. The plastic part can be taken out. At last, the Ejector Assembly pulls back Core Ejector Rod and Incline Core Rod to initial place.

The problem is: when in process of ejecting and pulling back Incline Core Rod, high resistance is generated between Incline Core Rod and guide slot. It results in stress concentration and three positions (one or more break down at a time) of Incline Core Rod are likely to break down in Fig. 6.

Due to time and resource limit, the research mainly focuses on China Patent Database. The main function of Core Rod engineering system is molding plastic undercut. Based on the same system and function search, Patent No. CN201309221Y is identified as target patent for design around which can effectively reduce the defect of breaking down in Core Rod.

The Patent engineering system structure is depicted in Fig. 7
                     .

The patent uses a vertical core ejector rod to push and pull slider base along Stationary mold half, the compressed Spring pushes and pulls Slider in horizontal direction, and the Slider makes incline direction along Slope surface. Although Core Ejector Rod of initial design also moves along vertical direction, it does not have interact with Stationary mold-half. The friction of Patent design between vertical core ejector design and Stationary mold-half are much smaller than the friction of initial design between Incline Core Rod and Stationary mold-half. Therefore, the breakdown defect can be effectively avoided.

Patent Claim Decomposition process is illustrated in Fig. 8
                     . There are 4 claims in the patent claim. Claim 1 of the patent claimed 4 subjects, which are a core ejector rod, a slider base, a slider, a spring. While Claims 2, 3, 4 refine and describe additional details of these subjects. These subjects define the protection scope of the patent. Therefore, the Four Technical features in Fig. 8 are identified. Because the patent used vertical core ejector rod to effectively avoid breakdown defect, the TF A (core ejector rod) is the technical feature that could be adopted and the remaining TFs (TF B, TF C, and TF D) are used to formulate various Trimming combinations and generate corresponding Trimming scenario.

Function Model analysis of Technical Feature can be seen in Fig. 9
                     .

Two different Trimming scenarios are generated based on TRIZ-based Trimming for Patent design around.

Trimming scenario 1 is illustrated in Table 3
                     .

Trimming TF C (Slider) and D (Spring). 
                        
                           •
                           Trimming TF C: the TF C (Slider) can be trimmed if using existing component (such as Slider Base) to eject and shape plastic undercut applying Trimming principle C.

Trimming TF D: the TF D (Spring) can be trimmed if we do not need the function of spring to pull and push Slider applying Trimming principle A.

The Trimming Function Model of scenario 1 is present in Fig. 10
                     . Although Trimming TF C and D, the initial function of TF C and D should be performed by remaining existing component (such as Slider Base).

Trimming problem is: how to make Slider Base shapes and ejects Plastic Part with Undercut? The Trimming problem generates a Physical Contradiction: Slider Base vertically ejects and pulls by Core Ejector Rod. Slider Base has to exit undercut position in other direction.

For our problem, the Physical Contradiction can be solved by separation in relation. Inventive Principle 17 (Another dimension) and Principle 19 (Periodic action) in Table 2 are used for generating ideas. The Core Ejector Rod moves vertically alone Stationary Mold Half to eject and pull Slider Base, the Slider Base could move horizontally and exit undercut position in incline direction.

New design of Trimming scenario 1 is presented in Fig. 11
                     . The height of Slide Base is not very high. This solution could mold medium or smaller free undercut of plastic part.

The Trimming scenario 2 is illustrated in Table 4
                     .

Trimming TF B (Slider Base), TF C (Slider) and D (Spring). 
                        
                           •
                           Trimming TF D (Spring): the TF D can be trimmed if we do not need the function of spring to pull and push Slider applying Trimming principle A.

Trimming TF C (Slider): the TF C can be trimmed if we do not need the function of slider to shape and eject plastic part applying Trimming principle A.

Trimming TF B (Slider Base): the TF B can be trimmed if another Component performs the function of TF B to shape and eject plastic part applying Trimming principle C.

A Physical Contradiction represented the Trimming problem: Core Ejector Rod should push and pull free undercut vertically, meanwhile it has to exit free undercut in other direction.

The Physical Contradiction can be solved by separation in time and separation in relation. Inventive Principle 14 (Spheroidality-Curvature), Inventive Principle 17 (Another dimension), and Principle 19 (Periodic action) are used for generating ideas. The other Inventive Principle not present in Table 2, like Principle 14, are also effective for ideas generating. At first half process of ejection plastic part, Core Ejector Rod pushes free undercut vertically. At later ejection process, Core Ejector Rod exits undercut. Then, Core Ejector Rod is pulled back vertically to initial position by Ejector Assembly.

Spiral groove structure is used to solve the Physical Contradiction. The new design of Trimming scenario 2 is presented in Fig. 13
                     .

Solution evaluation. New design of solution 1 eliminates Technical features C and D in patent. New design of solution 2 eliminates Technical features B, C and D and identify new function carrier to perform the required functions. The two solutions are substantially different from patent solution.

Based on two different Trimming scenarios, different Trimming problems are generated, and the two new designs had been granted for two patents in China.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In order to circumvent competitive patent, this paper proposes a TRIZ-based Trimming method for Patent design around. The process includes four stages. Technical Features are identified in Claim decomposition. Trimming Technical Features process is constructed, various Trimming scenarios and key Trimming problems are generated. Then, Modern TRIZ tools are introduced to solve the design around problems.

This method is an integrated design method from identifying the design around problem to creating an original and innovative solution or design with the TRIZ-based Trimming process. It is different from conventional design methods and innovates solution based on circumvent competitive patent approach. It provides a logically structured method, which can reduce blindness to innovation and can even further develop new patentable innovative solution. This method could circumvent competitive patent and adopt patent solution without infringing. Meanwhile, this method also could enhance company’s patent protection strategies to avoid designed around by other competitors.

Compared with other design around methods that mentioned in Section  2, the new proposed method presents a structure way from target definition, problem identification for eliminating the claimed components, problem solving that contains an integrated process of Modern TRIZ tools (such as Physical Contradiction resolution, and FOS), and solution evaluation to avoid infringing, which is more effective, repeatable and predictable for innovation. More than two patents are granted in China based on the proposed method in the project.

Based on our prior work, this paper mainly focuses on Trimming Technical Features for Patent design around. This paper is more logical and detail in the integrated TRIZ-based Trimming framework, which are Function Model process that for Trimming Technical Features priority rank, Trimming Technical Features process for Trimming scenarios and Trimming problems generating, integrated process of Modern TRIZ, and detailed infringement evaluation process. Furthermore, the case study generates two Trimming scenarios and two innovative solutions, which describe the effectiveness of the approach step by step.

The contributions of the paper include: 
                        
                           •
                           Establishing an integrated framework of Patent design around based on Trimming and Modern TRIZ problem solving tools.

Discussing Function Model process including function levels and function rank for Trimming Technical Features priority ranking.

Constructing Trimming step by step process for Trimming Technical Features, generating different Trimming scenarios and Trimming problems for innovation inspiration.

Applying the method to solve Core Ejector System improvement and generating two patented solutions with the two corresponding Trimming scenarios.

Future research effort will focus on the further implementation the technologies in different industries. Patent design around is only one way to adopt patent knowledge for innovation design and has limited application area. It also needs future research to systematically using patent knowledge for innovation design.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The author would like to thank Shanghai Institute of Producer Service Development (SIPSD) and Shanghai Research Center for Industrial Informatics (SRCI2) for the funding support to this research. The authors also appreciate anonymous reviewers, Dr. Sergei Ikovenko, and Dr. Yongwei Sun for their helpful comments and suggestions on earlier drafts of this paper.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

