@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Multimodal predictor of neurodevelopmental outcome in newborns with hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We investigate the means to assist a clinician in prediction of neurodevelopmental outcome in newborns.


                        
                        
                           
                           We combine information from three different modalities – clinical, EEG and ECG.


                        
                        
                           
                           We identify a set of consistently informative features.


                        
                        
                           
                           Automated analysis of multimodal data complements clinical prediction.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Neonatal

Multimodal

EEG

ECG

Neurodevelopmental

Outcome

Decision support system

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Automated multimodal prediction of outcome in newborns with hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy is investigated in this work. Routine clinical measures and 1h EEG and ECG recordings 24h after birth were obtained from 38 newborns with different grades of HIE. Each newborn was reassessed at 24 months to establish their neurodevelopmental outcome. A set of multimodal features is extracted from the clinical, heart rate and EEG measures and is fed into a support vector machine classifier. The performance is reported with the statistically most unbiased leave-one-patient-out performance assessment routine. A subset of informative features, whose rankings are consistent across all patients, is identified. The best performance is obtained using a subset of 9 EEG, 2h and 1 clinical feature, leading to an area under the ROC curve of 87% and accuracy of 84% which compares favourably to the EEG-based clinical outcome prediction, previously reported on the same data. The work presents a promising step towards the use of multimodal data in building an objective decision support tool for clinical prediction of neurodevelopmental outcome in newborns with hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Perinatal hypoxic-ischaemic injury remains a major cause of neurodevelopmental disability. It is thought to affect between 3 and 5 per 1000 live births [1] and accounts for 23% of all neonatal deaths worldwide. With the advent of potential neuro-protective therapies in the form of induced hypothermia, early and accurate methods of diagnosis of hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy (HIE) have become increasingly important [38,39]. At the same time, reliable prognostic information is vital in order to counsel parents and caregivers. It is often a major challenge facing those caring for infants with HIE [2].

To date, several different types of monitoring have been studied for outcome prediction. The prognostic value of the EEG in the prediction of long-term outcome is well documented [2–5]. A meta-analysis by Sinclair et al. [3] concluded that burst suppression, slow activity, low voltage and an isoelectric pattern are associated with a markedly increased risk of death or neurodevelopmental handicap. Ramaswamy et al. [6] reviewed biomarkers in full-term newborns with encephalopathy to determine if current biomarkers were strong enough for clinical implementation as predictors of outcome. The review concluded that no biomarker had yet been studied extensively enough to warrant routine clinical use. Laptook et al. [7] reported that Apgar scores assigned at 10min provided useful prognostic information. However, both the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetrics and Gynaecology recommended that the Apgar score alone should not be used as a predictor of neurodevelopmental outcome [8]. Lingwood et al. [9] hypothesized that cerebral impedance as measured by bioimpedance spectroscopy would be increased in newborns who have suffered a hypoxic/ischaemic insult and who subsequently have a poor neurological outcome. However, on examining a set of 24 newborns it was concluded that this attribute was not suitable for discrimination of outcome. Jyoti et al. [10] developed simplified magnetic resonance grades and found these grades to be highly predictive of neurodevelopmental outcome. However, the optimal timing of an MRI examination for prognosis in newborns with HIE is the second week of life and therefore its use for early prognostication may be limited [11].

The development of automated decision support systems for monitoring in the newborn is a rapidly expanding area [44]. Both EEG and heart rate variability (HRV) have been incorporated in the automated detection of neonatal seizures [12,13]. Neonatal HR monitoring has also been used in the prediction of sepsis and systematic inflammatory response syndrome [14]. HRV is thought to provide information on the autonomic balance of the infant, which may be disturbed post hypoxic injury [15]. More recently, depressed HRV in neonates has been associated with moderate-to-severe abnormalities on EEG and MRI [40]. Vergales et al. [40] have also found that low HRV remained significantly associated with adverse short-term outcomes (day 4–7).

The messages from the clinical literature, both with positive and negative conclusions, show that there is no single measure that provides reliable long term prognostication. Most of the cited works though were limited to linear methods that consider a single feature at a time. A nonlinear complex relationship between these predictors has not been explored, and in fact it may improve accuracy, with each parameter providing complementary information. In this study, a multimodal combination of routine clinical markers, EEG and HR parameters is investigated together with non-linear support vector machines (SVMs) employed for neurodevelopmental outcome prediction at 24 months in newborn infants with HIE.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 details the clinical dataset used in the experiments, introduces the investigated features, and describes the outcome prediction system developed in the group, along with the feature selection routine. Section 3 presents and discusses obtained results. Conclusions are drawn in Section 4.

@&#METHODS@&#

Newborns were prospectively recruited into this study if they fulfilled two or more of the following criteria: initial capillary or arterial pH <7.1, Apgar score <5 at 5min, initial capillary or arterial lactate >7mmol/l (normal newborn values <4mmol/l) or abnormal neurology/clinical seizures. Infants who met the initial criteria were examined using a standardized method of neonatal neurological assessment, the Amiel–Tison method [16]. Initial pH and base deficit (BD) were analysed on admission to the neonatal unit (usually within 30min of birth) on a unit-based ABL300 blood gas analyser (Radiometer, Copenhagen, Denmark).

Video-EEG and ECG data were recorded synchronously for each patient using the Viasys NicOne EEG system, with a sampling rate of 256Hz. The 10–20 system of electrode placement, modified for newborns was used with the following montage: F4-C4, C4-O2, F3-C3, C3-O1, T4-C4, C4-Cz, Cz-C3 and C3-T3. Recordings were commenced as soon as possible after birth. All recordings took place in the neonatal intensive care unit of Cork University Maternity Hospital between May 2003 and May 2005, and the study had full ethical approval from the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of the Cork Teaching Hospitals. Newborns were not treated with therapeutic hypothermia. From these recordings, 1-hour segments of EEG and ECG that were mostly free from visual artifacts were selected for analysis at 24h of age for each infant. Developmental follow-up was assessed using the Griffiths Scales of Mental Development at 24 months [17]. A neurological assessment of motor function was performed at the same time. An abnormal outcome was defined as a general quotient less than 87, significant motor dysfunction, or death.

In total, 38 term infants fit the criteria for this study with 21/17 found to have abnormal/normal outcomes at 24 months, respectively. 
                        Fig. 1(top) shows an example of multi-channel EEG and ECG recordings for a newborn who subsequently had a normal neurodevelopmental outcome. Fig. 1 (bottom) presents an example from a newborn with an abnormal outcome. In contrast to the continuous EEG activity in Fig. 1(top), the EEG for this patient is in a state of low voltage burst-suppression with clear asymmetry between hemispheres.

Limited prior knowledge was available on what features would perform well for the considered task. A large set of features was extracted from the three modalities, EEG, ECG and clinical. It is our intention to describe the signals from as many perspectives as possible.

The 1-hour EEG per patient was down-sampled from 256Hz to 32Hz with an anti-aliasing filter set at 16Hz. The filtered EEG was then segmented into 60s epochs with no overlap.

A set of 57 EEG features was investigated in this work (
                           Table 1). This long feature set carries frequency, energetic and structural information (information theory) and can be seen as a general multi-resolution descriptor of EEG activity.

In fact, 55 of these 57 features have successfully been exploited for detection of seizures in newborns [12,18,33], and epilepsy in adults [19]. These features have been used for automated background EEG classification [20,41]. Previous work on prognosis of newborn outcome using EEG [3,5] has shown that quantification of brain asymmetry can be indicative of brain damaging processes. Thus, brain symmetry index [21] was added to the set of 55 features to quantify the difference between spectral characteristics of the left and right hemispheres. Similarly, normalized delta band power which measures the percentage of power in the 0.5 to 4Hz band has been related to outcome in [22] and was also added to the features set.

As HIE is assumed to be a global injury, the information across all EEG electrodes was combined by taking the feature mean. The median has resulted in a similar performance and its results are not included here.

The HR was estimated using the time intervals between the QRS complexes of the ECG signal. The algorithm reported in [23] was used to extract the R-waves. The resulting R-points were manually inspected to correct any ectopic beats or mark artifacts. The instantaneous HR was calculated in beats per minute (BPM). The 1-hour HR signal was first segmented into 60s epochs. A window length of 2 to 5min was recommended to calculate short-term HRV features in adults [24]. However, the resting HR of a newborn infant is on average twice that for a typical adult; 100–200 BPM for newborns in comparison to 60–100 BPM for adults. Thus, the window length can be set to 60s in newborn analysis.

A set of 60 features was then extracted from each 60s epoch of ECG (Table 1). These features have partially been implemented in apnoea studies [25], automated ECG-based neonatal seizure detection [15], sleep monitoring [26], sepsis monitoring [27], central nervous system innervations in adults [28], and detection of food allergy from paediatric ECG [29]. Similarly to EEG, these features serve as a general multi-resolution descriptor of ECG and are used to quantify the baseline and variability of the HR. Feature formulas and detailed feature descriptions can be found in [15,29].

The Apgar score provides a clinical evaluation of the newborn by combining 5 signs such as respiratory effort, reflex irritability, muscle tone, HR, and colour. The score is assigned 5min after birth, ranging from 0 to 10. In addition, the initial pH and base deficit were also analysed, to give a total of three clinical features.

The diagram of the developed multimodal outcome predictor is shown in 
                        Fig. 2. After the features are extracted, every newborn is then represented by approximately 60 vectors of 120 features (over the whole period). All feature vectors from newborns with normal and abnormal outcomes are labelled 1 and −1, respectively. To assure commensurability of the various features the training data were normalized to zero mean and unit variance. The obtained normalization template is saved and then applied to the testing data.

The EEG and HR features were synchronized as they were extracted from the same 60s epochs across 1h of data. In contrast, the clinical features represent one value per newborn, i.e. a one-off measurement. To account for this, the clinical features are replicated for each epoch and appended to each feature vector prior to classification. The normalized features extracted from each epoch were then fed to train a single SVM classifier with a Gaussian kernel. Model selection on the training data was performed to choose suitable SVM model parameters. The outputs of the SVM were converted to pseudo probabilistic values using Platt׳s method [30] to provide a probability of having a normal outcome given a feature vector observation. In fact, the system outputs a trend of probabilistic values, one per each 60s epoch within the 1h of data. An example of the probabilistic trend for a patient with normal and a patient with abnormal outcomes is shown in 
                        Fig. 3. These ~60 probabilistic measures were averaged for each specific patient to give a single value representing a probability that the patient will have a normal outcome given a set of 1-hour EEG, 1-hour ECG, and one-off clinical observations.

A large set of features is extracted from EEG and HR in order to accompany the clinical measures. Due to the novelty of research area, no features have yet been conclusively established as being useful for this application. One of the aims of the study is to identify a feature subset which is informative for the prediction of neurodevelopmental outcome at 24 months. Here, the Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) method [31] was employed to provide ranking for the multimodal feature set. It has been initially proposed for selecting genes that are relevant for a cancer classification problem. An advantage of this routine for our application is that the SVM optimization criterion is used in feature selection. Thus, there is a match between the feature selection and classification algorithms. In this routine, an SVM classifier is first trained. The deviation in the cost function is then calculated for the removal of each one of the currently active features, while preserving the same set of support vectors. The cost deviation DJ
                        
                           i
                         for the i
                        th feature is computed as
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 D
                                 
                                    
                                       J
                                    
                                    
                                       i
                                    
                                 
                                 =
                                 
                                    |
                                    
                                       
                                          1
                                          2
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             α
                                          
                                          T
                                       
                                       H
                                       α
                                       −
                                       
                                          1
                                          2
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             α
                                          
                                          T
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             H
                                          
                                          
                                             i
                                          
                                       
                                       α
                                    
                                    |
                                 
                                 ,
                              
                           
                        where H is the matrix with elements, H(p, q)=y
                        
                           p
                        
                        y
                        
                           q
                        
                        K(x
                        
                           p
                        
                        , x
                        
                           q
                        
                        ), and here K is Gaussian kernel function, x
                        
                           p
                        , x
                        
                           q
                         are support vectors and y
                        
                           p
                        , y
                        
                           q
                         are their respective labels. The feature corresponding to the smallest difference in DJ
                        
                           i
                         is removed. The set of support vectors with corresponding Lagrange multipliers (α) is assumed to remain unchanged for the H
                        
                           i
                         matrix which is re-computed without feature i. To relax this assumption, only a single feature is eliminated per iteration. The SVM model is then retrained to balance the space of remaining features and support vectors. By sequentially eliminating each least useful feature the RFE feature selection results in the nested subsets of features. The experiments section explains how the RFE can be used to rank features. It is worth noting that the RFE feature selection routine does not require testing the SVM model. Therefore, feature selection can be performed on the training data.

The leave-one-patient-out (LOO) method was used to assess the performance of the developed system. For each iteration of the LOO all but one patients׳ data were used for training and the remaining patient׳s data were used for testing. This procedure was repeated until each patient had been a test subject. The LOO is known to be an almost unbiased estimation of the true error [32] – the error obtainable by testing on a separate dataset of infinite size. Importantly, the performance assessment routine is independent of the model selection routine, so that the testing patient is not seen or used for training the classifier or tuning other system parameters at any time. The detailed explanation of the performance assessment and model selection routines are indicated in 
                        Fig. 4.

The metric used in this work is the area under Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC curve plots sensitivity and specificity values which are defined as the accuracy of each class (abnormal and normal) separately. By varying the threshold from zero to one, 38 individual sensitivity and specificity pairs were produced to construct the ROC curve. Essentially, this curve displays the performance of the system across all possible operating points. The range of the ROC area is from 50% for no apparent distributional difference between normal and abnormal classes, to 100% for perfect separation between classes [42]. Furthermore, the ROC area is equivalent to the Wilcoxon rank sum statistical test [43]. This can be interpreted as such: For an outcome predictor giving a continuous probabilistic value, the ROC area quantifies the probability that a randomly sampled patient with normal outcome will have a higher value than a randomly sampled patient with abnormal outcome.

The ROC areas for each modality system (EEG, HR and clinical) can be seen in 
                        Fig. 5. Using clinical features only, an ROC area of 61.3% was achieved. The ROC areas of 66.1% and 75.1% were achieved using HR and EEG features, respectively. Each modality separately provides discrimination which is higher than that of the random choice (ROC=50%), but far from being a robust predictor of outcome in a clinical environment. As expected, the EEG modality achieves the highest performance, followed by the HR and clinical features. In effect, these results can serve as a quantified indication of discriminative capacity contained within each modality, which confirms what has been reported in the clinical literature. However, to date there has been no reported research investigating all the modalities simultaneously or exploiting the nonlinear relations within a multidimensional feature set.

The system which was trained on all 120 features resulted in an ROC performance of 72.6% which actually was worse than the ROC area observed using EEG features alone (Fig. 5). In order to gain insight into the role of the each modality, we examined the order in which the features were eliminated by the RFE routine. Three of the 120 features investigated are clinical features – the Apgar score, pH of the umbilical cord and the base deficit. Numerically, they represent one value per newborn and have zero intra-patient variability. These measures are quantified with low resolution within a restricted range and can be thought of as ‘quasi-categorical’ features. For this reason, the 3 clinical features were not used along with non-categorical variables in the RFE feature selection. Instead, the RFE routine was first applied to the EEG and HR features which were pooled together, i.e. 117 features, and then the contribution of each of the clinical features to the resultant feature set was investigated.

The RFE routine was applied to every training set in the LOO performance assessment. Thus, the order in which features were eliminated is different for iteration. For instance, considering a subset of 20 remaining features these features may be different for each training dataset. In order to identify features that appear to be consistently useful in all LOO iterations, the top 10, 15 and 20 features, after the RFE routine has been applied, were examined and only the features that appear among the top N features for all patients were retained.

The results with feature selection are shown in Fig. 5. Using these criteria, the resultant feature subsets contain 4, 11 and 17 features. The system based on the 11 features selected from the Top 15 features resulted in the highest performance with an ROC area of 85%. These 11 features appeared in each patient׳s Top 15 ranking which highlights the consistency of the RFE routine for feature selection across all patients.

Next, the contribution of every clinical feature to the 11 features selected from EEG and HR modalities is assessed. It can be seen that only the addition of the Apgar score results in an increase of the ROC area, reaching 86.8%. As can be seen from Fig. 5 the ROC area for the system which uses all 120 features is worse than that of the system that uses the 12 features selected from the EEG, HR and clinical measures. Actually, feature selection resulted in a substantial improvement over the system which uses all investigated features. It also indicates that 90% of features used for generic description of EEG and HR signals are not informative for the purpose of the considered task.

The discriminative power of the three clinical features for the outcome prediction is illustrated in 
                        Fig. 6. It can be seen that while some discriminatory information is contained in these features and especially the Apgar score, the individual features and their combination through visual interpretation would be insufficient for accurate outcome prediction.

The feature ranking procedure allows generalization of the importance of a particular feature. A given feature is unlikely to serve as a robust descriptor for the task if it is important for one patient and useless for another. The 12 features that resulted in the highest performance are shown in 
                        Table 2. It can be seen that the final feature set consists of 9 EEG features, 2h features, and 1 clinical feature.

Looking at the selected EEG features from Table 2, it can be seen that a number of parameters aim at quantifying the spectral content of the EEG signal. In particular, the selection of the normalised powers in EEG sub-bands implies that certain frequencies may contain more important information than others. Similarly, the peak frequency and the number of zero crossings aim at quantifying the dominant frequency of the EEG, suggesting that these measures are highly dichotomous in outcome prediction. The spectral entropy measures the distribution of the frequency components. The inactivity of the EEG which is calculated by subtraction of the adjacent samples of the EEG and counting the number which fall below 0.01μV is useful for quantifying periods of suppression in the EEG. In contrast to energy-based features (EEG amplitude analysis), the number of zero crossings of the first and second derivatives of EEG are related to EEG interval analysis 
                        [34] and measures the distribution of intervals between the extremes (1st derivative) as well as saddle points (2nd derivative).

The Shannon entropy of the HR measures the complexity of the HR signal. The power in the HF band is influenced by respiration and governed exclusively by the parasympathetic nervous system. Clinical studies have reported that the effect of encephalopathy in newborns on autonomic function is related to its clinical stage [15].

Although it is possible to provide reasonable rationale for the chosen features, it is worth noting that the selected features are only important if considered together. It is known in machine learning that two features may be completely useless when considered separately and provide a perfect separation when considered together [35]. The statistical analysis of each feature alone, which is common in clinical literature, could lead to different conclusions with regards to the importance of these features, as neither the context (the presence of other features) nor the nonlinear relations are considered.

For illustration purposes, the projection of neurodevelopmental outcome prediction onto the multimodal 3-D space is shown in 
                        Fig. 7. The single best feature is taken from each modality – the number of zero crossings of the 2nd derivative of the EEG, the Shannon entropy of the HR and Apgar score. Certain separation is visually perceivable between the normal and abnormal outcome groups.

The point on the ROC curve with the highest accuracy results in a correct detection of abnormal outcome of 71% (5 errors) and correct detection of normal outcome of 95% (1 error), 6 errors in total. Murray et al. [2] performed a clinical analysis of EEG patterns over one hour periods by focusing on burst suppression and sleep-wake cycling using the same dataset as employed in this work. After EEG grades were assigned, they were examined relative to neurodevelopmental outcome. The EEG grading was found to correctly predict the outcome in 32 out of 38 newborns, with 5 errors in the normal and 1 error in the abnormal outcome group. The performance of the automated system developed here is comparable to that achieved using clinical methods which require the time-consuming visual analysis of the EEG by an expert. It is worth noting that although the number of errors is the same the errors themselves are different, being from groups with different outcome. It indicates that the developed system can complement diagnosis-based decisions, and the two approaches together have a potential to minimise the final prediction error.

In this study, the results have been reported using the ROC area which quantifies discriminability independent of an operating point. The clinical, financial (cost of unnecessary treatment) and legal cost (malpractice) of a false negative or false-positive results as well as the knowledge of the probability of outcome for the population can aid the choice of a desirable operating point [36]. One of the major benefits of the developed system is the availability of a continuous probabilistic value that a patient will have a normal neurodevelopmental outcome. This probability can be interpreted as a continuous HIE grading, which ranges from 0 to 1, and might be as informative as a binary label for a clinician. 
                        Fig. 8 shows the distribution of the raw (unsmoothed) continuous system probabilities for each HIE grade as boxplots with the central mark being the median, the edges of the box being the 25th and 75th percentiles, the whiskers extending to the most extreme datapoints. Despite the fact that the system was trained to match the neurodevelopmental outcome as a target and the final system decision is made by taking the average probability over the whole hour of observations, it is possible to see that even a raw probability over a one-minute epoch can be correlated with an HIE grade. Murray et al. [2] concluded that the normal/mild HIE grade had 100% positive predictive value for the normal outcome. Here, looking at the problem from the opposite direction, it is possible to indicate that a very low probability of normal outcome is mostly associated with severe brain injury. A higher probability of normal outcome is more specific to the mild and moderate injuries as shown in Fig. 8. Usually diagnosis drives treatment and is used to prognosticate outcome as it has been done in [2]. It is interesting to observe that similarly the other way around has a potential to provide complementary information.

In this study, multimodal data were combined using feature-level fusion. The aim of the work is to show that the combination of multimodal physiological data can lead to more robust classification. The work does not intend to contribute to the general area of pattern recognition by comparing various fusion methods or investigating various levels on which information from different modalities can be combined.

Although LOO performance assessment has been shown to be an accurate predictor of the error obtainable in practice [37], validation of the developed model on a separate dataset would be very valuable to assess the level of robustness of the system, e.g. to different recording equipment. The proposed methodology will be validated on a separate cohort of newborns that were treated with therapeutic hypothermia. It is known that ‘cooling’ affects both EEG and ECG signals and it is reasonable to assume that a different model for cooled newborns has to be built following the same methodology. Similarly, pharmacology is not taken into account in the proposed study.

A clinical analysis of patterns that resulted in prediction errors is not reported in this study. Neither did we investigate sensitivity analysis of the chosen time points where the recordings and clinical measurements were obtained. The influence of the location of brain pathologies on the developed system architecture is left outside of the scope of this study.

It is reasonable to assume that a more accurate identification of the outcome of newborns with HIE could be achieved by combining the developed model with automated EEG grading [38], or automated EEG background classification [20]. This work intends to show that using a long set of simple features and no prior information on relevance of those features, an accurate multimodal prediction system can be built. It is achieved using a rigorous performance assessment and model selection routines but without the help of higher level features such as quantified measures of temporal and/or cyclic patterns like burst suppression [39] or sleep-wake cycling. Non-linear combination of multiple features taken from different modalities provides less insight into the internal system functionality to healthcare professional than e.g. a quantified amount of bursts and suppression though the former may provide better final results. Often in the area of biomedical engineering one has to find a trade-off between the need for intuitive interpretation of the designed model and the requested application accuracy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A novel framework has been presented that combines clinical information with HR and EEG measures to predict the neurodevelopmental outcome of newborns with HIE at 24 months. Signal processing techniques were used to create a large set of signal descriptors. It has been shown that 12 multimodal features provide promising prediction results across 38 newborns reaching ROC are of 86.8% and accuracy of 84%. The developed system represents a positive step towards the automated decision support tools for prediction of outcome in newborns.

None declared.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by a Science Foundation Ireland Principal Investigator (10/IN.1/B3036) and Research Centres (12/RC/2272) Awards.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2015.05.017.

The following is the Supplementary material related to this article 
                     Video 1
                     
                        
                           Video 1
                           
                              A 3-D scatter plot of the best performing features from each modality – the number of zero crossings of the 2nd derivative of the EEG, the Shannon entropy of the HR, and Apgar score. Marker type indicates which outcome group the data belong to and each marker represents an individual 60s epoch.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

