@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Urodynamic characteristics of rats with detrusor instability

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Detrusor instability (DI) could be induced by three different causes.


                        
                        
                           
                           The frequency of DI in experimental group was significantly higher than control.


                        
                        
                           
                           Urodynamics reflect the pathophysiological characteristics of DI.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Detrusor instability

Overactive bladder

Cyclophosphamide

Bladder outlet obstruction

Lipopolysaccharide

Urodynamics

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The purpose of the present study is to investigate urodynamic characteristics of rats with detrusor instability (DI) induced by different causes. Forty-eight adult female Sprague–Dawly rats were randomly divided into 4 groups: cyclophosphamide group, bladder outlet obstruction group, lipopolysaccharide group and control group. The BL-410 model bio-function experimental system was applied to monitor bladder pressure and a number of urodynamic parameters were recorded and calculated, including the frequency of detrusor instability, maximum voiding pressure (MVP), maximum cystometric capacity (MCC), intercontraction interval (ICI), voiding time (VT), postvoid residual (PVR) and bladder compliance (BC). The positive rates of DI in cyclophosphamide group, bladder outlet obstruction group and lipopolysaccharide group were 83.33%, 75.00% and 58.33%, respectively. And correspondingly the frequency of DI was 10.00±2.00, 4.87±1.24 and 3.50±1.00tmin−1, which was significantly higher than those of the control group (P<0.05). Compared with the control group, the decrease of MVP, MCC, ICI, VT and BC was noted in the cyclophosphamide group and lipopolysaccharide group. Increased PVR, MVP, MCC, VT and BC were presented in the bladder outlet obstruction group. Therefore, we suggested that the urodynamic parameters could reflect the pathophysiological characteristics of DI induced by different causes, which could systematically benefit the diagnosis and treatment of overactive bladder.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In 2002, International Continence Society (ICS) defined overactive bladder (OAB) as urgency with or without urge incontinence, usually accompany with urinary frequency and nocturia. And its urodynamic manifestation is detrusor instability (DI) during the filling phase [1,2]. The prevalence of this syndrome in adults is approximately 11.8% and rises with age [3].

In clinical practices, it has been frequently reported that OAB is associated with multiple diseases, including bladder outlet obstruction (BOO), neurogenic bladder dysfunction and urogenital system infection. It implied that they can exert enormous impact on the patient׳s health-related quality of life (HRQL). Therefore, it is necessary to establish the animal model similar to human OAB to identify its risk factors. In this study, three methods were applied to trigger DI in rats to investigate the urodynamic features of OAB.

@&#METHODS@&#

Fouty-eight adult female Sprague–Dawly rats (weight 250±25g ) were provided by the Experimental Animal Center of Tongji Medical College, and all animal experiments were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China. The rats were exposed to a 12/12 light/dark cycle, and fed at 22°C under a relative humidity of 60–75%. After adaptive feeding, the rats were randomly divided into 4 groups (n=12 for each group): cyclophosphamide (CYP) group, bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) group, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) group and control group. The rats in CYP group were given an intraperitoneal injection of cyclophosphamide (200mg/kg, purchased from Sigma Co., USA). In BOO group, the rats were anesthetized by intraperitonealy injecting with 10% chloral hydrate (3ml/kg), and a lubricated epidural catheter with a diameter of 1mm was inserted into the bladder gradually via the external orifice of urethra. Then a median obdominal incision (1.5cm) was made subsequently to expose the bladder and the urethra. The proximal end of the urethra was ligated with 2-0 Monocryl suture at the level of the bladder neck, taking care not to be over tight, ensuring the catheter was fixed, but could be removed. Finally, the incision was closed followed by intramuscular injection of penicillin. For LPS group, the rats were anesthetized and received bladder infusion with lipopolysaccharide (1mg/kg, purchased from Sigma Co., USA) once every alternate day and totally for 20 times. The control group did not receive any treatment.

After normal voiding, 36 rats underwent urethral catheterization and the postvoid residual (PVR) was measured. Then, the three model groups were created by the steps as described above. Before the tubes were inserted into the bladder lumen for cystometry, the bladder was anatomically exposed after urination, and a 1ml syringe was used to extract all residual urine so that the pre- and post-established PVR could be compared.

Two days after CYP administration, 40 days after bladder neck ligation and 40 days after LPS infusion, the bladder of rat was exposed through a median abdominal incision under anesthetic and sterile conditions. Bladder detained catheter was done by the methods reported previously [4]. Briefly, two polyethylene tubing (PE20) were cut to the length of 15cm, and inserted into the bladder via the dome and the depth was approximately 5mm. Purse-string suture was performed using a 5/0 absorbable suture to fix the tubes. Subsequently, perfusion of normal saline was conducted to evaluate the tubal patency and the presence of urine leakage. The distal ends of the two tubes were located in the subcutaneous tissue, and exteriorized from the nape skin. The same procedures were performed in control group.

24h after insertion of tubes, filling cystometry was performed for the waked animals using a BL-410 model bio-function experimental system (BL-410, Chengdu TME Technology Co., Chengdu, China). Prior to the test, the rats were each housed in a Ballman cage for 0.5h to adapt. After zero setting of the machine, the two inserted tubes were separately connected to the pressure sensor and microinfusion pump WZ-50C (Zhejiang University Medical Instrument Co., Hangzhou, China). The pumping velocity of normal saline was 5ml/h. Then, the curve of the bladder pressure was closely observed. OAB was defined by the onset of unstable detrusor contractions during the filling phase. Urodynamic parameters including frequency of DI, maximum voiding pressure (MVP), maximum cystometric capacity (MCC), intercontraction interval (ICI) and voiding time (VT) were recorded. Based on the urodynamic parameters, positive rate of DI and bladder compliance (BC) were calculated. Bladder voiding period was repeatedly recorded 3–5 times and the average served as the final value.

After observing bladder pressure and micturition for 0.5h, the rats of each group were euthanized with an excess dose of chloral hydrate and the bladders were quickly removed. The weights of the bladder were measured. For the macroscopic observation, calculus formation, bladder wall inflammation, edema and hyperemia were observed.

The results were presented as mean±standard deviation (SD). SPSS 18.0 statistical software (SPSS Inc., IL, USA) was used for the One-Way ANOVA. P<0.05 demonstrated statistical significance.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The PVR of rats in model groups were detected before and after model establishment (
                        Table 1). There was statistical significance between post- and pre-establishment in BOO group (P<0.05). The bladder appearance of rats in each group is shown in 
                        Fig. 1.

In control group, the bladder filling status was at a low pressure during urine storage. Then the detrusor contraction pressure increased significantly during urination and returned to normal status after urination (
                        Fig. 2A), during which no detrusor instability was observed. In CYP group, the detrusor contraction was unstable in the urine storage phase, and a serrated diagram was formed (Fig. 2B). Significant increase of bladder pressure was observed during the initial stage of voiding phase and it gradually decreased as voiding activity continued (Fig. 2C) in the rats with BOO. In terms of rats in LPS group, the decrease of bladder pressure was observed and the serrated diagram was formed during urination (Fig. 2D). Pressure fluctuation induced by spontaneous contraction of detrusor was noted in the CYP, BOO and LPS group during the filling phase.

The positive rates of DI in CYP group, BOO group and LPS group were 83.33%, 75.00% and 58.33%, respectively. Compared with the control group, statistical difference was noted in the model groups (P<0.05). The frequency and the amplitude of DI in each group are shown in Table 2. The positive rate and the frequency of DI in CYP group were higher than those of BOO group and LPS group (P<0.05). Additionally, the amplitude of DI in LPS group was higher than that in CYP group and BOO group (P<0.05).

The parameters of cystometrogram in each group are presented in 
                        Table 3. In comparison with the control group, remarkable decrease of MVP, MCC, VT, ICI and BC was noted in CYP group and LPS group. Moreover, significant increase of PVR was noted in CYP group and LPS group compared with the control group (P<0.05). As for BOO group, compared with the control group, MVP, MCC, VT, PVR and BC were significantly higher, while ICI was significantly lower (P<0.05).

The bladder weight increased in three model group compared with the control group (
                        Table 4). The mucosa of the bladder wall in rats untreated was smooth and glossy and was without inflamed hyperemia, coarseness, etc. In CYP group, 10 rats manifested hematuria on the second day after cyclophosphamide administration. And decreased bladder capacity, as well as swelling and hyperemia in the mucosa were also observed. In comparison, the rats of BOO group presented increased bladder capacity, together with increased thickness of the urinary bladder wall. Remarkably, bladder calculi were formed (25%). In LPS group, petechial hyperemia was observed on local urinary bladder wall.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Overactive bladder, a clinical symptom that occurs during filling phase, has a high incidence rate and poses great threats to the life quality of the patients. Thus, it has been considered as a hotspot of urology. According to our knowledge, dysfunction of bladder and urinary tract is the pathological basis for lower urinary tract symptoms [5]. In human beings, urodynamics can throw light on the stability of detrusor muscle, detrusor contractility and bladder compliance. Additionally, it can help to identify the potential mechanisms for urinary symptoms and evaluate the prognosis after treatment. Recently, urodynamics has been performed in certain animal models to investigate the causes for lower urinary tract diseases [6–10]. Frequently, cystometry has been applied to study the urine-storage and urination function in rats, mice and guinea pigs [11]. During urodynamic examination, the experimental animals are always under anesthesia, but some common anesthetics such as chloral hydrate, ketamine and pentobarbital could inhibit contraction activity of detrusor and normal urination reflex [12]. Urethane had smaller effect on urination activity, but some scholars reported that micturition threshold pressure and maximum voiding pressure increased under the effect of urethane׳s anesthesia [13]. Therefore, in this study, the bladder pressure was measured when rats were conscious, which could accurately monitor the bladder function status and contraction activity of bladder detrusor, and could avoid the anesthetic interference on urination activity.

Successfully, three methods were applied to trigger DI in our study. The results showed that compared with other groups, the positive rate of DI in CYP group significantly increased which was characterized with a serrated wave (i.e. high density and low amplitude). In addition, decline of MVP, MCC, VT, ICI and BC was noted in comparison with the control group, which might be associated with the toxicity of cyclophosphamide. The mucous membrane of rat urinary bladder is constituted by transitional epithelial cells [14]. Acrolein, the major metabolic product of cyclophosphamide, is excreted through urine. It can form covalent band with mucous membrane of urinary tract and urinary bladder, which results in necrosis, hemorrhage, ulcer, mucous membrane injury as well as the decrease of bladder volume and compliance. Also, potassium contained in the urine could penetrate the urinary bladder wall and stimulate afferent nerves, leading to hemorrhagic cystitis and OAB [15,16]. Our observations also showed that in LPS group, MVP, MCC, VT, ICI and BC had a downward tendency, but the amplitude of the spontaneous contraction during filling phase was higher than that in CYP group and BOO group. The stimulation of lipopolysaccharide could enhance the density of afferent fibers in bladder and increase the sensitivity of nerve endings. Moreover, it was capable of alternating the threshold of afferent nerve in bladder, based on which impulse could be generated under a low filling pressure [17,18].

It is very interesting that in BOO group, a significant increase of postvoid residual (PVR) was found in established models. Bladder pressure showed continual increase with the growth of bladder infusion volume during filling phase and gradual decrease of bladder pressure after it reached the peak value during the voiding phase. The characteristics in urodynamic changes included extended urination duration, increase of MVP, PVR, MCC and BC, which indicated that potential obstruction might exist. The urodynamics induced by bladder outlet obstruction was affected by duration and degree of the obstruction [19–21]. According to Laplace׳s Law, a direct association existed among bladder volume, internal pressure and bladder wall tension [22]. Bladder outlet obstruction could give rise to the increase of residual urine, bladder volume, internal pressure, wall tension and compensatory thickening of muscular layer. All these could stimulate the afferent nerve in bladder, and induce the sense of filling and unstable contraction of detrusor.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Although, the rat models of DI induced by different causes presented the same characteristics, including decreased intercontraction interval and increased unstable contraction of detrusors, the urodynamics showed something different, which reflected the pathophysiologic characteristics of the bladder. Therefore, urodynamic studies could cast light on the diagnosis and prognosis of OAB.

We declare that we have no conflict of interest.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

