@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#In silico design of high-affinity ligands for the immobilization of inulinase

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           For the immobilization matrices we revealed the binding site with the inulinase.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ion exchange resins and fibers were experimentally tested.


                        
                        
                           
                           The maximal affinity to the inulinase was possessed by the matrix of KU-2.


                        
                        
                           
                           Affinities were in good agreement with catalytic activity of immobilized inulinase.


                        
                        
                           
                           Correlation factors are −0.84 (for yeast inulinase) and −0.81 (for plant inulinase).


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Computer modeling

Inulinase

Immobilization

Ligand

Docking

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               Graphical abstract
               
                  
                     
                        
                           fx1
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

High-throughput computer screening (based on flexible molecular docking) is a computational technique used to search for possible interactions between different molecular structures such as proteins (receptors, enzymes etc.), nucleic acids, ATP, drug candidates [36,37,41,6] or more exotic compounds [11] and various biologically active substances [1,14,3]. In addition, it provides an effective method in solving fundamental problems [17,2,38,9] in the field of biophysics and biochemistry [13,32,43]. The same approach turns out to be applicable to the study of the substrate specificity of enzymes, as well as to the development of their inhibitors or activators [20,44,45].

The target molecule of our study, inulinase (2.1-β-D-fructan–fructan hydrolase, EC 3.2.1.7), performs hydrolysis cleaving inulin and other fructose-containing polymers to fructose. There are over 36,000 species of plants known to contain inulin. Thus, inulinase can be used for the industrial production of fructose from plant raw material, particularly from artichoke, chicory and yacon extracts [21,31,5].

In the modern food production industry, enzyme samples immobilized on insoluble polymeric carriers have a number of essential technological advantages over their soluble precursors due to the fact that they: (1) are heterogeneous catalysts and can be easily separated from the reaction medium, which enables us to stop the reaction at any point, re-use the catalyst, and obtain a product not contaminated by the enzyme fraction; (2) allow for a continuous process (in flow reactors), and for the control over the speed of the catalyzed reaction. In recent years, a special focus has been made on the selection and modification of carriers, the improvement of immobilization methods, and the study of the kinetic aspects of catalysis by heterogeneous enzymatic systems. It is known that immobilization usually results in a partial loss of enzymatic activity. However, selecting an appropriate carrier may significantly increase the specific activity of the immobilized biocatalyst [21].

Currently there are a lot of recent works deals with optimization of packed-bed bioreactors configuration for inulinase production [28]. An increasing interest has also been given to the search for the best operating conditions in fructose production by inulin enzyme hydrolysis [34] in terms of immobilization technique [19,30,42] and reactor type [10,35,8].

A new type of support for enzyme immobilization has drawn great attention in recent years, viz. Sepabeads (a class of methacrylic polymers very suitable for enzymes immobilization in industrial purposes) [27]. Basso et al. [4] reported a rational immobilization of inulinase on Sepabeads based on homology modeling, docking and molecular dynamics. The new preparation of immobilized enzyme was tested under near-industrial conditions, and a novel reactor configuration for fructose production from inulin was proposed and tested. Experiments were run in batch and continuous reactors.

Adsorptive and covalent ways of immobilization for inulinase on synthetic cation-exchanger and anion-exchanger were developed, allowing to preserve 80–85% of activity of native enzyme [23].

To date, few studies have been carried out the conditions of the inulinase production and its application to heterogeneous biocatalysts and biosensors. Studying the mechanisms of inulinase immobilization will enable us to expand the knowledge about the processes of the enzymatic hydrolysis of polysaccharides and improve the existing technological ways of producing fructose [15,16,25,26,39,7].

The aim of this work is to offer a high-affinity molecular agent that would bind tightly to the inulinase enzyme without disturbing its enzymatic activity significantly. This ligand with the required side chain length and the «anchor» system at the ends of the macromolecule used for cross-linking could be further used as a mean for inulinase immobilizing.

Flexible molecular docking was performed using the Autodock VINA package [40], whereas the preparation of the structure of the target was taken from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and the ligands generated in the Avogadro [12] package was carried out in the MGLTools 1.5.6.rc3 program [29]. Representations of the ligand-receptor interactions were made using the LigPlot 1.3.6. package [24]. The inulinase molecule from Aspergillus ficuum, which was assigned the code 3SC7 in the database (
                        Fig. 1), consists of 516 amino acid residues. The structure of this molecule was obtained by means of X-ray diffraction [33] with 1.5Å resolution (perfectly suitable for computer calculations using the flexible docking method). It is important to note that inulinase was crystallized together with some organic ligands, including D-mannose, which is an enzyme activator. The known position of the sugar on the enzyme surface gave us an opportunity to calibrate the selected docking package (Autodock VINA) using the example of mannose and inulinase complex. Its structure is known from X-ray diffraction analysis, and it was taken as the «reference complex». According to the docking results, the site of interaction of the modeled ligand predicted by the program is in good agreement with the localization of mannose deduced from the experiments. The affinity of such binding was −4.5kCal/mol.

Prior to the measurements, water molecules were removed from the target. Furthermore, we arrayed the charge on the protein surface and selected a cell for the docking calculations, 68×58×60 angstroms in size. The center of the protein molecule (whose geometry was securely fixed) was at the point with coordinates (x=37.044; y=−36.997; z=−5.365). We used the same target parameters for screening the entire set of ligands. The list included relatively simple sugars (activators, inhibitors, enzymatic catalysis products), as well as high-molecular weight compounds (cation and anion exchange resins and fibers [18]) glycoproteins, phenylalanine-proline peptide, polylactate, and caffeine. A brief description of polycation and polyanion exchange resins may be found in 
                        Table 1.

When calculating the flexible docking, each of the ligands had a maximal conformational freedom: the rotation of functional groups around all ordinary bonds was permitted. In the case of resins and fibers (polymer ligands), the chain size was limited to five monomer units – it enabled us to calculate the structures of the ligand׳s possible complexes with the target in a reasonable computational time providing the extended structure of the ligand.

Adsorption immobilization (5 g carrier in 50ml acetate buffer, pH 4.5) was carried out overnight at ambient temperature. The enzyme (5ml) was added to ionite suspension and mixed in a flask on an electric mixer for 1.5h at 25°C, after which the mixture was centrifuged for 5min at 250g. Immobilized preparation obtained by adsorption was washed from protein in acetate buffer. Control was carried out at λ=280nm.

The catalytic activity of the enzyme was determined by the resorcinol method [22]. Inulin (MP biomedicals) from chicory (molecular weight about 5kDa) was used as a substrate. The temperature of hydrolysis was set to 70°C, pH 4.5.

The amount of the enzyme capable of producing 1μmol of fructose per 1min under the used conditions was taken as a unit of inulinase activity. The protein content was determined according to the Lowry method.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The calculated values of the total interaction energies, the spatial localization of the ligand complexes with the inulinase molecule, and their brief descriptions are shown in 
                     Table 2. It must be noted that the structure and the biological effect of the caffeine molecule are unlike those for the typical substrates, activators, or matrices of carriers, and that is why this molecule was selected for the test calculations. The calculations revealed a difference in the binding sites of various types of ligands. In particular, for the glucose, L- and D-fructose, sucrose, mannose, and N-acetylglucosamine the key binding site was the loops in the N-terminal domain of the protein (
                     Fig. 2 shows a typical docking site using the example of mannose, while the representation of possible interactions can be seen in 
                     Fig. 3). In contrast to this, for the chitosan, polylactate, glycoprotein, polycation and polyanion exchange resins we revealed a different binding site – the end part of the “β-barrel” in the N-terminal domain (
                     Fig. 4), on the side opposite to the active center of inulinase.

According to [33], the enzymatic activity of inulinase occurs due to catalytic residues Glu43 and Glu233. The localization of matrix binding sites for the inulinase immobilization, resulted from the performed molecular docking, explains the drop in the activity of the enzyme when it is bound to the surface – a phenomenon well-known from the experiment [22,22] and quite acceptable for industrial use: the sites of inulinase “anchoring” do not affect the active site of the enzyme, and possibly even, to some extent, direct the macromolecule in a more effective way by exposing its active site to the substrate.

Based on the analysis of the docking results, the following important facts must be noted. First, the chitosan matrix for the immobilization demonstrated the affinity of −7kCal/mol. Second, a test molecule of glycoprotein (Fig. 4, interaction representations in 
                     Fig. 5) demonstrated the binding affinity −6.2kCal/mol which is comparable to that of some substrates: sucrose (−6.1kCal/mol) and inulin (−6.3kCal/mol), see Table 2. We consider that these parameters, as well as the same binding sites during the complex formation, are probably an experimental verification of the stability and activity of such complexes and consider these compounds to be quite promising for inulinase sorption.

Further modifications of this glycoprotein strengthened our assumption about the high industrial potential of its use as an immobilization matrix. Molecular “sewing” of the cysteine residue to the glycoprotein (to form disulfide links with the carrier) did not significantly affect either the energy of binding or localization of the ligand on the enzyme (for flexible docking). At the same time, using a rigid conformation of cysteine residue in this glycoprotein not only revealed an increase in the binding affinity to the target (to −7.6kCal/mol), but also demonstrated the benefits of «sewing» Cys residue to the N-terminus of the model glycoprotein.

We also considered the possibility of using peptides containing amino acid sequences with aromatic groups and proline as immobilization agents. The Phe-Pro-Pro-Pro-Pro structure demonstrated the binding affinity to the target of −7.0kCal/mol, which was comparable to experimentally tested matrices, which were ion exchange resins (KU-2, AV-17-2P) and fibers (KOPAN-90, VION-AN 1 and VION KN-1), and in some cases even surpassed this parameter. It must be noted that, in the above mentioned ligand range, the maximal affinity to the target was possessed by the matrix of KU-2 cation-exchange resin; the calculation showed the affinity of −7.3kCal/mol. It is also important that, according to flexible docking, all the immobilization agents bound with inulinase at the edge of the N-terminal domain of the protein (
                     Fig. 6, the representation of possible interactions may be seen in Fig. 5), which did not sterically modify the enzyme active site. It must also be pointed out that the VION-KN1 connection (cation-exchange fiber) was highly homologous to the polylactate, reflected in the similar affinity values, which they demonstrated in relation to the inulinase.

Superposition of all investigated ligands in one structure of inulinase 3SC7 is presented in 
                     Fig. 7.

We must also note that the results obtained from the molecular docking were in good agreement with the existing experimental data (
                     Table 3): during immobilization of inulinase from Kluyveromyces marxianus and Helianthus tuberosus, the higher percentage of activity preservation in heterogeneous preparations correlates with the higher affinity of the enzyme to the carrier matrix. The corresponding correlation factors are −0.84 (for inulinase from K. marxianus) and −0.81 (for inulinase from H. tuberosus).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

We determine the binding affinities of the inulinase enzyme using molecular docking models of its ligands and fragments of immobilization matrices.

For the glucose, L- and D-fructose, sucrose, mannose, and N-acetylglucosamine the key binding site was the loops in the N-terminal domain of the protein. In contrast to this, for the immobilization matrices (chitosan, polylactate, glycoproteins, polycation and polyanion exchange resins) we revealed a different binding site – the end part of the “β-barrel” in the N-terminal domain on the side opposite to the active center of inulinase.

Based on these findings, we made certain conclusions regarding the potential effectiveness of the experimental testing of some compounds as agents for the inulinase immobilization. The main candidates for the role of such agents are glycoproteins, for which we propose an additional incorporation of cysteine residues into their structure, aimed at creating structures with disulfide «anchors» to the carrier.

Ion exchange resins (KU-2, AV-17-2P) and fibers (KOPAN-90, VION-AN 1 and VION KN-1) were experimentally tested as matrices for immobilization of inulinase. The results obtained from the molecular docking were in good agreement with the existing experimental data: during immobilization of inulinase from K. marxianus and H. tuberosus, the higher percentage of activity preservation in heterogeneous preparations correlates with the higher affinity of the enzyme to the carrier matrix.

No conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The reported study was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (Contract no. NS 13-04-90781/13).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

