@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Classification of laryngeal disorders based on shape and vascular defects of vocal folds

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Vocal folds on videolaryngostroboscopy images are detected by HOG for examination.


                        
                        
                           
                           Vocal fold images are classified into five laryngeal disorder types.


                        
                        
                           
                           We exploit shape and vascular features of vocal folds for classification.


                        
                        
                           
                           An average classification success rate of 81% is achived.


                        
                        
                           
                           We demonstrate that visible vessels of vocal folds can act as a prognostic marker.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Laryngeal image analysis

Classification of vocal fold disorders

Histogram of Oriented Gradients

Vascular vectors

Vessel centerline extraction

Measurement of vocal fold shape defects

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Vocal fold disorders such as laryngitis, vocal nodules, and vocal polyps may cause hoarseness, breathing and swallowing difficulties due to vocal fold malfunction. Despite the fact that state of the art medical imaging techniques help physicians to obtain more detailed information, difficulty in differentiating minor anomalies of vocal folds encourages physicians to research new strategies and technologies to aid the diagnostic process. Recent studies on vocal fold disorders note the potential role of the vascular structure of vocal folds in differential diagnosis of anomalies. However, standards of clinical usage of the blood vessels have not been well established yet due to the lack of objective and comprehensive evaluation of the vascular structure.
                  In this paper, we present a novel approach that categorizes vocal folds into healthy, nodule, polyp, sulcus vocalis, and laryngitis classes exploiting visible blood vessels on the superior surface of vocal folds and shapes of vocal fold edges by using image processing techniques and machine learning methods. We first detected the vocal folds on videolaryngostroboscopy images by using Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) descriptors. Then we examined the shape of vocal fold edges in order to provide features such as size and splay portion of mass lesions. We developed a new vessel centerline extraction procedure that is specialized to the vascular structure of vocal folds. Extracted vessel centerlines were evaluated in order to get vascular features of vocal folds, such as the amount of vessels in the longitudinal and transverse form. During the last step, categorization of vocal folds was performed by a novel binary decision tree architecture, which evaluates features of the vocal fold edge shape and vascular structure.
                  The performance of the proposed system was evaluated by using laryngeal images of 70 patients. Sensitivity of 86%, 94%, 80%, 73%, and 76% were obtained for healthy, polyp, nodule, laryngitis, and sulcus vocalis classes, respectively. These results indicate that visible vessels of vocal folds can act as a prognostic marker for vocal fold pathologies, as well as the vocal fold shape features, and may play a critical role in more effective diagnosis.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Diagnosis of vocal fold disorders such as laryngitis, vocal nodules, and vocal polyps is based on examining structural defects of the vocal folds and vocal fold vibrations by medical imaging devices such as videolaryngostroboscopy and endoscopic high-speed cameras. However, the subjective diagnosis is error-prone and may vary between different physicians examining the same patient because of the variety of vocal fold anomalies [1,2]. Even if shape and vibration pattern of vocal folds give significant information about laryngeal disorders, as well as voice signal and questionnaire data, the variety of vocal fold anomalies drives physicians to research new approaches to aid the diagnostic process [3].

There have been several medical research studies published in the last 30 years in which the presence of visible blood vessels on the superior surface of vocal folds has been associated with benign lesions such as nodules, polyps, and minimal structural alterations such as epidermoid cysts and vocal fold sulci [4–8]. One of the most comprehensive studies on this topic is reported by de Biase and Pontes [1]. They noted that the incidence of blood vessels is higher in sulcus vocalis, epidermoid cysts, and polyps than in the nodule and control groups. Increasing interest in the effects of the vocal fold anomalies on the anatomic structure of blood vessels leads us to consider exploiting vascular structure and shape features of vocal folds for specialized classification of laryngeal diseases.

There are very few attempts for automated analysis of laryngeal images by using visual characteristics of vocal folds. The clinical diagnosis of vocal fold paresis is based on examination of the rapidly moving vocal folds during phonation. Lohscheller et al. introduced a visualization method, namely Phonovibrography, for capturing the whole spatiotemporal pattern of activity [9]. In Voigt et al. [10], subjects were classified into healthy and vocal fold paresis classes exploiting Phonovibrography. On the other hand, examination of the shape defect of the vocal folds is required for diagnosis of organic lesions. In Ilgner et al. [11], manually marked suspect lesions are classified into healthy and diseased tissues exploiting textural features of laryngoscopy images. A larger set of laryngeal images has been used in Verikas et al. [12] for classification of vocal fold images into three decision classes, namely, nodular, diffuse, and healthy. They exploited color, texture, and geometric features extracted from an image of patient’s vocal folds, voice signal, and questionnaire data. Their nodular class includes nodules, polyps, and cysts, whereas the diffuse class is composed of papillomata, hyperplastic laryngitis with keratosis, and carcinoma. The primary disadvantage of this study is the use of vocal fold images that can only be acquired during direct micro-laryngoscopy, which is a surgical instrument. There are several risks linked to the procedure such as anesthesia, a sore or numb tongue, bleeding, and infection. A decision support system for diagnostics of laryngeal diseases can be developed by using different types of analyses of vocal folds. However, clinical usage of the system requires the use of images that are acquired during routine physical examination instead of surgery. In addition to this, there are a limited number of vocal fold disorders that can be classified by the proposed design. Vocal fold disorders that do not cause benign lesions such as sulcus vocalis and laryngitis are not examined.

Even if the latest medical research indicates that there is a relationship between blood vessels and vocal fold disorders, there is no reported study in the literature that classifies laryngeal diseases by using computational methods by means of vascular structure and shape defects of vocal folds. In our previous work [13], we extracted blood vessels on vocal folds and used transverse vessels for healthy-altered vocal fold classification. In Turkmen et al. [14], we exploited the orientation pattern of vessels to aid differential diagnosis of nodules and cysts.

In this study we propose a novel method that classifies laryngeal disorders by evaluating both vessel and shape features of vocal folds. The block diagram of the proposed system is shown in 
                     Fig. 1. The system is composed of four main steps:
                        
                           1.
                           Detection of the vocal folds on videolaryngostroboscopy images exploiting HOG descriptors.

Extraction of size, location, shape, and symmetry features of vocal fold mass lesions.

Vessel centerline extraction and analyzing the orientation pattern of vessels.

Classification of laryngeal disorders into healthy, sulcus vocalis, laryngitis, nodule, and polyp groups by using a new binary decision tree architecture.

The key contributions of this study could be given as follows:
                        
                           1.
                           We propose a novel approach that segments vocal folds from surrounding tissue by using HOG descriptors. Since edge directions of vocal folds significantly differ from surrounding laryngeal tissue, using HOG is very tempting in detection of vocal folds on videolaryngostroboscopy images.

We present a novel glottal area segmentation method that enables segmentation of vocal folds even if the glottal area is divided into two parts by vocal fold pathologies.

We present a novel vessel centerline extraction method which is designed by considering the challenges inflicted by vocal fold imaging techniques and the anatomic structure of vessels on the superior surface of vocal folds.

Automatic analysis of vascular features gives physicians an opportunity of fast, convenient, and objective evaluation of laryngeal images.

Classification of vocal fold pathologies based on vascular features reveals how vascular structure varies among different vocal fold pathologies. Therefore, it contributes to establishing the standards of clinical usage of vessels.

Since structural defect of blood vessels can be a symptom of vocal fold disorders, evaluating vocal folds in terms of vascular structure enables early diagnosis.

Evaluation of vascular structure provides not only classification of vocal fold mass lesions, but also minimal structural alterations such as sulcus vocalis.

One of the outputs of the system is the measurement related to the shape features of mass lesions that can also be used by physicians for objectively monitoring the clinical condition of patients.

We have collected a vocal fold image database that consists of 70 videolaryngostroboscopy and direct microlaryngoscopy recordings. Images of vocal folds on which blood vessels can be clearly seen are selected manually for processing. Vocal fold disorders can be unilateral or bilateral. Distribution of subjects among recordings in the database and the total number of analyzed vocal folds of each disorder type is given in 
                     Table 1.

Sample vocal fold images from the dataset are given in 
                     Fig. 2. Basically, the vocal fold disorders that are examined in this study can be grouped into two main categories based on their effect on vocal fold shape: growths which are arising near the inner edge of the vocal folds (nodule, polyp), and disorders that do not bulge out from the edge contour (sulcus vocalis, laryngitis).

The edge and vessel features of vocal fold disorders are as follows:

Healthy vocal folds: Edges of vocal folds are smooth and straight. Number of visible vessels on vocal folds is quite low and blood vessels are generally in longitudinal form or somewhat tortuous.

Sulcus vocalis: A groove is developed on the leading edge of the two vocal folds. No considerable distortion is observed on the inner edge contour of the vocal folds. Pathological tissue is avascular, whereas blood vessels on the vocal fold orient toward it.

Laryngitis: It is an inflammation of the larynx and does not cause distortion on the vocal fold edge contour. The presence of visible longitudinal vessels is significantly high in laryngitis. In addition to this, mesh vascularization can be observed.

Nodule: The vocal fold nodules are deformations in vocal fold tissue during collisions. They are usually bilateral and broad-based. Blood vessels are generally in longitudinal form.

Polyp: A vocal fold polyp typically occurs only on one side of the vocal fold and can be in a variety of shapes and sizes. As they grow, they take on a rounded shape. The incidence of transverse vessels is significantly high.

Typical shape features of polyps and nodules are generally sufficient for diagnosis. Most polyps are larger than nodules. However, discriminating small and relatively broad-based polyps from nodules may be challenging. De Biase and Pontes [1] noted that the incidence of transverse blood vessels is higher in polyp than in the nodule and control groups. Therefore, vessel structures of vocal folds can also be exploited for classification.

Since vocal fold edge features are not discriminative for classification of laryngitis and sulcus vocalis, vessel features like orientation pattern and number of visible vessel segments are referable.

Videolaryngostroboscopy images contain vocal folds with surrounding larynx tissue. Therefore, vocal folds have to be segmented from surrounding tissue and the glottal area for reliable analysis of vessel features. The segmentation algorithm is composed of three main parts: detection of vocal folds on laryngeal image, segmentation of glottis, and finally normalization of vocal fold images.
                  

We used a novel approach that uses a HOG algorithm to detect the vocal folds on laryngeal images. HOG is widely used in computer vision and image processing for object detection because of its computational efficiency and robustness. A HOG descriptor describes objects by the distribution of intensity gradients or edge directions.

In practice HOG is implemented by dividing the image window into small spatial regions. Each region is accumulating a local 1-D histogram of gradient directions or edge orientations over the pixels of the region. The final descriptor is then the vector of all collected histograms over the image window [15]. Detection of a reference object in an image requires searching for the image position that maximizes the match between the reference object descriptor and the descriptor computed at that image part [16].

Although the images that are acquired during routine laryngoscopy are in standard size, minimal change in the position of the laryngoscope can cause a significant change in the size of the vocal folds within the image. Since vocal fold edges have an elliptical structure, we used an elliptical detection window with an area that is 6% of the laryngoscopy images. The size and shape of the detection window enables provision of a sufficient amount of context that helps detection even if the size of the vocal fold varies. In this study, the minor and major radii of the detection window are defined as r
                        
                           x
                        =300pixel and r
                        
                           y
                        =400pixel. We divided each cropped detection window into 50×50pixel blocks with 50% overlap. The size of overlapping blocks is determined empirically. L2-Norm block normalization is done for better invariance to illumination. Each block accumulates a local 1-D histogram of gradient directions over the pixels of the block. We used [−1:0:+1] gradient filter and linear gradient voting into nine orientation bins in 0–180°. The combined histogram entries form the final descriptor.

We assembled a reference object set that consists of 20 manually selected interested regions that contain the vocal folds. Detection of vocal folds is performed by evaluating the reference object set by using the nearest neighbor method. In order to compose the reference object set, disjoint frames from the test set are extracted from laryngostroboscopy videos. Vocal fold images with different shapes and sizes were used for scale-invariant detection. Sample images from the reference object set and their HOG descriptors are given in the first and second rows of 
                        Fig. 3, respectively.

The proposed algorithm scans the videolaryngostroboscopy image by scrolling the detection window across the entire image with 20pixel horizontal and 20pixel vertical step sizes. We compute HOG descriptors of detection windows derived from the videolaryngostroboscopy image. Descriptors produced by the reference object set are compared with the descriptors produced by detection windows that are derived from the videolaryngostroboscopy image using the nearest neighbor method. The detection window on the videolaryngostroboscopy image that gives the best match is selected. Videolaryngostroboscopy test image, HOGs of the test image, and the detection result are given in the third row of Fig. 3, respectively. The selected detection window is marked with green. Analyses of shape and vascular features of vocal folds are performed on the selected detection window of each laryngeal image.

After detection of the region that contains the vocal folds, the next step is segmentation of the glottal area. The glottal area is defined as the space in between the vocal folds. Accurate glottal area segmentation is of crucial importance to display the shape of the vocal fold edges. Different glottal area segmentation approaches have been reported [17–23]. Algorithms that use active shape models and region growing based methods are the most frequently used techniques in laryngeal image segmentation. Because some of the laryngeal disorders cause shape defects on vocal folds, shape models may not generalize well. To deal with these problems, the glottal area was segmented by applying a region growing algorithm on the red channel of the vocal fold image, which was first blurred using a Gaussian filter (kernel size=7×7σ=1.55) [13]. The regions are expanded until the homogeneity of grown regions is corrupted. Standard deviation and average of the red channel intensities of detected seed points are exploited for determining the corruption of homogeneity [24].

The size of vocal folds within the image changes due to the movement of the laryngoscope and larynx during videolaryngostroboscopy. Therefore, all the vocal fold images were normalized exploiting the size of detected glottal area. Normalization not only enables standardization of measurement results regarding pathology size and vascularization, but also helps to increase the portion of true vocal fold area in the segmented image region. A sample from the normalized vocal fold image is given in 
                        Fig. 4a. The segmented glottal area is marked with black.

The distortion of the vocal fold edge contour is highly discriminative for categorization of organic mass lesions. Evaluation of vocal fold lesions is done by analyzing the vocal fold edges that stand out from the vocal fold edge baselines (which indicate the edge borders of vocal folds before vocal folds were affected by the pathologies). In this study, we determine vocal fold edge baselines exploiting the glottal area in order to analyze the shape features of lesions.

Let x be the pixels on the vocal fold edge baselines and d(x) be the distances of x to the pixels on the inside edges of the cords; the left and right vocal fold edge curves that are obtained for each vocal fold is presented in Fig. 4b. We estimate size, location, splay portion, and symmetry of vocal fold mass lesions by analyzing vocal fold edge curves.

The assessment of the blood vessel characteristics such as length, tortuosity, and direction provides new insights to diagnose many diseases such as diabetic retinopathy, esophageal cancer, and heart diseases [25–28]. Therefore for years, several algorithms for blood vessel segmentation, most of which were designed for retinal images were developed [26–35]. However, vocal fold vessel characteristics differ from retinal vessels in directional pattern and amount of bifurcation. Therefore, we propose a new vessel centerline extraction approach by taking these differences into account. We need to get one pixel-wide vascular tree in order to analyze vascular features such as start and end points of blood vessels, vessels in longitudinal and transverse form, and the directions of transverse vessels. The proposed blood vessel centerline detection algorithm is composed of three main parts [13]: initial vessel segmentation by region growing, skeletonization of vessel segments, removal of false vessels, and finally filling the gaps in the vascular tree.

The block diagram of the system is given in 
                        Fig. 5a. We first performed initial vessel segmentation by a region growing process using the pixels obtained by Canny Edge Detection as seed points [36]. Then we obtained a vessel skeleton by an iterative thinning process and clarified false vessel skeletons by validating the centerline segment candidates based on the characteristics of the skeleton segments and edge pixels. The centerline extraction phase is terminated by connection of the validated centerline points that belong to the same blood vessel.

In this study we use two different approaches to extract blood vessel features: evaluation of the visual characteristics of each blood vessel separately and measurement of the orientation of blood vessels toward the vocal fold pathology.

At the first step each connected vessel skeleton component is traced and partitioned into branches. A sample vocal fold image with extracted vessel branches is provided in Fig. 5b. Next the vertical and horizontal displacements of a branch are measured. Finally, each branch is presented as a vascular vector by binding its minimum and maximum points on the axes that give maximum displacement.

In the first approach, we categorize vascular vectors into longitudinal and tortoise classes according to their angles to the baselines. The vascular vector is labeled as tortuous if its angle to the baseline is greater than a predefined threshold and vice versa. Tortoise and longitudinal vascular vectors are shown in Fig. 5c. Tortoise vascular vectors are marked with red while longitudinal ones are marked with black.

We used vector fields to measure the orientation of blood vessels toward vocal fold pathology. We constructed a vector field for every vocal fold image by assigning a vector to the origin of each vascular vector. All vectors in the vector field end at the center of the vocal fold image. We measured the similarity of vessel vectors and the vector field by using cosine similarity in order to evaluate the orientation of blood vessels toward vocal fold pathologies quantitatively. High similarity of the vector field and vessel network indicates the vessel structures that orients toward pathology.

The following features of vocal folds are exploited for classification: Total length of tortoise vascular vectors, total length of longitudinal vascular vectors, total length of extracted vessel centerlines, similarity of vessel vectors, and corresponding vector field.

In this study, we aimed to design a vocal fold disorder classification system that simulates the human decision-making mechanism based on supervised machine learning methods. The proposed algorithm uses binary decision tree architecture depicted in 
                     Fig. 6. Each node represents one binary classifier that realizes separation of two classes. Healthy/non-healthy vocal fold classification is done at the first level by exploiting both edge and vessel features. Vocal fold edge distortion is examined at the second level and vocal folds with edge distortion are classified into nodule and polyp classes according to their edge and vessel features. On the other hand, since laryngitis and sulcus vocalis do not cause considerable distortion of the vocal fold contour, vessel features are used to classify them.

Naive Bayes, multilayer perceptron, k-nearest neighbors (KNN), support vector machine (SVM), and random forest (RF) algorithms are employed in each node and their results are evaluated [37–39]. Among these classifiers the best results were obtained by KNN, SVM, and RF. Therefore, performance results of SVM, KNN, and RF classifiers are compared.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS@&#

As long as vocal fold images are acquired during routine videolaryngostroboscopy, adaptive calculation of parameters used in segmentation of vocal folds and blood vessel centerline extraction steps are not required. Therefore, a validation set which consists of 20 frames that have been extracted from 10 laryngostroboscopy videos is used for adjusting the parameters used in the segmentation of vocal folds and blood vessel centerline extraction steps. The performance evaluation of the proposed vocal fold segmentation and the centerline extraction algorithms is carried out by using videolaryngostroboscopy images that are disjoint from the validation set. The results are evaluated by comparing ground truths drawn by a medical expert.

To evaluate the algorithm proposed for the segmentation of vocal folds, we used 50 frames that have been extracted from 50 videolaryngostroboscopy videos. A successful segmentation is achieved if both of the vocal folds aligned at the middle of the image and the segmented glottal area presents the vocal fold edge contours correctly. The proposed algorithm achieved a segmentation success rate of 80%. Five percent of the errors were caused by misdetection of vocal folds on the laryngeal image by HOG and the remaining errors are related to segmentation of the glottal area by region growing.

The proposed method employs a sliding window principle to detect vocal folds in a laryngeal image. In each detection window, a 1485 dimensional HOG feature vector is extracted (each of the 165 overlapping blocks within the detection window accumulates a local HOG direction that contains 9 bins). In addition, the speed of such detection process depends on the hardware configuration of the computer system and programming language; we observe that it takes about 35s on an Intel i7 with 1.60GHz. Since the proposed system is offline and yields high success rates, we prefer HOG for vocal fold detection.

In order to test the new vessel centerline detection scheme, a total of 100 frames have been extracted from 50 laryngostroboscopy videos (25fps; 1920×1080pixel). Since vessel centerlines do not precisely overlap with ground truths due to small differences in the segmentations, evaluation is quite difficult. Therefore, the distance between every point on the skeleton and the closest point on the ground truth is computed. The distance between two matched pixels that is below the predetermined threshold refers to the correct classification.

Means of precision, sensitivity, and specificity of proposed blood vessel centerline extraction algorithm were measured as 0.93, 0.82 and 0.99, respectively, while variances of them were measured as 0.003, 0.006, and 3.54×10−6, respectively.

We observed that success of the proposed centerline extraction algorithm is highly dependent on the initial vessel segmentation. Better results can be obtained by improving the ability of the initial vessel segmentation algorithm to detect low contrast and narrow vessels.

A total of four features were extracted by analysis of the vocal fold edge shape while a total of four features were extracted by analysis of vascular structure. Extracted features are given in 
                        Table 2. Since the number of extracted features is quite small, no feature reduction or ranking is employed.

The success of a binary decision tree highly depends on the choice of the tests for the interior nodes. Therefore, we first evaluated the classification success of each interior node separately. Since vocal fold disorders can be unilateral or bilateral, we examined each vocal fold separately. Leave-one-out cross validation was used in order to tune the parameters SVM, KNN, and RF algorithms. On the basis of the results of cross validation, the KNN rule was used with k=5 and SVM was trained using polynomial kernel. SVM penalty parameter C was set to 0.1. RF of 100 trees, each constructed considering three random features were employed for classification of straight edges/edge distortion and laryngitis/sulcus vocalis classification, while RF of 100 trees, each constructed considering four random features were employed for classification of healthy/non-healthy and nodule/polyp classification. Features that were used in each binary classification task and average true positive rates of each node are given in 
                        Table 3.

For each level of the decision tree, the best results were obtained by RF, RF, KNN, and SVM classifiers, respectively. Thus, they were employed for healthy/non-healthy, straight edges/edge distortion, nodule/polyp, and laryngitis/sulcus vocalis classification, respectively. An error occurring in a classification level affects the success rate of classification tasks employed on the sublevels. Therefore, the resulting accuracy of the proposed binary decision tree architecture was measured as the number of correctly predicted data to total test data for each class. We selected the classifier that gives high prediction accuracy for each node, leading to construction of an efficient decision tree. The confusion matrix and success rates of the binary tree are shown in 
                        Table 4.

High success rates were achieved in healthy, polyp, and nodule classes. Whereas accuracy of healthy/non-healthy and straight edges/edge distortion classification considerably affects the overall success rate of the decision tree. Especially sulcus vocalis instances that are classified as healthy at the root node of the tree result in a decrease of the true positive rate of the sulcus vocalis class.

Analyzing Table 3, it can be verified that RF not only gives best results in the healthy/non-healthy and straight edges/edge distortion classification, but also its success rate is comparable with KNN and SVM classifiers in the nodule/polyp and laryngitis/sulcus vocalis classification. Considering the low test time complexity of RF, it can be preferred over KNN and SVM in nodule/polyp and laryngitis/sulcus vocalis classification to achieve a system that is more manageable and easier to interpret.

Samples from true positive and false negatives from each class are given in 
                        Fig. 7. Vocal fold edge baselines are marked with green, while tortoise vascular vectors are marked with red and longitudinal ones are marked with black. The first two columns show true positives while the last one shows false negatives in each row. True positive healthy samples are shown in Fig. 7a. Samples from the polyp class are given in Fig. 7b. Even though the lesion detected on the third vocal fold image has the characteristics of a polyp in terms of shape features, it is labeled as a nodule because of the low number of tortiose vessels. Fig. 7c shows samples from the nodule class. Since the edges of the last vocal fold image are labeled as straight in the straight edges/edge distortion test, both the left and right vocal folds are classified as laryngitis. Samples from the chronic laryngitis class are given in the first two images of Fig. 7d. Generally, the number of visible longitudinal vessels is significantly high in chronic laryngitis. However, the last image in Fig. 7d does not match this description and both vocal folds are labeled as sulcus vocalis. Fig. 7e shows samples from the sulcus vocalis class. The last image of Fig. 7e belongs to a patient with bilateral sulcus vocalis. The right vocal fold is correctly classified while the left one is classified as laryngitis because of its apparent longitudinal vessels.

We have composed the proposed binary decision tree by the motivation of combining the supervised machine learning methods and clinical experiences. To classify samples by standard single-task learning and analyze the results, it would be helpful to evaluate the contribution of the proposed system. For that purpose we classified vocal folds by SVM, KNN, and RF algorithms separately and measured the success rates. Both vessel and edge features are used for classification. The classification results of standard single-task learning and our proposed binary decision tree are given in 
                        Table 5.

Classification results experimentally demonstrated that, while best results of single-task learning are obtained by KNN and SVM algorithms, single-task learning significantly under performs our vocal fold classifier which integrates existing clinical knowledge to machine learning approaches. Achieving high success rates even with a small number of features indicates the consistency and discriminativeness of extracted features.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Studies that focus on automated analysis of laryngeal images can be divided into two groups: studies that detect vocal fold vibration irregularities by examining digital recordings of vocal fold movements [9,10] and studies that analyze laryngeal still images [11,12].

Studies that evaluate vocal fold vibration patterns are able to detect vocal fold disorders such as vocal fold paresis that cannot be diagnosed by evaluating still images. However, analyzing vibration patterns is not sufficient for detection of disorders such as nodules and polyps. The advantage of our study compared to studies that analyze vibration patterns is the opportunity of detecting vocal fold benign lesions.

Reported studies that analyze still images evaluate images acquired during direct microlaryngoscopy. Direct microlaryngoscopy is a surgical instrument that produces images with high resolution. However, there are several risks linked to the procedure of direct microlaryngoscopy such as anesthesia. The most comprehensive study reported in that field not only evaluated color, texture, and geometric features extracted from the vocal fold image but also patient’s voice signal and questionnaire data [12]. The aim of the reported study is grouping of vocal fold disorders instead of their classification. Our proposed method has three main advantages: analyzing the images acquired during routine physical examination instead of surgery, evaluating vascular features in order to detect vocal fold pathologies that do not bulge out from the edge contour such as sulcus vocalis and laryngitis, and finally capability of distinguishing a nodule from a polyp.

The presented system requires manual selection of laryngeal images of vocal folds in which blood vessels can be clearly seen for processing. Clinical usage of the system involves a preprocessing step which is designed for automatic selection of appropriate laryngeal images.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this paper we propose a novel approach that classifies vocal fold disorders into five categories, namely healthy, nodule, polyp, sulcus vocalis, and laryngitis by exploiting shape features of mass lesions and orientation pattern of blood vessels on the superior surface of vocal folds. A novel binary decision tree which combines human expertise and machine learning approaches is designed for classification of vocal folds. It is observed that performances of machine learning methods that are employed in interior nodes are close to each other. This indicates the robustness of the proposed feature extraction methods and an opportunity to extend the designed system to different medical image processing fields.

The outcomes of this study have both medical and computational significance. Vascular structure analyses of vocal folds yield new perspectives on diagnosis of complex disorders of vocal folds such as the case when vocal folds are affected by different pathologies at the same time. Structural defect of blood vessels can be a symptom of several vocal fold disorders. Therefore, evaluating vocal folds in terms of vascular structure provides early diagnosis. There are currently no commercially available larynx monitoring devices that offer examination of vascular structures. It is possible to implement the proposed method in an embedded decision support system to aid physicians in determining subtypes of laryngeal disorders in real time.

Examination of other common and serious types of vocal fold disorders such as carcinoma and papilloma in terms of vascular structure will result in long-term improvement in early diagnosis. In the proposed system, centerlines of vessel segments are extracted and their orientation pattern is examined. Evaluating the caliber of the vessels associated with their orientation pattern could be considered to improve performance of classification. Utilizing a vibration pattern of vocal folds to detect not only vocal fold paralysis but also benign lesions and minimal structural alterations will give researchers a different point of view to develop more specialized computer-aided diagnosis systems.

None declared.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This research has been supported by Yildiz Technical University’s Scientific Research Projects Coordination Department under the grant number 2011-04-01-DOP02. We wish to express our appreciation to SESVAK for their clinical support of this work.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

