@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of monoscopic and stereoscopic displays for visual–spatial tasks in medical contexts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Controlled visual experiments were used to examine performance on 3D spatial tasks.


                        
                        
                           
                           We examine the effects of stereopsis in medical spatial tasks.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stereopsis significantly effects spatial task performance in specific ranges.


                        
                        
                           
                           Color did not affect the performance of participants.


                        
                        
                           
                           Orientation of the 3D representation influenced the effect of steropsis.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Human factors

Stereoscopic applications

Stereoscopic displays

Human computer interaction

Performance

Perception

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In the medical field, digital images are present in diagnosis, pre-operative planning, minimally invasive surgery, instruction, and training. The use of medical digital imaging has afforded new ways to interact with a patient, such as seeing fine details inside a body. This increased usage also raises many basic research questions on human perception and performance when utilizing these images. The work presented here attempts to answer the question: How would adding the stereopsis depth cue affect relative position tasks in a medical context compared to a monoscopic view? By designing and conducting a study to isolate the benefits between monoscopic 3D and stereoscopic 3D displays in a relative position task, the following hypothesis was tested: stereoscopic 3D displays are beneficial over monoscopic 3D displays for relative position judgment tasks in a medical visualization setting. 44 medical students completed a series of relative position judgments tasks. The results show that stereoscopic condition yielded a higher score than the monoscopic condition with regard to the hypothesis.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Visualizing and understanding digital medical data is a complex yet critical process involved in diagnosis, pre-operative planning, minimally invasive surgery, instruction and training in the medical field. The information generated from CT, MRI, and other medical imaging technologies can be high in volume, highly detailed and complex. Translating this data into usable information is difficult, yet of the uttermost importance to patients’ care [1]. At 28.6%, diagnostic errors are the leading type of medical paid claim in the United States. Diagnostic errors leading to death or permanent injury range from 80,000 to 160,000 patients annually [2]. Diagnostic errors occur because: (1) physician cognitive bias, for example when a physician focuses in a single diagnosis without considering all the diagnostic possibilities and (2) Limited information, medical imaging data is not always available in diagnosis [3]. It is crucial that medical imaging data is represented and used in such a way as to minimize diagnostic errors.

Visualization tools and applications are being developed to minimize the complexity of medical data. One of the proposed solutions is the use of both monocular and binocular cues for depth perception, as in the case of stereoscopic applications. Depth perception is used to determine the shapes of objects in the world, and the spatial position of these objects [4]. The ability to see depth is so important that the Human Visual System (HVS) has redundant cues to detect it. Monocular depth cues can be acquired by only one eye, and these types of cues can be present in conventional displays. Monocular depth cues include perspective projection, occlusion, familiar size, object motion, and motion parallax [5–7]. If monocular depth cues are degraded or absent in traditional displays then depth perception and performance may also degrade. Stereoscopic technology can provide more robust, natural, and accurate depth perception cues in image representations.

Stereopsis is a binocular depth cue that consists of processing the disparity between the unique images presented to each eye. Human eyes are separated slightly horizontally and receive a unique perspective of the world. The brain fuses the left and right images, and from the differences between the two images, the brain extracts depth information [5]. The disparity of information obtained from the two unique images is processed to the point that the HVS can differentiate between an object 1.0m away and a second object 1.2mm away [6].

Even if stereoscopic applications use the most sensitive depth cue, and theoretically offer advantages over monoscopic monitors when displaying depth information to the HVS, the adoption of stereoscopic applications in medicine will not occur until a clear advantage of stereoscopic applications over monoscopic applications is demonstrated.

The work presented here attempts to study the how the stereoscopic depth cue affect a visual spatial task over a traditional monoscopic 3D display.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Even though stereopsis applications offer the most robust and complete set of depth cues they are not widely adopted in the medical field. There are three main aspects contributing to barriers of adopting stereoscopic displays: (1) negative physiological displays associated with stereoscopic displays, (2) additional costs in hardware, and (3) the unclear understanding of the advantages of stereoscopic displays over monoscopic displays.

The first contributing factor against the adoption of stereoscopic displays is the association of stereoscopic displays and physiological effects. It is estimated that around two to three million persons in the US cannot see stereopsis and when presented with stereoscopic applications they experience negative reactions, such as headaches, blurred vision, and dizziness when using stereoscopic displays [1,8].

The second contributing factor to the adoption of stereoscopic displays is cost. Stereoscopic systems require additional equipment such as glasses, special displays, and even specialized tracking systems. In some cases the computing requirements are more demanding than regular displays [6]. However, processing power has increased, and simultaneously decreased in cost, such that a stereoscopic display can be acquired for little more than a standard desktop computer.

The third contributing factor slowing the adoption of stereoscopic displays is whether they have clear advantages over monosocopic displays. Many of the studies that compare monoscopic and stereoscopic applications have yielded mixed results [1]. It is important to further the study of stereoscopic applications with basic research questions to understand their advantages and limitations.

Many stereoscopic applications have been developed to address current short-comings of traditional display technologies. Current stereoscopic medical applications can be divided into four areas: diagnosis, pre-operative planning, minimally invasive surgery, and teaching/training [1,9].

Diagnosis aims to identify anatomical structures and abnormalities inside the human body. Currently most diagnosis applications use a mixture of 2D views and monoscopic 3D views. By making use of stereopsis to separate the background object from the object of interest, stereoscopic applications could help to reduce false positives and false negatives during diagnosis. Several stereoscopic applications have been developed for diagnostic purposes, including applications in mammography [10–12].

Pre-operative planning finds the optimal surgical path for a procedure based on pre-operative images obtained from the patient. Pre-operative planning can improve surgical precision, reduce the time of an intervention, and reduce possible complications. Similarly to diagnosis, pre-operative planning uses a mixture of 2D and monoscopic 3D views. The 2D views help to assess the distances and angles of the surgical path, while 3D views help to understand and label the anatomical structures. Several stereoscopic [13,14] applications have been developed for pre-operative planning. For example, Reitinger [13] developed a stereoscopic liver surgery planning that allows the user to analyze the data, and conduct measurements utilizing pre-operative planning.

Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is another potential application for stereoscopic displays. MIS surgery is conducted from outside the body by minimizing the size of the incisions. MIS has been proven to lower the recovery times for the patient [15]. MIS is challenging for the surgeon because visual information is restricted. The operative space cannot be seen directly, as it is only available through a camera placed through one of the incisions, called the laparoscope. The image obtained from the laparoscope is restricted to a 2D flat monitor and lacks many of the depth cues associated with open surgery.

Computer simulations and visualizations have often been used to facilitate training. These simulations offer an alternative to cadavers, which are expensive and do not represent living tissue. Real patients are often not an option while training. Stereoscopic applications could aid in training by providing a better spatial understanding of anatomical features. Several studies show an advantage of stereoscopic applications to monoscopic applications for training [16,17]. Luursema [16] conducted a study in which participants were exposed to either a monoscopic or a stereoscopic training condition for an anatomical learning module. Participants with the stereoscopic condition performed better in answering anatomical questions.

While the many possible stereoscopic applications may highlight the benefits of stereoscopic displays, the majority of studies conducted to this day have yielded mixed results. Kickuth [18] conducted a study for the classification of fractures using monocular 3D and stereo 3D displays and did not find any benefits or disadvantages of stereo 3D over mono 3D. Out of the 62 images used for the identification fractures, 40 of those images had artificially created fractures by a surgeon. Kickuth commented that some of the artificial fractures were of atypical shape, which may have increased the level of difficulty of the task. Hanna conducted a study in which four specialized operators conducted 60 tasks in 2D and stereoscopic 3D displays and no differences between the conditions. This study had four experienced participants that could have been using monocular depth cues to complete the tasks. For these users stereopsis might not offer an advantage due to their vast experience. However, this study did not show that stereopsis performed worse than the 2D condition, so while other monocular cues can be used in surgical tasks, using stereopsis as a cue does not lead to worse results.

These studies have been important in paving the way to evaluate the differences between monoscopic and stereoscopic 3D displays, but in order to assess the relevance of stereoscopic applications in a medical context additional research is necessary.

McIntire et al. [19] conducted a review of all the stereoscopic studies available in literature today. Out of the 162 publications and 182 experiment reviews, they found that 60% had positive stereoscopic results, 15% showed unclear benefits, and 25% showed no benefits.

While much research has been done to study stereoscopic applications, it is still unclear as to precisely when they benefit a user the most over a monoscopic application. This becomes even more murky when considering this in the medical field as many studies are not run using medical tasks or imagery. It is important to understand the limitations of stereoscopic displays. The study presented in this paper was conducted under several controlled conditions to understand how these conditions affect performance in a medical context. Distances, orientations, and colors were independent variables used to assess the performance of a visual spatial task under monoscopic and stereoscopic conditions.

Based on surveyed literature the purpose of this work is to test the following hypothesis (null hypothesis for statistical purposes): Adding stereopsis as a depth cue will have an overall positive effect on a visual spatial task in a medical context. The benefits of stereoscopic displays will be complex and dependent on task difficulty and view angle.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

This study assessed participants’ visual–spatial ability to make relative judgments of objects inside a medical volume of real patient data. The study began with a pre-survey, followed by a set of visual–spatial tests, and finally a set of relative position judgment visual–spatial tasks. The pre-survey asked general background questions about previous experience with stereoscopic applications, about visualization tools, and discussed survey materials. These questions were meant to identify possible variables that could influence the results of the study.

The visual–spatial tests consisted of the mental rotation test [20] and the paper folding test [21]. These are two widely validated tests that measure high-level visual–spatial skills. It was hypothesized that high-level visual–spatial skills will lead to better performance in relative position judgment tasks.

The relative position task consisted of identifying which of two cylinders was closest to a reference cylinder, similar to previous studies regarding 2D and performance [21–23]. Sando [24]measured the difference in performance between monoscopic 2D views and monoscopic 3D views (perspective views). Sando’s studies consisted of placing three objects in a white space, and asked participants to complete relative judgement tasks.

In this study, three cylinders were introduced into an actual patient CT set rendered as a 3D volume, using Sando’s experimental design as a foundation. The cylinders represented the basic shape of instruments that one may find in minimally invasive surgical procedures. One cylinder was set at the center of the data for every task, and was considered the reference cylinder. The other two cylinders were placed around the reference cylinder, with one of the cylinders always closer to the reference cylinder. The task asked the participants to select which of the two cylinders was the closest to the reference. Participants had 30s to make a decision before the interface would automatically move to the next task. The 30s allotted per task was selected as a consensus from literature and a pilot study confirming this duration was sufficient [25]. Answers of each participant were recorded for each task, including those that were skipped.

The data set consisted of 354 slices of 512×512 CT images of the chest. This data set was selected because first and second year medical students, the target participants for the study, were not overly familiar with these anatomical structures and thus could not use additional cues to aid them in the evaluating the positions of the cylinders. The data set was anonymized real patient data obtained from public domain sample data sets [26].

The independent variables of the study were distances, color, and views. Distances refer to the different positions of the cylinders. Four different distances, called cases, were set up by varying the depth distance between the cylinders from the reference cylinder. Case no. 1, was 30mm between the cylinders. Case no. 2, had a depth distance of 15mm, and cases no. 3 and 4 had 5mm and 2mm, respectively. It was expected that tasks with the furthest distances between the cylinders would be easier for a participant, thus making case no. 1 the easiest, and case no. 4 the hardest.

There were seven different views used (i.e. different volume orientations). The different views were up, center, down, center right, center left, up left, and up right as shown in 
                     Fig. 1. The views up, center, and down, were repeated for every case. Views where the volume was at a rotated angle (Fig. 1b, c, e, and f), were only repeated in two of the four cases. For every view and at every case there were two mirrored images, one in which the green was the cylinder closest to the reference, and the other one in which the blue was the cylinder closest to the reference. In total there were 40 tasks, covering the four cases. It was expected that some of the views would be easier for participants, such as the down view, because distortions were minimized at this angle, and it appeared easier to make a relative distance judgment along a line parallel to a face (Fig. 1g). Other views, such as those with the angles, were expected to be more difficult for participants because the volume data could partially occlude the cylinders.

After finishing one set of 40 tasks, participants completed a second set. The differences between sets were the colors. In one of the sets all cylinders were gray (same tone and color). In the other set, the reference cylinder was red, the left cylinder was green, and the right cylinder was blue. The use and absence of color was to understand if color was playing a role in determining the distances of the cylinders. Every participant did both the grayscale, as well as the color sets.

The equipment used consisted of a Dell Precision T5500. CPU: Xeon W5580@3.20GHz. Ram: 4GB, NVidia Quadro FX 5800 graphics card. The monitor used was a Asus 23 in. Wide screen 3D NVIDIA ready monitor. For the stereoscopic condition NVidia Infrared 3D Vision wireless glasses were used.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Following the Institutional Review Board (IRB) guidelines, each of the participants was introduced to the study. Participants were told the activities to be completed during the session, and that the study was voluntary and they could stop participation at any point. Participants were not compensated for their time.

There were 46 participants in the study. The performance of two of the participants fell below 1.5Q of the minimum value, were considered outliers and dropped from the results. To avoid possible learning effects, participants were only exposed to either mono or stereo display, but not both. The tasks were pseudo-randomized into three sets used by both conditions. The grayscale and color conditions were counter balanced so half the participants saw the grayscale set first, and half the participants saw the color set first. Twenty-two of the participants went through the task in the stereoscopic condition, and 23 participants went through the monoscopic condition.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A proportion correct (PC) score was calculated for all the cylinder tasks by dividing the number of correct answers by the total number of possible correct answers. The p-value was calculated using a standard parametric t-test approach. The data was first examined for its distribution and found to be normal. Then, a test statistic was used to summarize the data, and the p-value computed using standard t-tests.

For the 40 tasks the PC of the grayscale condition was 72.2% and the PC for the color condition was 72.8%, there was no statistical difference between the color and grayscale conditions (p=0.6679). The data was further analyzed by mono and stereo condition, volume orientation, and difficulty level.

The PC of the stereo condition was 76.1% and 69.2% for the monoscopic condition. The difference was statistically significant (p<0.0001). The PC was higher for the stereoscopic condition for 26 out of the 40 tasks, 13 of them being statistically significant. The PC was higher for the monoscopic condition for 10 of the 40 tasks, but only two of them were statistically significant. The remaining four tasks had the same PC at 100% for both the stereoscopic and the monoscopic condition.

The results of the monoscopic and the stereoscopic conditions of the four cases of difficulty are shown in 
                     Fig. 2. For all cases the stereoscopic condition yielded higher PC. For case no. 1, the easiest of the four cases the differences of PC for mono was 92.40% and stereo 95.24%. For case no. 2, and 3 the stereo condition was statistically significant, 11% higher for the stereoscopic condition than the monoscopic condition (p=0.0002). The PC for case no. 4 was 53.70% for the mono condition, and 57.90% for the stereoscopic condition, this difference was not statistically significant (p=0.05).

In addition to the four cases, the volume of the tasks was at seven different orientations. By analyzing the results by volume orientation the stereoscopic condition yielded higher PC for all orientations as shown in 
                     Fig. 3. Four of the seven were statistically significant (p<0.03): the up, center, down, and up right. While the volume orientation of up left, center right, and center left orientation were not statistically significant the stereoscopic condition still yielded higher results.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Overall the performance difference between the color and the grayscale condition was of less than 1% and this difference was not statistically significant.

The stereoscopic condition yielded higher performance in 26 out of the 40 tasks, with 13 of these being statistically significant (p<0.05). The monoscopic condition yielded higher performance on 10 of the 40 tasks, with only two of them being statistically significant (p<0.05). Overall the stereoscopic condition yielded higher performance for the majority of the tested cases. Only in four of the tasks were the PC results the same for both the stereoscopic and the monoscopic condition. In these tasks, participants were able to score 100% in either condition.

As the distances between the cylinders decreased, increasing task difficulty, performance decreased for both the stereoscopic and the monoscopic condition. However, the stereoscopic condition yielded higher performances for the four cases, with statistically significant differences (p<0.03) for the second and the third case.

For case no. 1, the easiest case, the monoscopic condition yielded 92% performance and the stereoscopic condition yielded 95% performance, both very high. On case no. 4, the most difficult, the PC for the monoscopic condition was 53% and 57% for the stereoscopic condition. This difference was not statistically significant. These results suggest that for distances higher than 15mm the stereoscopic condition does not offer additional benefits than the monoscocopic condition. Between 5mm and 15mm in distances, the stereoscopic condition yielded higher and statistically significant results. These may be the distances were the stereoscopic condition offers the largest benefit. Less than 5mm, the stereoscopic condition did not yield statistically significant benefit over the monoscopic condition 4.

The overall hypothesis was confirmed, stereoscopic display offers an overall benefit over monoscopic displays in relative judgment visual–spatial tasks. These benefits are dependent on task difficulty. When tasks are very easy, there isn’t a practical difference between the monoscopic condition and the stereoscopic condition. When tasks are of medium to hard difficulty, the stereoscopic display offers the most benefits. These findings are consistent with previously conducted research [2], where stereoscopic applications offer the most benefits with added task complexity. For the most difficult cases the stereoscopic condition was not statistically significant different than the monoscopic condition, but the stereoscopic condition did yield higher performance.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This paper presented a study conducted with 44 participants to assess the effect of stereoscopic displays over monoscopic displays in a visual spatial task in a medical context. Participants selected which of two cylinders were closer to a reference cylinder in patient data. Participants were 1st and 2nd year medical students.

The stereoscopic condition yielded higher performance in 20 out of the 40 tasks completed. The 40 tasks were divided into four cases, these cases used different distances between the cylinders. At distances higher than 15mm the stereoscopic condition did not yield statistically significant results than the monoscopic condition, but between 5mm and 15mm the stereoscopic condition showed statistically significant higher performance. Overall the stereoscopic condition yielded higher performance across tasks, and across cases.

@&#FUTURE WORK@&#

Future studies to validate this work and further the understanding of the benefits of stereoscopic displays in medically sensitive tasks need to be conducted. A study to validate at what distances the stereoscopic conditions offer the most benefit for visual–spatial tasks needs to be conducted. Another study that adds animation to the volume will assess how interaction plays a role in performance between monoscopic and stereoscopic conditions. These studies need to be conducted to continue the understanding of what are the benefits and limitations of using stereoscopic displays in the medical field.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

Theoretically stereoscopic applications offer advantages over monoscopic applications when displaying depth information, yet the adoption of stereoscopic applications in medicine will not occur until the advantages are clearly demonstrated. Many of the studies that compare monoscopic and stereoscopic applications have yielded mixed results. It is important to further the study of stereoscopic applications with basic research questions to understand their advantages and limitations.

The purpose of this work is to test the following hypothesis: Adding stereopsis as a depth cue will have an overall positive effect on a visual spatial task in a medical context. The benefits of stereoscopic displays will be complex and dependent on task difficulty and view angle.

A user study was completed to address this question. 44 medical students completed a series of relative position judgments tasks in a medical context. The results show that stereoscopic condition had a positive impact on the task over the monoscopic condition.

The stereoscopic condition yielded higher performance in 20 out of the 40 tasks completed. The 40 tasks were divided into four cases of difficulty, these cases used different distances between the cylinders. At distances higher than 15mm the stereoscopic condition did not yield statistically significant results than the monoscopic condition, but between 5mm and 15mm the stereoscopic condition showed statistically significant higher performance. Overall the stereoscopic condition yielded higher performance across tasks, and across cases.

None declared.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

