@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Prediction of feature genes in trauma patients with the TNF rs1800629 A allele using support vector machine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A total of 133 feature genes were screened out in training set.


                        
                        
                           
                           SVM classifier peaked at 100% and 86.2% correct rate in training and validation sets.


                        
                        
                           
                           Feature genes were mainly enriched in cell proliferation and ribosome pathway.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Severe trauma

Tumor necrosis factor-α rs1800629 A allele

Support vector machine

Feature gene

Classification

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α variant is closely linked to sepsis syndrome and mortality after severe trauma. We aimed to identify feature genes associated with the TNF rs1800629 A allele in trauma patients and help to direct them toward alternative successful treatment.
               
               
                  Methods
                  In this study, we used 58 sets of gene expression data from Gene Expression Omnibus to predict the feature genes associated with the TNF rs1800629 A allele in trauma patients. We applied support vector machine (SVM) classifier model for classification prediction combining with leave-one-out cross validation method. Functional annotation of feature genes was carried out to study the biological function using database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery (DAVID).
               
               
                  Results
                  A total of 133 feature genes were screened out and was well differentiated in the training set (14 patients with variant, 15 with wild type). Moreover, SVM classifier peaked in predictive accuracy with 100% correct rate in training set and 86.2% in testing set. Interestingly, functional annotation showed that feature genes, such as HMOX1 (heme oxygenase (decycling) 1) and RPS7 (ribosomal protein S7) were mainly enriched in terms of cell proliferation and ribosome.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  
                     HMOX1 and RPS7 may be key feature genes associated with the TNF rs1800629 A allele and may play a crucial role in the inflammatory response in trauma patients. Moreover, the cell proliferation and ribosome pathway may contribute to the progression of severe trauma.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Severe trauma remains to be a global health problem and the second leading cause of death under the age of 45 years [1]. Patients subjected to severe trauma are at a risk of developing sepsis and subsequent organ dysfunction [2]. Moreover, severe trauma and sepsis are related to a high rate of immune irregularities due to an acute inflammatory response in injured sites after encountering trauma or sepsis [2]. The inflammatory response is the host׳s response to extraneous threat, such as invading pathogen or tissue damage, and subsequent up-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and immune cells into tissues [3,4].

The cytokine response plays an important role in the development of severe trauma in that pro-inflammatory cytokines including tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-6, 8, 12 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) have been shown to release excessively. TNF-α is considered as an essential component in immune response to inflammation that primarily produced by immune cells including macrophages, monocytes and other non-immune cells [5,6]. Currently, TNF-α is shown to act as a key intermediary in inflammatory response that mediates a cascade of cytokines. Furthermore, TNF-α is responsible for organ failure as well as increased risk of sepsis after multiple injuries [7,8]. A previous study has revealed that elevated circulating levels of TNF-α are observed in response to severe trauma [9]. Besides, several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the promoter region or coding sequence of TNF-α have been thought to increase the risk for severe sepsis after trauma and may be associated with outcome of trauma [10,11]. Menges et al. also indicated that variations of the gene encoding for TNF-α (TNF-α variants) were related to sepsis syndrome and death following severe trauma [12]. Therefore, TNF-α variants may be key factors during the development of severe trauma, and identification of feature genes related to TNF-α variants may help improve therapy of trauma. However, classification of trauma patients based on TNF-α variants has never been reported in previous study, as well as feature genes associated with TNF-α variants.

Various feature gene identification methods in handling microarray data have been applied, especially support vector machine (SVM) which is one of the most effective method in classification [13]. Previously, a prospective cohort study based on microarray data GSE5760 was performed to confirm that TNF-α variants were associated with increased occurrence of sepsis syndrome in trauma patients and the peripheral blood transcriptome in patients with or without the TNF rs1800629 A allele was different [12]. Moreover, microarray data GSE5760 was also used to investigate candidate genes and miRNAs for elucidate the effect of TNF rs1800629 A allele on sepsis syndrome in multiple trauma patients [14]. In contrast to this, we used microarray data GSE5760 in this study and predicted feature genes associated with the TNF rs1800629 A allele by applying the SVM method in conjunction with leave one out cross validation (LOOCV). Moreover, functional annotation of feature genes was conducted. The objective of our study was to predict feature genes associated with TNF rs1800629 A allele in trauma patients. Our study will help to elucidate the molecular mechanism of severe trauma and is crucial for drug target selection in clinical application.

The dataset GSE5760 deposited by Menges et al. [12] was downloaded from GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE5760) based on the platform of GE Healthcare/Amersham Biosciences CodeLink UniSet Human I Bioarray. A total of 28 patients were used for array analysis, including 12 patients with the TNF rs1800629 A allele (MUT1-12) and 16 patients without the TNF rs1800629 A allele (WT1-16). The transcpriptome from peripheral blood from 28 patients was firstly examined using the CodeLink UniSet Human 10K Bioarrays (GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany). Only whole blood samples were used for this investigation upon admission to the intensive care unit (ICU). Each patient sample was hybridized in duplicate on microarrays (label-extract technical replicate). The arrays were designated WTx.y or MUTx.y with WT for patients without and MUT for patients with the TNF rs1800629 A allele, with x for the patient-ID (1, 2, 3 and 4) and y for the technical replicate number (1, 2 or 3). Microarray results were validated by quantification of mRNA using TaqMan® technology. After microarray quality analysis, a set of 58 arrays containing 28 blood samples with the TNF rs1800629 A allele and 30 samples without the TNF rs1800629 A allele were subjected to microarray analysis. In this study, the first 29 out of 58 samples were used as training set (14 samples with rs1800629 A allele and 15 samples without variant based on number order of GSM) and the remaining samples were used as testing set. A schematic diagram of analysis in this study was shown in 
                        Fig. 1.

Raw expression data were quantile normalized using a Robust Multi-array Averaging (RMA) [15] method. The probe data were converted into gene symbol based on probe annotation file. If multiple probes corresponded to the same gene symbol, the mean value was calculated as the gene expression value of this gene. Data were then log2 transformed [16] for further analysis.

To distinguish samples with or without TNF-α rs1800629 A allele, Limma package [17] was applied to identify feature genes with differentially expressed in training set. P values were adjusted for multiple testing by Benjamini–Hochberg procedure as the false discovery rate (FDR) [18]. Genes with FDR less than 0.05 and fold change (FC, mutation/wild type) more than 1.5 were considered as significant.

SVM is employed as the predictor, which has proven to be a powerful machine learning technique, especially for classification [19,20]. In this study, we performed our classification analyses using a SVM classifier (kernel: radial basis, gamma=0.0075, C parameter default value=1) based on feature genes associated with the TNF rs1800629 A allele. SVM classifier was implemented by the e1071 package in R (http://cran.r-project.org/package=e1071) [21]. Moreover, LOOCV [22,23] which involves iteratively leaving out one sample as testing sample until no remaining training samples was applied to estimate the generalized performance of our classifier. Thus, for N samples, the LOOCV would train the classifier N times.

In order to accurately evaluate the classification prediction of SVM classifier, based on the results of LOOCV assessment, the classification models for samples with or without TNF-α variant were comprehensively evaluated based on the calculation of sensitivity, specificity [24], positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV) [25] and the area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUC) curve [26]. If the five parameters equal 1, a perfect classifier can be found. However, if they are equal to 0.5, the classifier has no discriminative power at all.

To further study the functions of feature genes, Gene Ontology (GO) functional analysis was conducted using database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery (DAVID, available at http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/) [27] online tool. Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis was carried out by KEGG Orthology Based Annotation System (KOBAS, available at http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/home.do) [28]. GO terms with FDR less than 0.05 and KEGG categories with P value less than 0.05 were considered to be significant.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Using FDR<0.05 and FC>1.5 as filtering criteria, 133 genes including 86 up- and 47 down-regulated genes were screened out in trauma patients with the TNF rs1800629 A allele compared with patients without TNF-α variant.

To generate a predictive classifier from this cohort, gene expression values were calculated. This SVM classifier, using LOOCV, peaked in predictive accuracy with 100% correct rate in training set indicating that all 29 samples were distinguished by SVM, but 86.2% in testing set (
                        Fig. 2A and B). Four samples were wrong differentiated, including two mutants and two wild types (Fig. 2C). To further assess the effects of SVM classifier, performance metrics including correct rate, sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV and AUC were calculated and shown in 
                        Table 1. AUC in training set was 1 whereas 0.89 in testing set, and the ROC of training or testing set is shown in 
                        Fig. 3. The results showed the high correct rate, sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV for predicting trauma patients with the TNF rs1800629 A allele and without variant in the training and testing cohorts.

To understand the biological meaning of feature genes with differentially expressed in peripheral blood from trauma patients, we performed GO functional and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. The results showed that feature genes were mainly involved in GO terms of cell proliferation, protein import and negative regulation of cell proliferation. Top 10 GO terms are shown in 
                        Table 2. The percentage of feature genes involved in GO terms is shown in 
                        Fig. 4. Most of feature genes were enriched in cell proliferation and response to organic substance, including HMOX1 (heme oxygenase (decycling) 1), HDGFRP3 (hepatoma-derived growth factor, related protein 3) and ASPM (asp (abnormal spindle) homolog, microcephaly associated). In addition, the significantly enriched pathways mainly were Ribosome, T cell receptor signaling pathway and Toxoplasmosis (
                        Table 3). Ribosome pathway-related genes including MRPL1 (mitochondrial ribosomal protein L1), MRPL22 (mitochondrial ribosomal protein L22), RPS7 (ribosomal protein S7) and RPL6 (ribosomal protein L6) were significantly up-regulated in trauma patients with TNF-α variant.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, we utilized SVM classifier model for classification prediction of feature selection associated with the TNF rs1800629 A allele in trauma patients by conjunction with LOOCV. A total of 133 feature genes were screened out and well differentiated in the training set. Moreover, SVM classifier peaked in predictive accuracy with 100% correct rate in training set and 86.2% in testing set, suggesting that these feature genes could be valuable for screening of trauma patients with or without the TNF rs1800629 A allele. Besides, the results of functional annotation indicated that feature genes were mainly enriched in cell proliferation terms and ribosomes pathway, such as HMOX1 and PRS7.

As we all know, TNF-α has been shown to play crucial roles in cellular response to inflammation, such as cell proliferation, apoptosis and production of inflammatory mediators as well as pathogenesis of septic shock [29]. TNF-α -308G/A variant is associated with survival in sepsis or septic shock of [30]. Moreover, the TNF-α rs1800629 polymorphism has been described to be associated with sepsis syndrome and death after severe trauma [12]. In our study changes of associated gene expression would be found in trauma patients with the TNF-α rs1800629 polymorphism, such as HOMX1. HOMX1 is a stress protein belonging to heat shock protein family that protects against oxidative stress and inflammation [31]. It has been proved to attenuate inflammation in a wide range of conditions by decreasing leukocyte infiltration and inflammatory adhesion molecules, but down-regulation of HOMX1 contributes to inflammation [32]. Additionally, Wagener et al. demostrated that 2008 HOMX1 was involved in joint damage and disease activity of rheumatoid arthritis that was an inflammation-induced disease [31]. More interestingly, HMOX1 has been found to be mediated by NFκB pathway that involved in cellular activity, such as injury, stress and complex immune response. Meanwhile, NFκB induces expression of TNF-α [33]. There is a great deal of evidence supporting correlation between NFκB signaling and sepsis suggesting that the pathway significantly regulates inflammation [34]. Considering the important role of TNF-α and HMOX1, we postulate that TNF-α variant may induce differential expression of HMOX1 in trauma patients and HMOX1 may be a feature gene associated with TNF-α variant for contributing to severe trauma.

On the other hand, the local release of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines after severe trauma implies their ability to alter immune response. The important pro-inflammatory cytokines associated to trauma consist of TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8 and so on. Ribosome is the essential part in transcription and translation of genes involved in inflammation and immune response. More importantly, overproduction of cytokines is also involved in ribosome pathway which was consistent with pathway enrichment analysis in our study. RPS7 is considered as a gene involved in ribosomal activation and maturation of ribosomal RNA that expressing in lymphocyte, neutrophil and monocyte [35]. Furthermore, RPS7 plays a vital role in cell development via interaction with p53 and regulation of matrix metalloproteinase family [36]. Genetic deficiency of RPS7 induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest by activating p53. However, little is known about the role of RPS7 in inflammation and immunology after trauma. In our study, up-regulated RPS7 was observed in trauma patients with the TNF rs1800629 A allele and was significantly enriched in ribosome pathway. Therefore, RPS7 may be a feature gene associated with TNF-α variant and involved in severe trauma through regulating ribosome pathway.

In our study, SVM method provides an efficient way to build classifier to prove that those feature genes may be associated with the TNF rs1800629 A allele. SVM method is shown to be able to best classify genes with a common function and predict their functional roles using gene expression data from DNA microarray hybridization experiments [37]. Moreover, SVM classifier is proved to be suitable for genetic diagnosis, as well as drug discovery [38]. Thus, SVM method will help us to verify feature genes associated with TNF-α variant for finding novel biomedical markers and drug target in severe trauma treatment. Despite good prediction performance of SVM classifier, these results are still need to be regarded as preliminary because of the limited number of investigated patients. Meanwhile, more experiments are needed as future work.

In summary, HMOX1 and RPS7 may be key feature genes associated with the TNF rs1800629 A allele and may play a crucial role in the inflammatory response in trauma patients. Moreover, the cell proliferation and ribosome pathway may contribute to the progression of severe trauma. Our study will provide more insights for trauma patients-selective gene prediction and help to develop new drug targets.

None.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was supported by Shanghai medical key subject construction project (ZK2012A28) and Key National Clinical Discipline construction project (2013).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

