@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Prediction of time dependent survival in HF patients after VAD implantation using pre- and post-operative data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A methodology for the prediction of time dependent survival in patients after LVAD implantation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Data mining techniques applied.


                        
                        
                           
                           Pre-implantation data are exploited in order to estimate their predictive power.


                        
                        
                           
                           Prediction accuracy enhancement with the integration of post-implantation data.


                        
                        
                           
                           An optimal subset of features highly correlated with patient survival is identified.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Heart failure disease

Ventricular assist device

Survival prediction

Data mining

Feature selection

Classification

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Heart failure is one of the most common diseases worldwide. In recent years, Ventricular Assist Devices (VADs) have become a valuable option for patients with advanced HF. Although it has been shown that VADs improve patient survival rates, several complications persist during left VAD (LVAD) support. The stratification scores currently employed are mostly generic, i.e. not specifically built for LVAD patients, and are based on pre-implantation patient data. In this work we apply data mining approaches for the prediction of time dependent survival in patients after LVAD implantation. Moreover, the predictions acquired with the use of pre-implantation data are enriched by employing post-implantation data, i.e. follow-up data. Different clinical scenarios have been depicted and the subsequent conditions are tested in order to identify the optimal set of pre- and post-implant features, as well as the most suitable algorithms for feature selection and prediction. The proposed approach is applied to a real dataset of 71 patients, reporting an accuracy of 84.5%, sensitivity of 87% and specificity of 82%. Based on the reported results, expert cardio-surgeons can be supported in planning the treatment of VAD patients.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Heart failure (HF) is one of the most common diseases worldwide, with a prevalence of over 5.8 million in the USA, and over 23 million worldwide. Projections show that the prevalence of HF will increase by 46% from 2012 to 2030, resulting in more than 8 million people in US [1,2]. Up to some years ago, heart transplantation was the conventional treatment for end-stage heart failure. Each year approximately 5000 transplantations take place worldwide, although it is estimated that up to 50,000 people are candidates for transplantation [3]. The need for alternative treatment has led to the development of implantable Ventricular Assist Devices (VAD) which has become a valuable option for patients with advanced HF. The progress in VAD technology over the last years has moved VAD usage from limited “bridge-to-transplant” (BTT) to durable lifelong support, i.e. a “destination-therapy” (DT), while occasionally VADs are used as a “bridge-to-(myocardial)-recovery”. Although it has been shown that VADs improve patient׳s survival rates (see e.g. [4,5]) several complications persist during left VAD (LVAD) support, which are based on: (i) the pre-existing effects of advanced heart failure, (ii) the requirement of extensive surgery to implant the device and (iii) the effects of VAD in compromised patients [6]. Sepsis, right heart failure and multiorgan failure are the most common causes of death [7]. Current estimates calculate the number of end-stage HF patients potentially in need for LVAD support from 30,000 to 100,000 in the US [8] or up to 200,000 worldwide [9]. Therefore the need for careful patient selection of candidates is of paramount importance. As we are moving from BTR to DT approaches though, what seems to be lacking is not only a reliable pre-operative stratification score, but also a tool in order to assess the status of the patient after the implantation.

The most widely employed by clinicians stratification scores are the Heart Failure Survival Score (HFSS) [10] and the Seattle Heart Failure Model (SHFM) [11]. Both of them have not been specifically built for LVAD patients and can estimate survival rates of HF patients, without considering the LVAD implantation, based on hemodynamic instability and other features of HF. Still, Schaffer et al. [12] report that SHFM works better than other scores for mortality prediction before and after VAD implantation. Complementary to the above, the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score [13] is also used identifying candidate patients at high risk of developing other diseases (multi-organ failures) when undergoing LVAD implantation.

The first score specifically built for LVAD patients was the Lietz-Miller Destination Therapy Risk Score (DTRS) [14] which is derived from a patient cohort of 222 patients receiving a first generation LVAD treatment who were followed up until death and discriminates risk groups at 1-year survival. Through multivariate analysis, the DTRS estimates risk scores for 90-day in-hospital mortality based on 9 pre-operative patient variables and is considered one of the major attempts for risk stratification of LVAD patients. Still, it has received some criticism on the synthesis of the dataset, the representation of different patient groups including the ones with co-morbidities.

As DTRS was shown to provide modest discrimination for destination therapy patients with continuous flows devices, logistic regression was recently applied by Cowger et al. [8] for the calculation of a Heartmate II relevant risk score estimating 90-day mortality risk based on five pre-operative variables. Wang et al. [15] introduce machine learning techniques for patient classification into two groups (alive/dead). Three different machine learning algorithms are utilized for risk prognosis of candidate VAD patients, namely: Decision Trees, Support Vector Machines, and Bayesian Tree-Augmented Network. Among the three models developed for predicting 90-day survival, Decision Trees outperform the other two approaches with predictive accuracy 61.2%. The authors compare the performance of their model with the survival index of Lietz et al. [14] and note that the proposed model performs better in identifying high-risk patients. Machine learning techniques and more specifically Bayesian Networks have been recently applied to a large study employing data from the Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support (INTERMACS) database. A risk stratification system called CHRiSS (Cardiac Health Risk Stratification System) has been proposed in order to further predict patient mortality at specific endpoints (namely Day 30, Day 90, Month, 6, Year 1 and Year 2) [9]. Approximately two hundred pre-implant clinical features have been examined for building the five distinct Bayesian Network models. Machine learning techniques have been also recently applied in [16] where 25 pre-operative variables are initially employed. Different classifiers are tested, namely Naïve Bayes, k-Nearest Neighbor, Decision trees, Random forests, Multilayer perceptron neural networks and Support Vector Machines; with Decision Trees finally selected as they provide the best results.

All the above studies are limited to pre-operative data. As LVAD now becomes Destination Therapy, a series of data (reflecting patient hemodynamic status and organ functioning) is generated after the implantation. Therefore they can further enhance initial predictions, by providing input on the post-implantation status. In the present study, we integrate a multitude of clinical data related to HF disease, aiming to estimate the survival probabilities of patients who are receiving VAD therapy. The aim of this work is to estimate the predictive power of the pre-operative data and identify an optimal subset of factors that are highly correlated with patient survival. Based on these results, we are able to investigate whether and how the integration of additional information, namely post-operative patient data, along with the utilization of data mining methods can enhance the prediction accuracy. Such an improvement in prediction can be proven quite helpful towards determining the most proper design of a treatment plan.

In the sections that follow, we layout our study which is divided into three main parts. In the first part, namely Section 2, we describe our dataset by presenting the features extracted for the candidate patients and we introduce the methods utilized for predicting the survival probabilities. In Section 3, we present the performance of the employed methods along with the calculated metrics for several experimental settings. Finally, in the last part, we discuss the results of the proposed analysis and suggest possible extensions of the current study.

The dataset considered in the current study has been provided by the Katholieke Universiteit of Leuven, Belgium and contains data from 71 patients treated with second generation VADs. Patients were followed for an up to 12 month period after implantation unless they died. The follow up period refers to specific time points, i.e. 1 month, 2 months, 3 months, 6 months, 9 months and 1 year. Moreover, patients that had a heart transplant, or at their latest measurement were alive or had a VAD explantation are considered as survived. Both above mentioned cases, i.e. VAD explanation/Heart Transplant, are considered to be characterized by a stable patient condition and relatively good progress. Out of the 71 patients, 51 survived the 12 month period. In total 39 pre-operative features and 9 post-operative ones for each time slice were recorded for each patient. The 39 pre-operative features are shown in 
                        Table 1, with their mean (or median) and their standard deviation. The related features are in accordance with medical literature on pre-operative risk factors for VAD patients [17].

Related to the post-operative data, specific features capturing multi-organ functioning have been monitored during the follow-up visits (
                        Table 2). Both sources of data are exploited aiming to predict survival probabilities of patients supported with VAD therapy.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

In the present study four different datasets are employed based on the usage of pre-and post-operative data. Initially, the current practice pre-operative features (i.e. 11 features) that have been assessed by the medical experts prior to VAD implantation as well as the total number of pre-operative features (i.e. 39 features) are considered. Based on the existing datasets we further combine this information with post-operative clinical data separately and generate two more subsets. More specifically, the first dataset includes 11 features, namely: Age, Gender, HF Etiology, PCWP, RAP, CO, BP (S), BP (D), NT-proBNP level, Total bilirubin and Creatinine. In the second dataset we consider the total set of the pre-operative features (Table 1). In the third dataset, the values of the current practice pre-operative features are considered in combination with the 9 post-operative features. Concerning the post-operative data for each patient, we use the last available feature values, either before the event (i.e. death) or the last available values prior to heart transplantation or weaning Finally, in the fourth dataset all 39 pre-operative features along with the 9 post-operative features are taken into consideration. Each of the four datasets are subsequently used as inputs to the classification methods utilized in the proposed study. Moreover, in each case we proceed with and without performing feature selection resulting in eight experiments as shown in 
                        Fig. 1. The proposed methodology allows us not only to investigate the predictive power of pre-operative features regarding the patient survival probability, but also to further explore a possible enhancement in the prediction accuracy by integrating additional patient data.

In order to handle the class imbalance of our dataset (i.e. 51 survived and 20 non-survived after the completion of the follow-up period) the following procedure is considered: 10-equally distributed datasets are created after the performance of 10-permutations. The sampling of the output datasets is performed without replacements, thus no repeated values are observed in the sub-samples. The 10-balanced datasets consist of all the cases that correspond to the non-survival class and an equal number of the survival cases which are randomly selected in each permutation. Therefore, after the sub-sampling, fully balanced datasets with the class labels being equally represented are utilized at the next steps of the proposed approach.

Due to the large number of features in our datasets we investigate whether smaller feature sets can yield better results. For this, we employ the Wrapper algorithm [18], in order to identify the key factors for our target outcome. More specifically, the employment of the Wrapper algorithm results in a relevant subset of features, thus identifying the most prominent variables. In the Wrapper approach, the feature subset selection is performed using an induction algorithm as part of the evaluation function. The induction algorithm is typically represented by a set of training instances which correspond to a vector of feature values and a class label. The main purpose of an induction algorithm is to induce a classifier that will appropriately map new feature values to the class values. Additionally, the problem of feature subset selection refers to a learning algorithm that selects some optimal features from the initial dataset while ignoring the rest. As mentioned above, the feature selection in the Wrapper approach conducts a search for a reduced feature set and then the induction algorithm is run on that data aiming to generate a classifier with the highest accuracy. Based on the fact that Wrapper is tuned with specific classification algorithms, it has been often reported to outperform other feature selection approaches. In the present work, we employ Wrapper feature selection and the search is conducted in terms of the BestFirst [19] algorithm. In terms of the classifier employed, when we perform attribute selection, Wrapper is tuned each time with different classification algorithms in order to extract the optimal feature subset with the highest precision.

The datasets considered in this study are employed by prediction algorithms with and without the performance of attribute selection. For each dataset two experiments are conducted according to the proposed data mining methodology in order to identify the optimal algorithm and its parameters. More specifically, we utilize the following machine learning algorithms: Naïve Bayes (NB), Bayesian Networks (BN), decision trees with AdaBoost metalearner, Support Vector Machines (SVM), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) and Random Forests (RF). NB implements the probabilistic Naïve Bayes classifier and uses kernel density estimators which improve the performance; BN is utilized using the TAN search algorithm [20] for estimating the conditional probability tables of the network; AdaBoost metalearning algorithm is also run by applying the C4.5 classifier [21] to the weighted dataset; SVM is employed using a polynomial kernel, the complexity parameter c=1 and a filter that normalizes the training data; ANN classifier uses backpropagation for classifying instances and is implemented with default number of hidden layers, learning rate equals 0.3 and the training time set to 500 epochs.

@&#EVALUATION@&#

For evaluation purposes, we employ the 10-fold cross validation as well as the leave-one-out technique. Generally, in n-fold cross validation we decide on a fixed number of folds (i.e. n=10); on the contrary, when leave-one-out cross validation is performed, the number of folds equals to the total number of patients considered in the dataset. It has been shown that stratified 10-fold cross validation allows the best estimate of error; thus has become the standard method when only limited data is available [22]. It should be noted that both evaluation techniques are performed upon the balanced datasets created by the class imbalance handling procedure. Moreover, during each 10-fold repetition, the process of feature selection and classification is also repeated; this ensures that feature selection algorithm is based on the training set without changing its structure for the processing of the test instances.

Regarding the evaluation metrics, we calculate several indices, namely Sensitivity (Se), Specificity (Sp) and Accuracy (Acc) in order to assess the performance of each classification scheme.

@&#RESULTS@&#

This section is structured based on the four datasets utilized and according to the eight experiments which are conducted. As depicted in Fig. 1, the four subsets refer to the: (a) Current practice Pre-operative dataset, (b) the Full Pre-operative dataset, (c) the Current practice Pre-operative and Post-operative dataset and (d) the Full Pre-operative and Post-operative dataset. It should be noted that each source of data is treated independently. More specifically, for each dataset we perform two experiments by employing classification algorithms (i) with and (ii) without feature selection in order to predict the survival probabilities for each patient. In addition, each source of data is subject to Wrapper feature selection; thus, we identify the most discriminatory factors related to end-stage HF disease. As aforementioned, we hereby present the results obtained by our analyses aiming to investigate the predictive power of the pre-operative data, as well as to enhance the desired outcome based on the integration of post-operative data.


                        
                        Table 3 presents the results obtained using the classification algorithms with and without performing feature selection. More specifically, experiment 1 refers to the employment of predictive algorithms without performing feature selection, while in experiment 2 classification analysis is conducted based on the utilization of the Wrapper approach.

We observe that ANN yields the most significant results in terms of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. The employment of the Wrapper algorithm pinpoints the following features as most discriminatory for the ANN algorithm: Age, HF Etiology, PCWP, RAP, CO, BP (S) and Total bilirubin.

Moving to the set of the full pre-operative data which consists of 39 features as pinpointed by the medical experts, we perform the classification analysis as laid out previously (experiment 3 and experiment 4). 
                        Table 4 presents the results of the prediction algorithms without and after employing Wrapper feature selection.

In comparison to the previous analysis we notice that after the integration of the full pre-operative dataset, ANN yields the most notable results with the highest accuracy (i.e. 74.3% vs 66%). Sensitivity and specificity are similarly improved. The employment of the Wrapper algorithm identifies the following features as most significant for the ANN algorithm: Gender, BMI, HF Etiology, PCWP, PAP (D), PAP (M), RVP, SVR, Cardiac Power, HR, BP (S), LVEF, NT-proBNP, Hb, Total bilirubin, Sodium, BUN, Creatinine and CRP.

Using both the current practice pre-operative and post-operative datasets, which consist of all the pre-operative features along with the last values of the last time interval for each patient, we aim to identify those factors that affect the progression of HF as well as to predict the survival probabilities of the patients. For this, we perform feature selection in terms of the Wrapper algorithm. The obtained results of this step in our analysis are shown in 
                        Table 5 after the employment of the prediction algorithms without feature selection and after the utilization of the Wrapper (experiment 5 and experiment 6).

It should be noted that after the integration of the post-operative data in combination with the current practice data we detect a further improvement in the results obtained from each prediction algorithm (84% vs 74.3%). Wrapper feature selection with ANN algorithm yield the most remarkable accuracy for the prediction of patient survival probability. The utilization of the Wrapper algorithm for feature selection extracts the following factors as most important concerning the ANN classification algorithm: Age, Gender, HF Etiology, CRP, NT-proBNP, Total bilirubin, Sodium and Creatinine.

Testing the last dataset, the full pre-operative data along with the post-operative feature values are selected for conducting our experiments by utilizing a series of prediction algorithms for the estimation of patient survival probability. 
                        Table 6 presents the results obtained for each classification algorithm without performing feature selection and after utilizing the Wrapper algorithm (experiment 7 and experiment 8).

We observe that ANN with Wrapper feature selection yields almost equal results in comparison to the previous analyses. This slight difference between the last two datasets indicates that the usage of post-operative clinical data is of greater importance and yields meaningful results in comparison to the integration of the current practice or full pre-operative dataset. The most discriminatory features that are obtained after the employment of the Wrapper and the ANN algorithms are: Age, In Hospital Prior to Implant, CI, LVEF, NT-proBNP, AST, WBC, CRP, Sodium and Total bilirubin.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this work we present a method for the prediction of survival time of patients suffering from end stage HF and receiving LVAD therapy. The aim is to predict survival time after VAD implantation, exploiting a combination of both pre-operative and post-operative data. Specifically, the focus of our work is to enhance current risk stratification scores and estimate the next 3 months survival probabilities within a 12-month period after VAD implantation. Using our approach clinicians can get a warning of high risk for the next trimester and consequently adjust and optimize the therapy, increase visit frequencies, etc. Moreover, considering the estimated probability that LVAD patients will survive the next 3 months, based on our methodology, reveals the clinical impact of this type of prediction. For this, a data mining methodology has been designed and implemented. The proposed methodology involves feature selection and prediction algorithms. Extensive experiments have been conducted in order to identify the optimal algorithms and their parameters. The results indicate that the combination of Wrapper feature selection, coupled with ANNs for prediction of survival outperform other approaches. In this way, the method is able to conjecture about the approximate timing of potential survival estimation. Having an assessment with high accuracy of patient׳s survival probability can be proven quite helpful for clinicians concerning the proper design of a treatment protocol [6,23].

Moreover, the careful selection of candidate patients and the appropriate timing of VAD implantation are crucial for improved outcomes. The importance of predicting survival after VAD implantation in terms of data mining methods and/or stratification scores can facilitate the development of prognostic tools that can be used on a personalized basis. As the prevalence of HF disease keeps increasing worldwide and the progress of VAD technology over the last years has moved, it is obvious that the valid assessment of survival prediction after VAD implantation will benefit patient׳s clinical status as well as the design of a proper treatment plan.

The method has been applied to 4 different datasets, depending on the usage of pre-and post-operative data. In the first dataset, only a set of pre-operative essential parameters has been used. This accounts for 11 features that cardio-surgeons and cardiologists usually assess prior to VAD implantation. Two experiments were conducted based on the utilization of classification algorithms without performing feature selection and after the employment of the Wrapper approach. In the next dataset, we took into consideration all 39 features collected in our dataset, trying to identify additional pre-operative parameters that provide information on the survival after VAD implantation. In the same manner, two experiments were performed depending on the usage of classification methods without and after the performance of feature selection. According to Wrapper feature selection in these 39 features, 12 new features have been identified (i.e. BMI, PAP (D), PAP (M), RVP, SVR, Cardiac Power, HR, LVEF, Hb, Sodium, BUN and CRP) as informative ones. In the third source of data, the current practice features used, but additionally, the 9 post-operative features are employed in the prediction. Specifically, for each patient, we used the last available feature values, either before the event (i.e. death) or the last available values prior to heart transplantation or weaning. The two next experiments were conducted according to the employment of classification algorithms without feature selection and after the utilization of the Wrapper method. Finally, in the fourth dataset, all 39 pre-operative features along with the 9 post-operative features have been taken into consideration. Classification algorithms were employed without attribute selection and after the use of the Wrapper approach, as laid out previously (experiments 7 and 8). Additionally, through Wrapper feature selection in this dataset, the most informative features have been identified. These features correspond to: Age, In Hospital Prior to Implant, CI, LVEF, NT-proBNP, AST, WBC, CRP, Sodium and Total bilirubin.

Regarding the post-operative data, the last available feature values of each patient were used, either before the event (i.e. death) or the last available values prior to heart transplantation or weaning, indicating the last available “snapshot” of patient status. This was due to the fact that the clinical status of patients just after VAD implantation is unstable and is characterized by an increase of inflammation biomarkers. Moreover, the laboratory values are influenced by the post-operative inflammatory reaction, making it difficult to draw useful conclusions. Therefore, due to the high hemodynamic instability such measurements cannot be used for a clinically relevant medium or long term prediction. Testing the predictive power of post-op data few days after operation (i.e. first 15 days), when the patient situation could be considered less unstable, reported reduced performance (accuracy 76.6%, sensitivity 82%, specificity 71%). Moreover, we further tested the usage of only the post-operative data during the follow-up period without the inclusion of pre-operative data. The results reported a decrease in the prediction accuracy when only the post-operative dataset were used (accuracy 73%, sensitivity 79%, specificity 69%) indicating the superiority of the combined (i.e. pre-op and post-op data) approach.

The best performing classification algorithms, regarding each source of data considered in this study are summarized in 
                     Table 7. It is clear that, the employment of the Wrapper algorithm for feature selection produces enhanced prediction results. Thus, the refined set of features that are extracted can be further exploited in order to estimate the survival probability for a specific patient after the end of the 12 month follow-up period. In terms of validation, the outcome results of the current work are evaluated using 10-fold cross validation as well as the leave-one-patient-out technique. The results obtained by both techniques do not exhibit superior differences and seem to be in accordance in all the classification cases; thus, we hereby present only the output from the 10-fold evaluation technique. The classification algorithm that best predicts the mortality probabilities, we observe that ANN performs better in most of the cases. This confirms the ability of the multilayer perceptron methods to effectively capture nonlinear relationships. Hence, further development of ANN models aiming to predict the overall patient mortality can lead to more accurate decision making. ANNs are characterized by lack of interpretability. Such a “black-box” function often receives criticism. In order to be used by the clinicians, the trained ANN should be used as a computer program where clinicians would input pre- and post-operative data of a patient. If we wanted better interpretability of the decision pathway, we could select a Decision Tree based approach, with significant loss in performance.

An important finding of the results is the increasing accuracy (also sensitivity and specificity) when moving from dataset 1 to dataset 2. Specifically, this finding shows that when adding additional features, except those considered by the cardio surgeons before VAD implantation, the survival prediction accuracy increases from 66% to 74.3%. When post-operative information is added to the pre-operative one, again an increase in accuracy is achieved, showing the importance of the post-operative data for this prediction (74.3–84%). Finally, when all available pre- and post-operative features are used, the accuracy reported is the highest one, showing that in order to perform an overall assessment of patient׳s status and survival probability, the method needs to take into consideration all available information for this patient (84–84.5%). Additionally, it is worth mentioning the features that were found in common in all six classification algorithms employed in these experiments where feature selection was performed: Age, HF Etiology and Total bilirubin from the first dataset with the 11 pre-operative features; BP (S), Total bilirubin, LVEF, BUN and PAP (D) from the second source of data; Creatinine, Total bilirubin, NT-proBNP and Sodium from the third dataset; Hospital Prior to Implant, AST, ALT, Total bilirubin and NT-proBNP from the fourth dataset. Based on that knowledge we are able to conjecture about the significance of these features in terms of patient׳s survival.

The outcome results of the present study are compared with the works presented in the literature [9,14,15] (
                     Table 8). We observe that the basic limitation of previous studies is the integration of data only related to patient׳s pre-operational status. Specifically, their predictive models have been developed based on the exploitation of pre-implant clinical data. Although their outcome results can be proven very helpful for the survival prediction at specific time intervals, these models have yet the opportunity to be further improved. Current research indicates that additional post-operative data should be collected and more risk factors [24–27] should be considered and added to the models. It should be noted that the currently proposed classification analysis exhibits remarkable results in comparison to the other methods presented in the literature. However, direct comparison cannot be achieved due to the fact that different patient cohorts and clinical features have been employed for the development of the predictive models. A significant advantage of the proposed work is the exploitation of additional information related to post-operational measurements which allowed us to enhance our investigation for extracting more accurate prediction results. On the contrary, the other methodologies in the literature integrate mostly pre-implant measurements from the clinical patient׳s status. Future work will focus on the validation of our results both by increasing the number of enrolled patients and extending the study to multiple centers. It should be noted that most of the previous studies in the literature exploited only pre-operative data in order to define a score for VAD implantation or survival prediction. According to our knowledge, there has been no other study in the literature that utilizes such complex dataset. For this reason we were not able to identify a validation cohort with the same type of data. Still, this is something we intend to study further when such data will be available and consequently report results of a multi-center experience. Additionally, the significant increase of the number of patients can also allow the stratification based on different death causes. Of course this converts the two-class classification problem to a multi-class problem, which in turn increases the complexity significantly [28]. In any case, the nature of patients and the required follow-up time make this a lengthy process.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A methodology for the prediction of survival time of patients suffering from end stage HF and receiving LVAD therapy has been presented. Our approach involves feature selection and prediction algorithms aiming to identify the optimal ones and their parameters for the accurate prediction of patient survival. The method has been applied to 4 different datasets. Both pre- and post-operative clinical data are considered in the current study. The obtained results show that data mining algorithms is a prominent way for addressing the specific time dependent survival probability estimation problem. Moreover, they prove the usefulness of the post-operative data in this prediction. Overall, the proposed methodology and results can be proven quite helpful for clinicians towards the design of an appropriate treatment protocol. Still, further testing in the everyday clinical setting will fully reveal the clinical usefulness and potential of the proposed methodology.

We do not wish to declare any conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was supported by FP7-ICT-2009 European Project SensorART: A Remote Controlled Sensorized ARTificial Heart Enabling Patients Empowerment and New Therapy Approaches (Grant Agreement no. 248763).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

