@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A molecular prospective provides new insights into implication of PDYN and OPRK1 genes in alcohol dependence

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           SNPs alter an individual׳s susceptibility for alcohol addiction.


                        
                        
                           
                           Transcription factors bind to PDYN and OPRK1 SNPs in an allele-specific manner.


                        
                        
                           
                           
                              PDYN SNP rs1997794 has a high deleterious effect on transcriptional regulation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Transcription factors

Prodynorphin (PDYN)

κ-opioid receptor (OPRK1)

Allele-specific interactions

Alcohol addiction

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) both in coding and non-coding regions govern gene functions prompting differential vulnerability to diseases, heterogeneous response to pharmaceutical regimes and environmental anomalies. These genetic variations, SNPs, may alter an individual׳s susceptibility for alcohol dependence by remodeling DNA–protein interaction patterns in prodynorphin (PDYN) and the κ-opioid receptor (OPRK1) genes. In order to elaborate the underlying molecular mechanism behind these susceptibility differences we used bioinformatics tools to retrieve differential DNA–protein interactions at PDYN and OPRK1 SNPs significantly associated with alcohol dependence. Our results show allele-specific DNA–protein interactions depicting allele-specific mechanisms implicated in differential regulation of gene expression. Several transcription factors, for instance, VDR, RXR-alpha, NFYA, CTF family, USF-1, USF2, ER, AR and predominantly SP family show an allele-specific binding affinity with PDYN gene; likewise, GATA, TBP, AP-1, USF-2, C/EBPbeta, Cart-1 and ER interact with OPRK1 SNPs on intron 2 in an allele-specific manner. In a nutshell, transition of a single nucleotide may modify differential DNA–protein interactions at OPRK1 and PDYN׳s SNPs, significantly associated with pathology that may lead to altered individual vulnerability for alcohol dependence.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are associated with adaptations in phenotype such as predisposition to diseases, behavior towards medicines and environmental factors [1]. These SNPs can be in coding or non-coding regions of genes that may affect molecular functions of a cell in different ways (see 
                     Fig. 1).

Genetic association studies have shown the link between SNPs and various diseases [2–5]. Alcohol induces its addictive effects by molecular adaptations in human brain neuro-circuitries. Similarly, its reinforcing effects are executed by activation of dopamine system in mesolimbic pathway while aversive effects are the consequences of OPRK1 receptor activation [6–8]. Dynorphins are derived by proteolytic processing of prodynorphin, which is encoded by PDYN 
                     [9]. Dynorphins bind selectively to kappa opioid receptors (KOR), encoded by OPRK1. The 22kb OPRK1 gene is located on human chromosome 8 and comprises four exons, including a recently identified exon that encodes the 5׳ untranslated regions [10,11]. Genetic polymorphisms implicated in the regulation of endogenous opioid system encoding genes may govern reinforcing effects of alcohol and play key role in alcohol consumption.

In addition to the SNPs of PDYN and OPRK1 genes SNPs, several genetic polymorphisms in the μ-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1) are documented for their association with alcohol dependence and/or drug addiction. G-allele in A118G SNP (rs1799971) in encoding region of OPRM1 potentiates binding of β-endorphin with μ-opioid receptor, which in turn carries significantly higher craving for alcohol in male heavy drinkers [12]. Association of A118G (rs1799971) polymorphism with heroin and alcohol dependence is affected by altered regulation of protein kinase A (PKA) and pERK1/2 signaling pathways [13]. While, T1128C polymorphism (Leu7 to Pro7) in encoding region of neuropeptide Y increases vulnerability for alcohol dependence [14]. A functional SNP rs563649 in intron 1 region of OPRM1 is associated with substance dependence due to altered internal ribosomal entry site, mRNA levels and translational efficiency [15]. Furthermore, SNPs -554G>A and -995C>A in OPRM1 gene decrease the level of signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kB) binding and the transcriptional activity [16,17]. This indicates that genetic polymorphism in both exonic and intronic sequences affect the underlying signaling mechanisms that regulate individual׳s response to diseases and environmental factors.

A large European-Americans study has mapped all six genes that encode receptors and ligands for endogenous opioid system in 1860 individuals of European American descendants from 219 alcohol dependent families [4]. This study has documented that 9 SNPs in PDYN gene and 5 SNPs in OPRK1 gene are significantly associated with alcohol dependence. These findings indicate that genetic polymorphisms in receptor and its ligand encoding genes may affect molecular pathways implicated in alcohol dependence.

Limited studies have been conducted to reveal underlying molecular mechanisms for the association of SNPs with different pathologies, particularly with alcohol dependence. These studies have documented that at SNPs, single nucleotide shift may lead to differential protein interactions with given SNP alleles [18,19]. These studies cover few SNPs that are significantly associated with alcohol dependence. Moreover, underlying molecular mechanisms operating on these SNPs, associations with alcohol dependence are governed by allele-specific differential protein interactions at OPRK1 and PDYN SNPs. Differential protein interactions may alter expression of these genes that may lead to altered vulnerability for alcohol dependence.

In present study, we used bioinformatics tools to establish allele-specific different protein binding patterns with PDYN and OPRK1 SNPs that are significantly associated with alcohol dependence. It will enable us to predict molecular mechanisms modulating PDYN and OPRK1 genes expressions. This study will provide guidelines to conduct experiments to elaborate molecular basis of SNPs associations with alcohol dependence, where a single nucleotide change is enough to alter our vulnerability for diseases. Moreover, current study will enable us to predict a broader picture of fundamental molecular mechanisms implicated in alcohol dependence.

A large European-Americans study has mapped all six genes that encode receptors and ligands for endogenous opioid system in 1860 individuals of European American descendants from 219 alcohol dependent families. They found that 9 SNPs in PDYN gene and 5 SNPs in OPRK1 gene are significantly associated with alcohol dependence. These 9 SNPs of PDYN and 5 SNPs of OPRK1 were selected from the Human genome variation database, HGVBase (http://hgvbase.cgb.ki.se) and National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database of SNPs, dbSNP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP) for our computational analysis.

To predict functionally important SNPs in 3׳ and 5׳ UTRs with their risk level we used VarioWatch (http://genepipe.ncgm.sinica.edu.tw/variowatch/watchingvar.do) [20]. VarioWatch is a functional variant and disease gene mining browser for association study, integrates the important information from various databases (dbSNP, UniProt, KEGG, Gene Ontology) and also incorporates in-depth functional analysis information on both known and novel variations. VarioWatch search was performed by using SNP ID in batch query mode selecting upstream (5׳) and downstream (3׳) region as 50,000 base pairs.

To identify functional SNPs in datasets, F-SNP (http://compbio.cs.queensu.ca /F-SNP/) [21] database were used. F-SNP uses more than 16 databases and bioinformatics tools to provide functional effects of SNPs. F-SNP prioritizes SNPs in a probabilistic framework based upon their possible deleterious effects with an integrative scoring system. F-SNP predicts functional effects at splicing, transcriptional and translational levels. Query was provided with SNP ID and functional consequences were predicted with respect to each functional category like splice regulation and transcriptional regulation.

Patch 1.0 is a pattern-based program for predicting transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) in DNA sequences. It uses positional weight matrices and a set of binding sites from TRANSFAC ® Public 6.0 [22]. Query sequence was designed by using the following parameters i.e. minimum length is 4; maximum number of mismatched is 2, and both mismatch penalty and lower score boundary was also set to 100.

Minimum length is the cutoff value and sequence longer than or equal to 4 will appear in output. In the Patch 1.0 the binding sites are compared and the maximum number of mismatches specifies positions that may differ locally with some part of input sequence. Lower the number of (local) mismatches than defined value of maximum number of mismatches or equal indicates a match between whole site and input sequence. Mismatch position in comparison is assigned a mismatch penalty. Overall score for match in the whole site (search pattern) and input sequence mismatch penalty value has a negative influence. A bonus weight of 100 is given to each matching nucleotide. Thus, negative influence of a mismatching position i.e. mismatch penalty which equals to 100 corresponds to positive influence of a matching position. Lower score boundary is a cut-off score and by default it is 87.5. It defines output matches between a site (search pattern) and input sequence. The score which is estimated for every match has to be higher than or equal to this cut-off.

@&#RESULTS@&#

We selected SNPs of PDYN and OPRK1 genes comprising of (I) UTR region SNPs and (II) intronic variants associated with alcoholic dependence. List of selected PDYN and OPRK1 SNPs is presented in 
                        Table 1.

Genetic polymorphisms, SNPs, present in UTR sites have an impact in the regulation of gene expression such as RNA transcript splicing site or transcription factor binding site alteration [23]. During translation of mRNA polymorphisms in 3׳ UTR affect gene expression while 5׳ UTR missense SNPs may alter RNA half-life by changing polyadenylation cap. Hence, UTRs have important role in the regulation of gene expression and RNAs stability. We analyzed UTR SNPs to reveal their functional prospective. VarioWatch returns results as graphical genome view and provide detailed information about variation such as risk type and risk level. As our query was about intronic variants, server only showed risk level with color code [20]. Risk level is tabulated (
                        Table 2). F-SNP determined deleterious effect of each SNP with respect to functional category either transcriptional regulation or splicing regulation [21]. Functional Significance (FS) score indicates potential deleterious effects on bio-molecular functions of candidate SNPs in their genomic region. It represents normalized confidence scores in the form of weighted averages for a SNP through integrated prediction tools indicating that the SNP is deleterious and weight is reliability score of each tool.

Functionally important SNPs in dataset are determined by FS score. Range of FS score is 0–0.5 and a value between this range show deleterious effect by SNP (higher the FS score greater the deleterious impact). However, FS score zero indicates non-deleterious effect by given SNP.

In our data set, rs6045819 in PDYN gene showed alteration in splicing regulation with 0.195 score indicating very low effect (FS score<0.5). While SNPs rs6045784, rs910080, rs6035222 and rs10854244 showed effect in transcriptional regulation with score of 0.5. PDYN promoter SNP (rs1997794), significantly associated with alcohol dependence, showed highest FS score with highest deleterious effect suggesting its important role in alteration of transcriptional regulations [18]. Other SNPs did not show any effect. OPRK1 SNPs were not recognized by the server as intronic SNPs and no results were obtained for them (Table 2).

Single nucleotide shift (C/T) at rs6045784 does not change protein binding affinity for PDYN gene. Blood pressure QLT 1 (BP1), androgen receptor (AR) and hepatic nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4alpha) transcription factors have higher affinity for G-allele while retinoid X receptor (RXR)-alpha and vitamin D receptor (VDR) strongly associate with A-allele in rs2235749. Similarly, A>G change in rs10485703 increases affinity of RXR-alpha and VDR factors for this motif. VDR response elements are usually composed of two repeats of six bases separated by a three-nucleotide spacer called a DR3 motif (GGTTCA-CCG-GGTGCA) [24]. SNPs rs2235749 and rs10485703 form a non-canonical binding site for VDR (Table 1, 
                           Fig. 2). Previous studies indicate that vitamin D is important for brain development [25–27] and it may enhance the level of several neurotrophins [28,29]. In alcohol dependents, higher expression of vitamin D receptor may modulate neuronal excitability associated with euphoric response of the alcohol [27].

Transition of A to G at 3׳ UTR rs910080 change binding affinity of several proteins; farnesoid X receptor (FXR), RXR-alpha and cartilage paired class homeoprotein 1 (Cart-1) to CAAT box transcription factor (CTF) 2, CTF-3, CTF-1, CP1A and nuclear transcription factor Y (NFYA). Minor G-allele of rs6045819 enhances binding affinity of upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and HIV-1 methylation binding protein-1 (HMBP) proteins. Actin related protein 1 (ARP-1), RXR-alpha and chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor 1 (COUP-TF1) have higher binding affinity towards PDYN in the presence of G-allele (rs6035222) on intron 3 at chromosome position 1963413 (GRCh37.p13) while E2 promoter binding factor+p107 (E2F+p107) and heat shock factor (HSF) have higher binding affinity to allele of rs6035222. The E2F6 transcription factor is a repressor protein that inhibits E2F mediated transcription and delays cell cycle progression from S phase [5]. E2F6 recognizes E2F consensus sites (TTTCGCGC) by forming heterodimers with DP (E2F dimerizing protein) proteins [30].

Likewise, minor A-allele of PDYN SNP (rs6045868) enhances the binding of Cart-1. T-allele at PDYN promoter SNP (rs1997794) intertwines with USF2, USF2b, activator protein (AP)1, estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha, ER-beta, ARP-1, COUP-TF1, RXR-alpha and c-Jun while minor C allele preferably binds to specificity protein (SP) 1, SP2, SP3 and SP4 transcription factors. Estrogen receptors perform their functions either directly by targeting genomic segment encoded by estrogen response elements (5′-GGTCAnnnTGACC-3′) or indirectly by interacting with nuclear proteins like AP-1 and SP1 transcription factors [31–33]. AP-1 contains a basic leucine-zipper motif that binds as a dimer to a seven-nucleotide consensus DNA element, TGA(C/G)TCA [34,35]. C-allele of rs1997794, a promoter SNP, and rs16918941 in OPRK1 gene form non-canonical binding sites for AP-1 (
                           Fig. 3) that can be targeted by AP-1 proteins in the brain of alcohol dependents [18].

Nonetheless, heterodimers of USF1 and USF2 usually recognize canonical E-box sequence CACGTG [36]. E-box is not formed by any of rs1997794 SNP alleles, suggesting that these proteins may recruit transcription factors to rs1997794 instead of their direct interaction at this locus. Moreover, possible non-canonical binding site for USF1 is formed by G-allele of rs6045819 (see 
                           Fig. 4).

In SNP rs1997794, SP1 binding with C-allele can recruit multiple other proteins and may work through multiple signaling pathways involving the nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group F, member 1 (NR2F1), ESR2 (ER beta), VDR, retinoblastoma-like protein 1 (RBL1), AR, Jun, ESR1 (ER alpha), SP3, SP4 and NFYA [37–43] in alcohol dependence. There is a non-canonical binding motif for SP1 in PDYN gene rs1997794 (Fig. 3).

Furthermore, A-allele (rs10854244) enhances the binding of AR protein factor while T-allele supports ER-alpha and HSF proteins upstream of PDYN gene (Table 1). In PDYN SNPs rs2235749 and rs10854244, possibly AR is the core protein that interacts with gene via binding motifs created by G- and A-alleles respectively, (Fig. 2) and recruits Jun and SP1 proteins. AR protein also interacts with TBP to mediate transcriptional activation [44]. AR and TBP proteins interact with their respective binding motifs in OPRK1 gene or TBP serves a co-activator of AR protein [44] (Table 1). Chronic administration of alcohol enhances c-Jun and TBP levels. Interactions of these proteins with EBrf1 and tRNA gene promoters escalate their transcription in liver that may be implicated in alcohol induced liver disease [45].

It suggests that multiple transcription factors may differentially bind to both alleles of PDYN SNPs that are significantly associated with alcohol dependence.

Single nucleotide shift at rs997917 (T>C) changes protein binding pattern such that trans-acting T-cell-specific transcription factor (GATA-3), CCAAT-enhancer-binding proteins beta (C/EBPbeta) and Cart-1 bind with higher affinity to T-allele while BP1, AR, HNF-4alpha and EBP-80 interact with C-allele. However, erythroid transcription factor (GATA-1), GATA-binding factor 6 (GATA-6) and TATA binding protein (TBP) can interact with both alleles. Conversely, rs6473797 does not affect the protein binding affinity of OPRK1 gene while rs12548098 (T>C) inhibits binding of HSF and hypersensitive reaction and pathogenicity factor (HrpF). Furthermore, rs16918941 on intron 2 alters binding affinity on A-allele for homeobox protein NK-3 homolog A (NKX3A), Cart-1, double homodomain protein 1 (DUX1), GATA-1, GATA-2, TBP, GATA-3, GATA-4, GATA-6,C/EBPbeta and Pu box binding factors to USF2, USF2b, AP-1, ER-alpha, ER-beta, Cart-1, USF1 and transforming growth-interacting factor (TGIF) in the presence of G-allele.

Furthermore, GATA family plays key role in the regulation of OPRK1 gene transcription through identification of GATA sequence in the gene [46]. GATA-1 expressed in hematopoietic system is essential for normal hematopoiesis [47], is differentially expressed in human heart and gut [48]. Mutation C to G at -133 5׳UTR disrupts GATA-1 binding on glycoprotein Ib (GpIbβ) gene on platelets decreasing GpIbβ gene transcription that results in increased risk of Bernard–Soulier syndrome [49]. Dynorphin B, a OPRK1 agonist up regulates the transcription of GATA-4 genes in isolated embryonic stem cell nuclei, in addition to transcriptional activation of PDYN gene [50]. Furthermore, genetic variations in GATA-4 binding site control relapse and treatment response to acamprosate in alcohol dependent patients by regulating expression of atrial natriuretic peptide [51]. Minor C-allele of rs698560 in OPRK1 is targeted by AP-1, Cart-1, glucocorticoid receptor (GR) alpha, GR-beta and C/EBPbetain humans while no protein binds with the major allele T-allele (Table 1).

It illustrates that adaptations in PDYN and OPRK1 functions in alcohol dependence are governed by complex molecular signaling pathways that differentially operate in virtue of the respective SNP in allele-specific manner.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Several PDYN SNPs in promoter and exon 4 regions together with OPRK1 SNPs in intron 2 and 3′-untranslated region have been reported for their associated with alcohol dependence [4]. These SNPs in PDYN and OPRK1 genes do not change amino acid sequence of encoded proteins [4], however, transcription factors interact with these SNPs in an allele-specific manner [18]. Our study demonstrates differential protein binding patterns with PDYN and OPRK1 SNPs. In-silico analysis of these SNPs showed significant alteration in transcriptional and splicing regulation of the gene with highest deleterious effect of rs1997794 in PDYN. Regulation of PDYN gene expression is a complex phenomenon that may implicate several transcription factors including avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog (c-Myc), neuron restrictive silencer factor (NRSF)/RE1-silencing transcription factor (REST) [36,52,53], USF1/2, AP-1 family protein, FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (FosB), cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB), downstream regulatory element (DRE) antagonist modulator (DREAM), yin-yang1 (YY1) and NF-kB [54–57]. c-Myc may directly interact with its binding motif in PDYN gene to regulate its function while AP-1 may either interact directly or recruit other proteins to regulate PDYN expression.

NFYA binds to CCAAT motif and usually has a neighboring SP1 binding GC-box [58]. NFYA together with SP1 is associated with transcription activation [58]. Moreover, CCAAT sequence element serves as recognition sequence for a variety of mammalian transcription factors including CTF-1, CTF-2, CTF-3 and CP1A. These transcription factors identify overlapping yet distinct subsets of CCAAT-containing promoters and interact with DNA within and around the CCAAT motif in different patterns [59]. All these factors may involve in controlling the cellular stress and uncontrolled craving of alcohol. NFYA induces proteasome gene expression and regulates cellular proteasome activity [60]. Aberrant proteasome activity is associated with numerous human diseases and neurological disorders [60]. These transcription factors may be involved in differential expression of PDYN in alcohol dependents due to allele-specific at rs910080 (A>G).

Individuals with a low-risk PDYN genotype are associated with elevated striatal dynorphins [61] that may play a defensive function by averting both the progress and maintenance of substance dependence. Several studies [19,62–65] have shown that PDYN and dynorphins may control cognitive functions and their up-regulation contributes to the disruption of the cognitive control over alcohol consumption patterns. It has been recently reported that cognitive problems due to neurodegenerative disorder are associated with mutation in dynorphin A leads to over expression of this peptide [62]. It has been documented that activation of OPRK1 receptor through dynorphin reduces craving and consumption of alcohol [66–68]. Differential binding patterns of transcription factors may alter OPRK1 and PDYN genes׳ expression thereby leading to individuals differential vulnerability for alcohol dependence.

There is a possibility that these SNPs may also alter chromatin remodeling and three dimensional chromosomal cross talks [69]. It suggests that transition of single nucleotide at SNPs may enhance or reduce affinity of transcription factors to regulatory site (formed by these SNPs), while they may facilitate or inhibit loop and/or bridge formation (three dimensional chromosomal cross talks) among regulatory sites located in different chromosomes entailing another layer of regulatory mechanisms in modulating gene expression and vulnerability for pathologies like alcohol dependence. A recent study has documented that C-allele of PDYN promoter SNP (rs1997794) may be associated with higher expression [61] while T-allele, which interacts with AP-1 is associated with lower expression of PDYN in vivo [70]. In our current study, we documented that AP-1, Jun and Fos proteins may interact with T-allele of PDYN promoter SNP (rs1997794) while none of these transcription factors has binding affinity with C-allele. These findings are in line with our previous study [18] where we experimentally demonstrated that T-allele (that form non-canonical AP-1 binding site) of PDYN gene׳s promoter SNP rs1997794 is targeted by avian sarcoma virus 17 oncogene homolog D (JunD) and FosB proteins, the dominant AP-1 constituents in human brain. While T- to C-transition abrogated AP-1 binding (
                     Fig. 5). Similarly, Ta-BF transcription factor has a higher affinity with T-allele in rs2235749 (C>T) causing transcriptional activation and is involved in cognitive control of alcohol drinking behavior [19].

Nevertheless, role of several regulatory SNPs in modulating DNA–protein or protein–protein interactions is not fully understood. The present study elaborates the implication of single nucleotide shift at these regulatory SNPs on differential protein binding pattern in PDYN and OPRK1 genes. It suggests that multiple transcription factors may differentially bind to both alleles of PDYN and OPRK1 SNPs that are significantly associated with alcohol dependence. It illustrates that adaptations in PDYN and OPRK1 functions in alcohol dependence are governed by complex molecular signaling pathways that differentially operate in virtue of the respective SNP in allele-specific manner. Previous studies with experimental evidences endorse our hypothesis that SNPs in PDYN and OPRK1 may alter the pattern of DNA–protein interactions in allele-specific manner. Our current study has experimental validation [at least for PDYN promoter SNP (rs1997794)] [18] and provides direction for the future studies to retrieve molecular mechanisms behind the functional implication of SNPs associated with pathologies. Implication of SNPs in the regulation of gene function by modulating patterns of DNA–protein interactions and three dimensional chromatin crosstalk requires experimental verification. Nevertheless, this study provides us guidelines to conduct experiments to understand the molecular and genetic mechanism for PDYN and OPRK1 genes regulation in alcohol dependence.

None.

Authors have no conflict of interest.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

