@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Genome wide classification and characterisation of CpG sites in cancer and normal cells

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Identification of common methylation patterns across different cancer types.


                        
                        
                           
                           Evidence for certain CpG being preferentially aberrantly methylated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Characterisation of the CpGs that are and are not aberrantly methylated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Data showing most CpG sites remain unmethylated in normal and cancerous cells.


                        
                        
                           
                           Identification of the motifs and features that classify the CpG sites are identified.


                        
                        
                           
                           The surrounding sequence has an influence on aberrant methylation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Motif

Pattern identification

Methylation in cancer

Computational analysis

Pattern searching algorithm

CpG

DNA sequence

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study identifies common methylation patterns across different cancer types in an effort to identify common molecular events in diverse types of cancer cells and provides evidence for the sequence surrounding a CpG to influence its susceptibility to aberrant methylation. CpG sites throughout the genome were divided into four classes: sites that either become hypo or hyper-methylated in a variety cancers using all the freely available microarray data (HypoCancer and HyperCancer classes) and those found in a constant hypo (Never methylated class) or hyper-methylated (Always methylated class) state in both normal and cancer cells. Our data shows that most CpG sites included in the HumanMethylation450K microarray remain unmethylated in normal and cancerous cells; however, certain sites in all the cancers investigated become specifically modified. More detailed analysis of the sites revealed that majority of those in the never methylated class were in CpG islands whereas those in the HyperCancer class were mostly associated with miRNA coding regions. The sites in the Hypermethylated class are associated with genes involved in initiating or maintaining the cancerous state, being enriched for processes involved in apoptosis, and with transcription factors predicted to bind to these genes linked to apoptosis and tumourgenesis (notably including E2F). Further we show that more LINE elements are associated with the HypoCancer class and more Alu repeats are associated with the HyperCancer class. Motifs that classify the classes were identified to distinguish them based on the surrounding DNA sequence alone, and for the identification of DNA sequences that could render sites more prone to aberrant methylation in cancer cells. This provides evidence that the sequence surrounding a CpG site has an influence on whether a site is hypo or hyper methylated.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

DNA methylation involving the addition of methyl groups to CpG sequences is one of the mechanisms used by the cells to control gene expression, gene silencing being a major biological consequence of DNA methylation. This phenomenon, known as epigenetic control has been reported to be important to mammalian development, X inactivation and genomic imprinting [1]. Epigenetic changes have been shown to occur in both healthy cells, where it assists in regulating gene expression during development, and diseased cells, where it is associated with aberrant gene expression, most notably in oncogenesis [2]. Many studies have also shown that differentially methylated CpG sites can act as a biomarkers in identifying disease and specific CpG site methylation can be a signature for specific types of tumours [3–7]. In tumour development global DNA hypomethylation is often followed by hypermethylation at specific CpGs [8–12]. Closer inspection of these studies and the fact that the cancer phenotype is associated with aberrant expression of a significant number of the same genes e.g. TP53 and RB1, in different cancer types, would suggest that there are common pathways and molecular mechanisms that can be identified across the different types of cancer. Further the differentially methylated CpGs could be informative in discovering mechanisms leading to malignancy. Factors that influence CpG methylation include chromatin accessibility, which have been shown to modulate methylation, DNASE1 footprinting, transcription factor levels and CTCF binding, where higher levels and the act of binding protect DNA from methylation [13–17].

Particular DNA motifs have been identified in previous studies that may be used to predict the methylation status of DNA sequences in normal cells. Notably methylation is more prevalent in regions of low CpG density, with regions of intermediate density being most variably methylated [18]. Yamada and Satou [19] employed machine learning methods, specifically support vector machine and random forest methods, using previously reported methylation data, to analyse DNA sequence features to predict methylation status. They revealed that frequencies of sequences containing CG, CT or CA are different when they compared unmethylated and methylated CpG islands. Ali and Seker [20] used an adapted K-nearest neighbour classifier method to predict the methylation state on chromosomes 6, 20 and 22 in various tissues. They identified four feature sub-sets which showed that methylated CpG islands can be distinguished from unmethylated CpG islands based on DNA sequence. Lastly Previti et al. [21] used data mining in the absence of supervised clustering to predict the methylation status of CpG islands in different tissues. These studies showed that there are significant differences in the sequences of CpG islands (CGIs) that predisposed them to methylation. Other studies have identified that the density and spacing of CpGs, the histone code (methylation of histone 3 at Lysine 4 (H3K4)), CTCF protein binding and REST protein binding can influence DNA methylation [22–29]. In their review of computational epigenetics called “Computational Epigenetics”, Bock and Lengauer [18] highlighted the fact that, although it is clear that much work has been done to document the epigenetic state of the genome (much of it reported in the ENCODE project [17]), to date, work in the area of de novo DNA methylation prediction is limited. One study however has shown that aberrant methylation has been shown to be associated with mutations where methylation in the MGMT promoter has been demonstrated to be closely associated with G:C to A:T mutations [30].

Thus whilst studies have identified motifs associated with normal methylation patterns few studies have attempted to search for motifs associated with aberrant methylation using computational techniques, one study by Feltus et al. [31] used Restriction Landmark Genome Scanning software to identify methylation resistant and methylation prone motifs based on DNA sequence and another by Lu et al. [32] has been carried out using word composition computation. Gorbani et al. [33] have suggested that the sequence surrounding a CpG can be used to predict aberrant methylation in trinucleotide repeat diseases using a pattern searching algorithm. Their results suggest that the sequence surrounding a CpG can be used to predict aberrant methylation. In another study by McCabe et al. [34] patterns were identified using machine learning techniques and used for pattern matching where DNA signatures and a co-occurrence with polycomb binding were found to predict aberrant CpG methylation in cancer cells. The reason for recruitment of the de novo DNA methyltransferases to specific genomic targets however remains largely unknown. Dnmt3 and certain transcription factors have been shown to interact with each other to target methylation Hervouet et al. [35] and recently it has been reported that DNMT3L and the lysine methyltransferase G9a are required for the initiation of proviral de novo DNA methylation [36,37]. Lastly Rowe et al. [38] have shown that ERV sequences are sufficient to direct rapid de novo methylation of a flanked promoter in embryonic stem (ES) cells.

In this study we have used a pattern searching algorithm to identify motifs in the DNA surrounding aberrantly methylated CpGs in the DNA of cancer cells from multiple cancer types and tissues so as to investigate whether common patterns of methylation across these different cancers can be identified. Previous studies have concentrated on one cancer or tissue type. Further most former studies that analysed surrounding DNA sequences are based on the sequences surrounding CpG islands or two classes of islands, methylation prone and methylation resistant. CpGs not associated with islands were not included [31]. With more data becoming publicly available about the methylation status around single CpG sites not associated with islands, it is now possible to investigate increasing numbers of sites and more additional classes of DNA methylation. In this study, we examined the DNA sequences surrounding CpG sites. We divided sites into four classes of DNA methylation: sites that either become hypo or hyper-methylated in a variety cancers (HypoCancer and HyperCancer classes) and those found in a constant hypo (Never methylated class) or hyper-methylated (Always methylated class) state in both normal and cancer cells. Thus we have divided the CpG sites into four classes:
                        
                           1.
                           Never methylated in either cancer or normal cells (class NM).

Always methylated class in cancer and normal cells (class AM).

Hypomethylated in normal and hypermethylated in cancer (class HyperCancer).

Hypermethylated in normal and hypomethylated in cancer (class HypoCancer).

Then we investigated the DNA sequence flanking these sites to investigate if we could find common sequences or motifs in each class. We have carried out this work in an attempt to better understand a possible influence of DNA sequence on aberrant methylation.


                        
                           
                              1.
                              Identify four classes of CpG sites based on data from diverse cancer types and normal tissue.

Identify methylation sites that could act as biomarkers.

Analyse the genes and DNA features associated with differentially methylated CpG sites to identify any links with carcinogenesis.

To identify DNA motifs in the DNA sequence surrounding a CpG that could render a CpG prone to aberrant methylation in cancer.

Using these motifs, suggest prediction criteria that could be used to identify CpG sites that are differentially methylated in normal and cancer cells in silico.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Using the method described 653 CpG sites were identified that could be divided into the four classes according to their methylation status: 447 CpG sites in the Never methylated class (class NM), 148 sites in the Always methylated class (class AM), 51 hypomethylated in normal and hypermethylated in cancer (class HyperCancer) and 7 sites hypermethylated in normal and hypomethylated in cancer (class HypoCancer). We mapped the positional relationship of the CpG sites to CpG islands in the UCSC browser. 81 CpG sites were not in any positional relationship with a CpG Island. Never methylated sites are predominantly within islands. Most of the CpGs in the two classes of variably methylated sites have no relationship to any CpG islands. Always methylated CpGs are spread among the different positional relationships to UCSC CpG islands. These results are shown in 
                        
                        Figs. 1 and 2.

The UCSC table browser was used in order to find out if methylation of these CpG sites could interfere with the expression of microRNA coding regions since miRNAs are suggested to interact with epigenetic machinery [39] and are important regulators of gene expression that are aberrantly regulated in cancer through changes in methylation [40]. The track “miR Sites High” in Table 1 “miRcode Predicted MicroRNA Target Sites microRNA” was investigated. A total number of 241 of the CpG sites were shown to overlap with microRNA coding sites. The results are depicted in 
                        Fig. 3. 148 NM class sites overlap (33%), 68 AM class sites (46%), 25 Class HyperCancer (49%) and 0 Class HypoCancer (Table 1).

Sixty four of these hits are to unique microRNAs to a class (
                        Table 1) 17 are unique to NM class sites, 4 microRNA are unique to normal_hypomethylated and cancer hypermethylated (HyperCancer), 7 are unique to AM class sites. Table 2 shows the unique microRNA sites and 
                        Fig. 4 shows the distribution of microRNAs species between the 3 classes they were identified in.

The genes neighbouring the CpGs found in Class HyperCancer are listed in 
                        Table 2 along with their function as identified by Cormine software http://www.coremine.com/medical/. This shows that the vast majority have some link with cancer or tumourgenesis.

On manual, DAVID and IPA (http://www.ingenuity.com/products/ipa) software functional clustering analysis [41,42] the most enriched gene cluster was found to be one with a functional key word of “Apoptosis” indicating that a large proportion of these genes are involved or predicted to be involved in apoptosis.

The genes listed in Table 2 above were analysed for their predicted DNA binding protein sites including 5Kbp up and down stream of their coding regions using oPossium transcription factor binding analysis software (http://opossum.cisreg.ca/oPOSSUM3/) which looks for and reports DNA protein binding motifs in gene sequences using their consensus binding sites. The most enriched predicted binding site according to oPossum [43] was for MZF1_1-4, a zinc finger transcription factor (TF) which is suspected as one regulator of transcriptional events during hemopoietic development and has been implicated in upregulating apoptosis by interacting with LDOC1 and enhancing the activity of LDOC1 for inducing apoptosis [44], thus if methylation in cancer prevents its binding this could affect the cells ability to enter apoptosis. MZF-1 has also been show to supress tumourgenicity [45].

The second most enriched, KLF4, contributes to the down-regulation of p53/TP53 transcription [46], which is important in tumorigenesis.

These genes are also enriched for the E2F family of transcription factors as assessed by oPossum software; 19 of the genes are predicted to bind (equivalent to 55.88%) this compares to 32.77% of all genes in the human genome.

The genes neighbouring the CpGs found in Class HypoCancer are listed in 
                        Table 3 along with their function as described by Cormine software http://www.coremine.com/medical/.

When analysed for transcription factor binding NOS1AP was the protein which had the most TF motifs associated with it and these include Sox2, RREB1, Evi1, NR3C1 with the highest z-score as determined by oPossum and notably E2F1. None of the other genes in this list were predicted to bind E2F type transcription factors.

Since methylation changes in cancers have been shown to be associated with repetitive elements, particularly LINE elements and ALU repeats [47,48], we analysed 1000bp of the DNA surrounding the CpGs in class HyperCancer and HypoCancer for the presence of LINE and ALU repeats using the UCSC [49] Genome Browser. Using the “custom annotation tracks” feature and reporting we were able to identify and count the number and position of these repeats. The results show that proportionally more LINE elements are associated with class HypoCancer, the hypomethylated group of CpGs and more Alu repeats are associated with class HyperCancer, the hypermethylated group of CpGs see 
                        Table 4.

We used MEME software [50] as described in the methods section to identify motifs that distinguish the 4 classes of CpG sites. 
                        Table 5 shows the top 5 motifs, based on p-value, which were found near the four classes of CpG site and their length and sequences, as determined by MEME.

These motifs were then compared to known DNA binding protein motifs: The only one of significance was the M3A motif which binds OCT1 which is methylated in cisplatin resistant cells [51]. Interestingly STAT3 which is involved in cell division in cancer cells is moderated by OCT1 [52].

Using 10-fold cross validation methodology we used 3 algorithms to classify the CpG sites according to their class, based on their motifs. (1) a support vector machine algorithm resulted in 69.5253% being correctly classified (2) a logistic algorithm resulted in 73.9663% (3) a J48 algorithm resulted in 71.2098% correct prediction of each CpG site into one of the 4 classes (NM, AM classes, Hypermethylated in normal and Hypomethylated in cancer (classes C and A) or vice versa).

Since the CpGs that distinguish between normal and cancer calls are of particular interest we performed a similar classification analysis using the Hypermethylated in normal and Hypomethylated in cancer or vice versa only.

Using 10-fold cross validation methodology we used the 3 algorithms to classify the distinguishing CpG sites according to their class based on their motifs. (1) a support vector machine algorithm resulted in 98.2759% correctly classified (2) a logistic algorithm resulted in 96.5517% (3) a J48 algorithm resulted in 94.8276% prediction of each of the 2 classes of CpG, Hypermethylated in normal and Hypomethylated in cancer or vice versa.


                           
                           Fig. 5 illustrates that the m13C (TCCAAGGGACACC) motif does not occur in the flanking DNA sequences of 50 out of 51 of the CpGs identified in class HyperCancer and occurs in all 7 of the sequences surrounding CpGs identified in class HypoCancer. This motif therefore is the most discriminative motif using the J48 algorithm to classify the CpGs into the 2 classes.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study we have shown that it is possible to divide the CpG sites in the human genome into 4 classes based on the methylation status in normal and cancer cells across many forms of cancer using multiple data sets: sites that are hypomethylated in normal and hypermethylated in cancer (class HyperCancer), hypermethylated in normal and hypomethylated in cancer cells (class HypoCancer), sites that are always hypermethylated in both normal and cancer cells and sites that are always hypomethylated in both normal and cancer. Interestingly, the results show that by far the largest number of CpG sites are unmethylated in both the cancerous and normal cell states and that those CpG sites that are differentially methylated in cancer cells are methylated suggesting that the transition to the tumourgenetic phenotype involves the methylation of particular CpG sites, which may be the cause of aberrant gene expression found in cancer cells. We suggest further from these results that the sites in former two classes may be useful biomarkers for cancer cells when undertaking methylation analysis. The data used in this study was all that was available at the time and we acknowledge that as more data becomes available, most notably in the TCAG data base further work to validate these results will be required using new software customised to analyse the data in these files which is in a different format to those in GEO. These results however represent a statistical analysis of an unbiased large sampling of the publicly available data and therefore suggest that our results will hold true for the whole population of data.

The sites in the four classes were analysed for their distinguishing characteristics and properties. Firstly their position in relation to CpG islands was deduced. Sites that are never methylated are predominantly within CpG islands and sites that are aberrantly hyper or hypomethylated in cancer cells, are not, perhaps suggesting that islands afford protection against global methylation changes in cancer cells.

The proximity to microRNA coding regions showed a greater percentage of the HyperCancer CpGs class are associated with one or more miRNAs coding sequences than any other class, with the HypoCancer class having none. Further, the number of times a particular miRNA coding region is associated with a class of CpG shows that never methylated CpGs had a greater number of microRNA sites associated with them per site, with some particular microRNAs identified repeatedly (up to 15 times). Several studies have provided evidence that disregulated miRNA expression contributes to the initiation and progression of human cancers [53–56,40]. Hypermethylation of micro RNAs has been shown to be present in many cancer types and could be the cause of this dysregulation. Thus it follows that the presence of miRNAs near CpGs could contribute to the hypermethylation of these CpGs in cancer cells.

The genes within 1Kb of the Hypocancer or Hypercancer classes of CpG sites that show a distinction in methylation status were identified and functionally characterised. This analysis showed that these sites are associated with genes that are involved in initiating or maintaining the cancerous state of cells, with those associated with class HyperCancer enriched for their involvement in apoptosis. Further, the transcription factors predicted to bind the genes associated with class HyperCancer are enriched for those linked to apoptosis and tumourgenisis (including E2F) indicating a possible mechanism by which the aberrant methylation may exert an effect. This strongly suggests that the differential methylation seen in these sites influences functionally pathogenic processes seen in cancerous cells probably instigated through aberrant gene expression.

LINE and Alu repeats associated with the differentially methylated classes were identified and the results showed that proportionally more LINE elements are associated with the HypoCancer class of CpGs and more Alu repeats are associated with the HyperCancer class of CpGs. Could LINE elements therefore protect against de novo methylation and Alu repeats render CpGs more susceptible? Interestingly hypomethylation of LINE-1 and Alu have been suggested to be the cause of global hypomethylation and genomic instability in many malignancies and autoimmune diseases [57–72] however not all Alu sequences are hypomethylated in human cancers [73]. Alu sequences located upstream of the CDKN2A promoter were found to be hypermethylated in cancer cell lines [74], and an Alu sequence located in intron 6 of TP53 showed extensive methylation in normal and cancer cells [74] and [75].

In order to see if the DNA sequence surrounding a CpG site has any influence on its methylation state MEME software was used to identify distinguishing motifs for each of the CpG classes and there similarity to known binding motifs for DNA binding proteins was determined. Of the motifs identified only one had similarity of note, which was the motif labelled M3A that showed similarity to the OCT1 motif, which has an involvement in cell division via STAT3 [76].

We were able to classify the distinguishing motifs that were identified to enable the classes to be distinguished based on DNA sequence alone and thus identify DNA sequences that could render CpG sites more prone to aberrant methylation in cancer cells. We were able to distinguish the 4 classes successfully with an accuracy of 74% and an attained an accuracy of 98% in distinguishing between sites that are hypo and hyper methylated in cancer cells. Thus we have shown that the sequence surrounding the CpG site has an influence on whether a site is aberrantly methylated in the oncogenic state and whether that aberrant methylation is hypo or hyper methylation. The motif that best distinguished the HyperCancer class from the HypoCancer class was the m13C motif, which contains the binding motif for the EBF1 and the RME transcription factors which have been shown to act as a tumour suppressor in multiple tumour types notably leukaemia׳s and colon cancer [77,78]. The NR2F1 binding motif is also present in m13C, another transcription factor with oestrogen response element binding which is down regulated in many tumour types [79]. Also NR4A2 which is a nuclear orphan receptor involved in neoplasms and a potential therapy target binds to this sequence [80]. This suggests that this motif is highly susceptible to hypo methylation in the cancer cells as it is seen predominantly in the HypoCancer class and the demethylation of this motif may be linked to tumour suppression functionality response in these cells.

Thus in summary, this study has shown that CpG sites in the human genome can be divided into four classes depending on their methylation status in diverse normal and cancer cell types. The two classes which show differential methylation in the normal and cancerous state show associations with genes and DNA features that are commensurate with the cancerous state. We show that only a distinct subset of CpG sites may need to be analysed for their methylation status to determine the cancerous state. In common with other more limited studies we have identified that there are DNA motifs surrounding a CpG that render them susceptible to methylation in the cancerous state. Further we show that CpG sites can be classified using the DNA sequence surrounding them into one of the four classes, showing that the methylation state of any given CpG can be predicted with a high degree of accuracy.

@&#METHODS@&#

As stated, most previous studies were focused on CpG islands but with the advance of technology there is now data available for single CpG sites not necessarily associated with islands using microarray technology. A widely used platform is HumanMethylation450k because of maximal coverage (in terms of number of CpGs analysed in the genome per chip) and data from samples and tissue types available.

Here, we selected 16 data series to study cancer cells and respective normal controls using raw data (signal Intensities from GEO in tabular format) available for CpG sites contained in the HumanMethylation450K microarray (
                        Table 6). We included one set of data that investigated only normal samples to ensure the number of normal data points to be nearer equal for normal and cancerous cells. The data series used for this work are listed in Table 6. They represent all the publicly available peer reviewed data sets obtainable at the time of undertaking the study. The platform soft files were downloaded from GEO and converted to table format with a custom filtering programme (which merely filters out the data in the code of the file from other code and reformats it into a table format) consisting of 16 data series of 535 tissue samples of which 301 were from cancer samples and 234 were from normal samples. These consisted of 259,783,695 data points representing the methylation status of each particular CpG in a particular sample within a data set. We selected these 16 data series so as to examine the methylation across all cancer types possible and compare them with the wide variety of normal tissues. The data is from multiple individuals which allowed us to find common patterns between individuals as well as different cancer types. The individual samples selected for our analysis from each data set were either untreated tumour or untreated normal samples i.e. not all the samples from any one data set was included, only those appropriate to this study. We wished to identify which CpGs are methylated as part of the pathology common to all types of cancers in a variety of tissues in many individuals. No data is included from cell lines or treated cells, and all are from either normal tissue not adjacent to the tumour or cancerous cells from the patient thus the difference in the methylation that we see is not due to cell culture conditioning or neighbouring cell contamination. Additional matched control tissues from other studies were also included so as to make the number of control data sets the same as the number of cancerous ones which is important for our numerical based analyses. The data series were tissue matched, cancer with the same tissue control as far as possible with no one tissue type representing more than 40% of the samples thus 60% common methylation state at any one CpG was chosen as the threshold for the analyses to mitigate as far as possible any bias in tissue or cell type (publicly available data in diverse normal tissue types due to ethical considerations being the limiting factor). All the data sets were from experiments carried out using the same platform. i.e. HumanMethylation450k so that differences are due to the sample and not to the platform used.

Samples from the datasets were stored in two files, which were read by a Java programme to identify CpG sites with specific defined criteria. Each of the files was read line by line to produce vectors of beta values. Any vectors which satisfy the following criteria were selected for further analysis: CpG sites for which all the samples׳ beta values were more than 0.8 were defined as Hypermethylated CpG sites and sites which had beta values of less than 0.2 were defined as Hypomethylated as described in [81] for variably methylated sites. In order to identify four classes of CpG sites, four classes were defined:
                           
                              1.
                              Class HyperCancer were sites which are hypermethylated in 60% of cancer samples and hypomethylated in 60% of normal samples

Class HypoCancer were sites which are hypomethylated in 60% of cancer samples and 60% hypermethylated in normal samples

Class AM were sites that are always hypermethylated (where 99% percent of the samples have beta-values more than 0.8) in both normal and cancer cells

Class NM were sites that are never methylated (where 99% of samples have a beta-value less than 0.1) in both normal and cancer cells.

CpG sites in each class with more than 50% overlap were removed.

The MEME (Multiple EM for Motif Elicitation) software suite (http://meme.nbcr.net) was used motifs discovery. We used default MEME settings with ZOOPS (zero or one motif per sequence) parameter, for discovering motifs for each class of identified CpG sites. Sixty bps of flanking sequence around each CpG site was used as input for the MEME analysis for each class and five best motifs according to their E-value as calculated in the MEME probability matrix were selected for further analysis with custom designed Java programme. 20 motifs (5 for each CpG class) were used as input to the MAST tool to align these motifs against the 653 CpG DNA sequences in the four classes. The MAST programme removed 2 motifs which have more than 60% overlap with others and so finally 18 motifs were selected by MAST used for further analysis.

A Java programme was developed to convert the MAST hit results to a feature matrix and the results used in the Weka package (http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/~ml/weka/) to evaluate the potential of using these motifs for classification of four classes of CpG sites. Using three different machine learning methods and 10 fold cross validation CpG sites were classified according to their motifs. The input matrix was the CpG sites with their corresponding class, and the features are motifs which appear in the flanking DNA. Similar methods have been used in previous studies [82,83]. J48, logistic and support vector machines were used as a classification tools for this purpose.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

This study identifies common methylation patterns across different cancer types in an effort to identify common molecular events in diverse types of cancer cells. In this paper we describe our meta-analyses of all the CpG sites throughout the genome from all the studies using the HumanMethylation450K microarray available of both normal and cancer cells using computational and bioinformatics methods. We believe that this work provides evidence that certain CpGs are more likely to be aberrantly methylated than others. Also we have characterised the properties of the CpGs that are and are not aberrantly methylated to suggest reasons why they should be so. Our data shows that most of the CpG sites studied remain unmethylated in normal and cancerous cells; however, certain sites in all the cancers investigated become specifically modified. Motifs and features that classify the classes were identified to distinguish them based on the surrounding DNA sequence alone, and for the identification of DNA sequences and features that could render sites more prone to aberrant methylation in cancer cells. This showed that the sequence surrounding a CpG site could have an influence on whether a site is aberrantly methylated in the oncogenic state and whether that aberrant methylation is hypo or hyper methylated.

The authors confirm there is no conflict of interest for the work detailed in this manuscript.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We acknowledge the support in kind of Brunel University and Staff in the Departments of Computer Science and Biosciences.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

