@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Dynamic analysis of a needle insertion for soft materials: Arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian-based three-dimensional finite element analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We performed ALE-based finite element analysis for agar gel and copper needles.


                        
                        
                           
                           We compared simulation results with corresponding experimental results.


                        
                        
                           
                           Deflections of each needle between both sets of results were different.


                        
                        
                           
                           There was no significant difference for mismatching area error.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our results have a potential to use as pre-operative surgical planning.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Dynamic analysis

Needle insertion

Finite element analysis

Arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian method

MR-guided microwave coagulation therapy

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Our goal was to develop a three-dimensional finite element model that enables dynamic analysis of needle insertion for soft materials. To demonstrate large deformation and fracture, we used the arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) method for fluid analysis. We performed ALE-based finite element analysis for 3% agar gel and three types of copper needle with bevel tips.
               
               
                  Methods
                  To evaluate simulation results, we compared the needle deflection and insertion force with corresponding experimental results acquired with a uniaxial manipulator. We studied the shear stress distribution of agar gel on various time scales.
               
               
                  Results
                  For 30°, 45°, and 60°, differences in deflections of each needle between both sets of results were 2.424, 2.981, and 3.737mm, respectively. For the insertion force, there was no significant difference for mismatching area error (p<0.05) between simulation and experimental results.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our results have the potential to be a stepping stone to develop pre-operative surgical planning to estimate an optimal needle insertion path for MR image-guided microwave coagulation therapy and for analyzing large deformation and fracture in biological tissues.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men [1]. Magnetic resonance (MR) image-guided microwave coagulation therapy of liver tumors is minimally invasive and has many advantages for both patients and surgeons compared to open surgery [2]. Surgeons are required to insert a needle tip precisely into a targeted location such as a tumor. However, even for expert surgeons, this is not easy because the needle deflection depends on the shape of the needle tip [3,4].

Several researchers have developed ways to put tip of a needle into a target tumor precisely not only in MR image-guide microwave coagulation therapy of liver tumors but also a number of percutaneous interventions in anesthesia, biopsy, and brachytherapy. Their works can be categorized as modeling insertion force [3,5–7], tissue deformation [8,9], and needle deflection [10,11]; and developing instruments to guide and steer the needle [8,12–14]. In the modeling insertion force, Okamura et al. have proposed a model of needle insertion force for the bovine liver [3]. However, they concluded that a more complete model of forces will require a combination of empirical and analytical modeling, with one approach being finite element analysis (FEA). On the other hand, by extending FEA, Dimaio et al. have developed an interactive virtual needle insertion simulation based on measured planar tissue deformations and needle insertion forces [15]. In addition, they have also proposed the concept of needle steering and formulated a needle manipulation Jacobian based on numerical needle insertion models that include the amounts of needle deflection and soft tissue deformation [16]. Moreover, Alterovitz et al. have developed a planning system for sensorless needle insertion to reduce the needle insertion error [9].

However, these results have never been clinically applied for human liver tissues [17]. One reason is complex physical phenomena such as fracture involved in large deformation in biological human tissues. Therefore, both clinicians and patients need new approaches. In this respect, time-dependent dynamic fracture analysis in FEA has a potential to solve this issue but it is especially difficult because mesh elimination techniques are required for representing it. In general, FEA with mesh elimination techniques is known as Lagrangian-based FEA for structural analysis. However, a stable calculation is difficult because the finite element mesh needs to flip the shape or release some nodes when the fracture occurs. Thus, we use an arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) method for fluid analysis that is also suitable for large deformation and fracture in the continuum model [18].

In this study, we develop a three-dimensional finite element model that enables dynamic analyses of needle insertion with ALE-based FEA using a soft tissue model and three types of needles with bevel tips. To evaluate simulation results, we compared the amount of deflection during needle insertion and the corresponding force along the needle axis with experimental results acquired with a uniaxial manipulator. In addition, we confirmed the shear stress distribution around the needle in simulation results.

As a phantom study by assuming the use of MR image-guided microwave coagulation therapy in open-MRI [19–21], we used 3% agar gel (Agar 010-15815, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan) instead of liver tissue as an isotropic and nonlinear elastic material [8]. To acquire a nominal stress and nominal strain curve of the agar gel, we performed a uniaxial compression test and three-points bending test using a compact tabletop universal tester (EZ Test, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). In general, the nominal stress and nominal strain curve is generated from results of the uniaxial compression and tension tests. However, for agar gel, it is difficult to perform a tension test because of its wetness. So, as the first step, a bending elastic modulus and a bending strain were calculated by the three-points bending test following ISO 178. Then, a nominal strain combining the nominal strain of the bending test (positive) and the compression test (negative) was used as input data to calculate a nominal stress according to the strain energy function W which is a function of the relative volume, J 
                        [22]:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       W
                                    
                                    ⁎
                                 
                                 =
                                 
                                    ∑
                                    
                                       i
                                       =
                                       1
                                    
                                    3
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       ∑
                                       
                                          j
                                          =
                                          1
                                       
                                       n
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   μ
                                                
                                                
                                                   j
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   α
                                                
                                                
                                                   j
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 (
                                 
                                    
                                       λ
                                    
                                    
                                       i
                                    
                                    
                                       ⁎
                                       
                                          
                                             α
                                          
                                          
                                             j
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 −
                                 1
                                 )
                                 +
                                 K
                                 (
                                 J
                                 −
                                 1
                                 −
                                 In
                                 
                                 J
                                 )
                              
                           
                        where the asterisk (⁎) indicates that the volumetric effects have been eliminated from the principal stretches, λ
                        
                           j
                        
                        ⁎. The number of terms, n, may vary from 1 to 8 inclusive, and the bulk modulus is K. The jth shear modulus and exponent are 
                           
                              
                                 μ
                              
                              
                                 j
                              
                           
                         and α
                        
                           j
                        , respectively. In this study, we used n=3 as the number of terms. Finally, we manually estimated six parameters until correct nominal stress was obtained by demonstrating displacement–force curve similar to both the compression and three-points bending tests through Lagrangian-based FEA with commercial software (ANSYS LS-DYNA Ver. 971 R6.0 single, Livermore Software Technology, CA, USA), iteratively. We prepared ten test pieces for the test (compression test: 60×20×4mm3, three-points bending test: 60×20×20mm3, cross-head speed: 2mm/s). Young׳s modulus and Poisson׳s ratio of the copper needle C1100 (Custom-made, Umihira, Kyoto, Japan) used were 117GPa and 0.33 respectively. The copper is used as one of MR compatible materials [23].

To evaluate this model, we performed an experiment to measure needle deflection and reaction force with a uniaxial insertion device (Custom-made, Umihira, Kyoto, Japan) (
                        Fig. 1) by 8000Hz sampling rates. The sizes of the needle and agar were φ1.6×150mm2 based on MR compatible 14-G puncture needle [2]) and 150×40×200mm3, respectively. The angles of the bevel needle tip were 30°, 45°, and 60°. The needle was inserted into the agar gel at constant velocity 2mm/s with a penetration depth of 100mm by assuming an application with open-MRI robot [23]. After insertion, we took photos from the lateral side with a digital camera (IXY Digital 2000IS, Canon, Ota-ku, Japan) to measure the needle deflection with image processing software (Image J, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA) (n=5).

We developed ALE-based FEA models as shown in 
                        Fig. 2A. The model consists of the agar fixed on the lower surface. The displacement 100mm along the z-axis was applied to the rigid part (yellow part of Fig. 2A) of the needle. The frictional coefficient 0.01 was empirically set as the contact condition between the needle and the agar. The same geometries as the experimental model were adopted for the sizes of the needle and agar, and the angles of the bevel needle tip. Also, the needles have no tubular structure because an outer needle was inserted into liver with an inner coagulation probe as one needle. We generated the needle mesh using rectangular elements as a shell, and generated the meshes of the agar with hexahedral elements as a solid (Fig. 2B, C). The number of meshes totaled 297,014 elements. The size of the smallest mesh was 0.375mm in all models. We performed standard ALE-based FEA including ANSYS LS-DYNA. Material models of the needle and the agar gel applied linear elastic material (MAT_001) and isotropic elastic–plastic material (MAT_124) applying a nominal stress and nominal strain curve estimated via the above procedure, respectively.

We statistically compared between the simulation and experimental results of acquired force and displacement curve using a two-factor ANOVA (p<0.05). An average curve was generated among experimental results for each bevel angle. We calculated the mismatching area by subtracting a domain bounded by the acquired force and displacement curve of simulation results from that of experimental results.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        
                        Fig. 3 shows mechanical properties of the agar gel. A nominal stress and nominal strain curve shows different trends for compression and tension.

A comparison of needle deflections between the experimental and simulation results is shown in 
                        Fig. 4. For 30°, 45°, and 60°, differences in mean deflections of each needle between both sets of results were 2.424, 2.981, and 3.737mm, respectively. 
                        Fig. 5 shows photos from the vertical direction for lateral side of the 30° needle at 0, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100mm.

A comparison of needle insertion forces is shown in 
                        Fig. 6. For experimental and simulation results, the mismatching areas were 189, 238, and 222; and 246, 294, and 317, respectively (
                        Fig. 7). The needle reaction forces showed no significant difference between simulation and experimental results (p>0.05). In addition, the post-puncture force gradually increased in all cases.

The shear stress distribution in a cross-sectional surface along the x–z plane from steps 0 to 100 for every 20th step for 30° is shown in 
                        Fig. 8. Shear stresses in each model had different distributions affecting the needle tip shape (S1, S2, and S3). For 30°, 45°, and 60°, the maximum shear stresses in last step were 0.0267, 0.0347, and 0.0350 MPa, respectively. The maximum shear stress appeared near the needle tip for all time scales and all cases.

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.07.012.

The following is the Supplementary material related to this article 
                        Video 1, 
                        Video 2, 
                        Video 3.
                           
                              Video 1
                              
                                 Shear stress distributions for 30° (MPa)
                              
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Video 2
                              
                                 Shear stress distributions for 45° (MPa)
                              
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Video 3
                              
                                 Shear stress distributions for 60° (MPa)
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, we developed a three-dimensional finite element model for dynamic fracture analysis of needle insertion through ALE-based FEA using an acquired nominal stress and nominal strain curve of agar gel. Applying an ALE method to fluid analysis makes it possible to do structure analysis with large deformation and fracture. Our results help to predict the needle deflection, insertion force, and shear stress distributions during needle insertion as pre-operative surgical planning in silico. In addition, it can help design new shapes of clinical needles to reduce the burden on patients.

For the nominal stress and nominal strain curve, it is clear that the agar gel has different compression and tension properties. Thus, in this study, we used an isotropic elastic–plastic material (MAT_124 that is the material number in ANSYS/LS-DYNA). For the different compression and tension properties, one should apply Ogden (MAT_77O) or Mooney-Rivlin (MAT_27) material, which can exhibit hyper-elastic rubber properties [24]. However, both hyper-elastic rubber models in ANSYS/LS-DYNA were supported for only low strain range. Thus, by following the Ogden equations (1), the nominal stress and nominal strain were estimated and applied into MAT_124 that can use a different stress/strain curve for compression and tension.

While the differences of needle deflection were 2.42, 2.98, and 3.73mm (Fig. 4), the size of a typical target tumor is about 30mm [25–27]. These results suggest that our simulation results are in the allowable range for clinical applications such as pre-operative surgical planning. However, these error rates of the mismatching errors for 30°, 45°, and 60° were 23%, 19%, and 30%, respectively and these results seem inaccurate even given the allowable range for clinical applications. One of reasons is the material property of the agar gel that can vary time-dependently in terms of the room temperature. Also, the agar gel has difficult to generate it as a complete isotropic material. As one of solutions, we are investigating generation of samples using a magnetic stirrer. In addition, our simulations used a great deal of time, about 70h to finish analysis. At this time, we can say with fair certainty that real-time simulation of intra-operative surgical navigation or virtual reality training to train hand skill is difficult; the research may be useful for pre-operative surgical planning instead. As one solution for this issue, the general purpose graphics processing unit (GPGPU) [28] has been developed and has accelerated the use of various commercial software in recent years. In other words, real-time ALE-based FEA will appear soon.

For the insertion force (Fig. 6), there was no peak during needle puncture compared to a result obtained by Okamura et al. [3]. It is for this reason that we eliminate the thin membrane on top of the surface of agar gel before the experiment and have absolutely no membrane in the finite element model. Actually, in MR image-guided microwave coagulation therapy, an incision line by surgical instruments is marked out on abdominal skin to reduce renitences of the needle insertion. In both simulation and experimental results, the increase of insertion force in post-puncture is due to the influence of friction between the agar gel and the needle. Also, the oscillation of the curve (Fig. 6) caused a stick-slip effect due to friction [3,15,29,30].

Finally, shear stress in the agar gel is distributed along the needle and seems generally undulating. This reason is, as mentioned above, also due to the influence of the stick-slip effect. In addition, one of the reasons for gradually rising of maximum shear stress is that the shape of the needle tip becomes increasingly similar to a cylindrical solid as the bevel angle increases. In this study, a maximum shear stress was adopted to confirm the stress distributions because the maximum shear stress is located as a safe side in comparison with the maximum principal stress and maximum strain energy.

For more clinical situation, the estimation of stress and strain curve of bovine liver tissue as isotropic and nonlinear elastic material [8] and ALE-based FEA are ongoing to investigate availability of our approach. Within the limitations of finite element study, these solutions may become a strong tool for understanding the mechanisms of various complex biological phenomena such as mosquito needle insertion into human skin [31–33] and cell injection [34,35].

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this study, we developed a three-dimensional finite element model that enables dynamic analysis of needle insertion by applying the ALE-based three-dimensional FEA. Our results have the potential to be a stepping stone to develop pre-operative surgical planning to estimate an optimal needle insertion path for MR image-guided microwave coagulation therapy and for analyzing large deformation and fracture in biological tissues.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) therapy of liver tumors is minimally invasive and has many advantages for patients such as minimal pain and scarring and quick recovery compared to open surgery. Surgeons are required to insert a needle tip precisely into a targeted location such as a tumor. However, even for expert surgeons, this is not easy because the needle deflection depends on the shape of the needle tip.

Our goal was to develop a three-dimensional finite element model that enables dynamic analysis of needle insertion for soft materials. To demonstrate large deformation and fracture, we used the arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) method for fluid analysis. We performed ALE-based finite element analysis for 3% agar gel and three types of copper needle with bevel tips by assuming to apply MR image-guided microwave coagulation therapy in Open-MRI.

To evaluate simulation results, we compared the amount of deflection during needle insertion and the corresponding force along the needle axis with experimental results acquired with a uniaxial manipulator. In addition, we confirmed the shear stress distribution around the needle in simulation results.

For 30°, 45°, and 60°, differences in deflections of each needle between both sets of results were 2.424, 2.981, and 3.737mm, respectively. For the insertion force, there was no significant difference for mismatching area error (p<0.05) between simulation and experimental results.

In this study, we developed three-dimensional finite element model that enables dynamic analysis of needle insertion by applying the ALE-based three-dimensional FEA. Our result shows that it is useful for pre-operative surgical planning for liver cancer surgery by radiofrequency ablation therapy and for analyzing large deformation and fracture in biological tissues. For the future, ALE-based FEA will become widely used to explain fracture mechanisms in biological tissues.

Conceived and designed the experiments: SY, KT, KS, SM. Performed the experiments: SY, KS. Performed the simulations: SY, KT. Analyzed the data: SY. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: SY, KS, SM, YS. Wrote the paper: SY. Administrative support: YS, HT.

The authors have declared that no conflict of interests exist.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research Nos. 24592955 and 21240017 from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Japan.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

