@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Integrative epigenetic profiling analysis identifies DNA methylation changes associated with chronic alcohol consumption

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ●
                           We presented a longitudinal study on alcohol use disorder in Taiwanese aborigines.


                        
                        
                           ●
                           Genome-wide methylation profiles uncovered genes affected by alcohol misuse.


                        
                        
                           ●
                           Bioinformatics analysis revealed the pathways affected by chronic alcohol exposure.


                        
                        
                           ●
                           Some of these genes and pathways have been implicated in alcohol-related diseases.


                        
                        
                           ●
                           We provided additional support for the role methylation plays in alcohol damage.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Alcoholism

Epigenetic profiling

DNA methylation

Longitudinal study

Taiwanese aboriginals

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Alcoholism has always been a major public health concern in Taiwan, especially in the aboriginal communities. Emerging evidence supports the association between DNA methylation and alcoholism, though very few studies have examined the effect of chronic alcohol consumption on the epignome. Since 1986, we have been following up on the mental health conditions of four major aboriginal peoples of Taiwan. The 993 aboriginal people who underwent the phase 1 (1986) clinical interviews were followed up through phase 2 (1990–1992), and phase 3 (2003–2009). Selected individuals for the current study included 10 males from the phase 1 normal cohort who remained normal at phase 2 and became dependent on alcohol by phase 3 and 10 control subjects who have not had any drinking problems throughout the study. We profiled the DNA methylation changes in the blood samples collected at phases 2 and 3. Enrichment analyses have identified several biological processes related to immune system responses and aging in the control group. In contrast, differentially methylated genes in the case group were mostly associated with susceptibility to infections, as well as pathways related to muscular contraction and neural degeneration. The methylation levels of six genes were found to correlate with alcohol consumption. These include genes involved in neurogenesis (NPDC1) and inflammation (HERC5), as well as alcoholism-associated genes ADCY9, CKM, and PHOX2A. Given the limited sample size, our approach uncovered genes and disease pathways associated with chronic alcohol consumption at the epigenetic level. The results offer a preliminary methylome map that enhances our understanding of alcohol-induced damages and offers new targets for alcohol injury research.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

It is well-established that multiple genetic and environmental factors determine an individual’s predisposition to alcohol use disorder (AUD) [1–3]. For the development of alcohol dependence, approximately 40 to 60% of the variance is attributable to variations in the genotype [4,5]. As dependence develops only following repeated use, the neurobiological changes that arise in response to repeated alcohol exposure are the key factors interplaying between the genotype and the environment [6].

Alcohol exposure is known to cause aberrant DNA methylation, the severity of which can be aggravated by alcohol consumption [7–9]. There is emerging evidence supporting the involvement of DNA methylation in alcoholism. For example, alpha synuclein, a gene associated with dopaminergic neurotransmission, showed promoter DNA hypermethylation in the peripheral mononuclear cells of patients with alcohol dependence [10]. In fact, DNA methylation is suggested to play an important role in AUD. Altered DNA methylation has been found in the promoters of the atrial natriuretic peptide, vasopressin, and N-methyl-d-aspartate 2b receptor subtype genes in patients undergoing alcohol withdrawal [11–13]. As well, hypermethylation of the dopamine transporter gene has been associated with alcohol dependence [13]. Methylation of the CpG sites in the promoter region of the polypeptide pro-opiomelanocortin was also found to be different between alcohol-dependent and healthy controls, linking this gene to craving [14]. These studies indicate that the complex spectrum of AUD may be partially attributable to alterations in the epigenetic regulation of multiple genes.

A genome-wide approach holds the promise of providing a global scope and uncovering the different molecular players underlying the association between DNA methylation changes and alcoholism. In a recent array-based study comparing the DNA methylation profiles between alcohol dependent and non-alcoholic controls in African Americans and European Americans, several genes linked with craving, alcohol addiction, and alcohol-induced damages, were found to be differentially methylated between the cases and controls [15]. Comparison of the methylomes between alcohol dependent cases and healthy controls in a Chinese male population also revealed DNA methylation differences in genes associated with the development of alcohol dependence [16]. These differential methylation patterns were population-specific, implicating that the predisposition to AUD may result from a complex interplay of inherent genetic variation and epigenetic modifications.

Recently, an investigation on the DNA methylation mechanisms underlying the effects of short-term alcohol uncovered widespread changes in the methylome of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells [17]. However, the changes in DNA methylation on a genome-wide scale after chronic alcohol intake have not been fully examined yet. Here, we present a preliminary assessment of alterations in DNA methylation associated with long-term alcohol consumption among subjects from a longitudinal study of AUD in the Taiwan Aboriginal Study Project (TASP) [18]. TASP began in 1986 (N=993) with four major Taiwanese aboriginal groups (Ami, Atayal, Paiwan, and Bunun). In the phase 1 cross-sectional survey (1986–1988), high lifetime prevalence rates of DSM-III-R AUD were found among the four groups, ranging from 44.5% to 54.5% [19]. In the phase 2 follow-up conducted four years later (1990–1992), the age-standardized annual incidence rates of AUD among the four groups were found to range from 2.8 to 4.9% [20]. A phase 3 16-year follow-up was conducted in 2003–2009. The blood samples collected at phases 2 and 3 with 12 years in between presented a great opportunity to examine the effect of alcohol drinking on DNA methylation among incidence cases of AUD during the period. Here, we report an integrative bioinformatics approach for the analysis of genome-wide DNA methylation changes associated with chronic alcohol consumption, offering a preliminary methylome map that helps enhance our understanding of alcohol-induced damages.

All procedures were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Academia Sinica, Taiwan, and written informed consents were obtained from all participants. For those who had reduced ability to consent, the carers or guardians gave written informed consent on behalf of these participants. Our analysis was based on a subset of participants. Because existing evidence suggests that DNA methylation may be gender specific [21,22], this study only focused on male cohort subjects as a preliminary investigation into the association between DNA methylation and alcohol drinking.

Several criteria were considered for the selection of cases. Since DNA preparation was performed at phases 2 and 3, study subjects must have DNA samples available from both phases. The amount and the quality of these samples must meet the requirements for array analysis as well. Also, to study the effect of alcohol on methylation patterns, we chose AUD cases with no lifetime drinking problem at phase 2, but developed AUD after phase 2 and were diagnosed alcohol dependence according to DSM-IV at phase 3. Moreover, these subjects must have been heavy drinkers (≥80g of alcohol intake/day) at phase 3 when their blood samples were collected. All subjects from the male cohort fulfilling these criteria have been included (N=10). Each case was age-matched with one male control (±3 years) who had never been found to have lifetime DSM-IV alcohol dependence or alcohol-related conditions throughout the three phases of investigations. The blood samples were drawn solely for the purpose of DNA isolation. Clinical examinations were not performed on the blood samples. However, none of the participants reported any family history of inherited diseases, nor were any of the participants affected by immune-related diseases such as hepatitis or infectious diseases like tuberculosis or influenza at the time of blood collection.

For each individual, 10ml of blood was drawn at phases 2 and 3. Blood samples were collected into BD Vacutainer® SST™ blood collection tubes (Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). DNA extraction was performed using the Gentra Puregene Blood Kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA quality and quantity were determined on a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Techonologies, Wilmington, DE, USA). DNA integrity was evaluated by agarose gel electrophoresis. Each sample (500ng) underwent bisulfite conversion using the EZ DNA methylation kit from Zymo Research (Orange, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions with modifications recommended by Illumina (San Diego, CA, USA). To confirm that bisulfite conversion was successful, quality control PCR reactions were performed for each sample using the primers and protocol described by Thirlwell et al. [23]. Bisulfite converted DNA samples were then subjected to methylation profiling on the Infinium® HumanMethylation27 BeadChips (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) according to Illumina’s instructions at Genetech Biotech in Taipei, Taiwan. Each locus was interrogated by a specific probe linked to a methylated (M) and unmethylated (U) bead type. Fluorescent intensities of the M and U beads were used to calculate the methylation status of a specific CpG site, following the formula: β=M/((M+U)+100).

Comparisons of variables such as age, alcohol consumption, smoking and betel nut use were performed using the Mann–Whitney test in SPSS v18.0 (Somers, NY, USA). For methylation comparison, data were background normalized in Illumina’s BeadStudio (San Diego, CA, USA) and exported for additional analysis using GeneSpring® (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Our analysis was based on genes corresponding to CpG sites (or probes) that were methylated or unmethylated. Average beta values for the CpG sites in the case and control groups were calculated. In our data, there were genes with two or more sites showing similar results. These duplicate records were removed so that the same genes were not counted twice.

Differential methylation between phases 2 and 3 in the case and control was analyzed using Wilcoxon paired sample test. Differential methylation at a particular CpG site was considered to be significant if p<0.01. Neither the case nor the control group was genotyped for the CpG sites. Since it was possible that genotype may affect methylation, we limited our focus on methylation differences that have occurred within each individual from phase 2 to phase 3, and not between the case and control groups. However, significantly differentially methylated genes (or CpG sites) in the control group were used to filter out potential aging-related changes in the case group. The remaining differentially methylated genes were then analyzed for correlation with alcohol consumption using Spearman’s correlation test.

Gene set enrichment analysis was performed to evaluate the most important biological processes, molecular functions, and networks. We utilized Panther version 9.0 (release date Jan 20, 2014) [24,25] to find enriched Gene Ontology (GO) terms, and WikiPathways [26] to uncover pathways over-represented by differentially methylated genes between the control and case group. To identify potential protein interaction modules from these differentially methylated genes, we cross-validated the protein interaction network results with WebGestalt [27,28] using a significance threshold of Benjamini–Hochberg (B–H) adjusted p<0.05 and STRING 9.1 [29], with a confidence level of 0.70 based on co-expression and experimental evidence. The WebGestalt disease function was also employed to identify potential disease categories associated with the differentially methylated genes in the control and case groups.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The case and control groups appeared to be similar in the distribution of age, education, mental disorders, and average alcohol consumption at phases 1 and 2 (
                     Table 1). Average monthly alcohol consumption at phase 3 was significantly much higher in the case than in the control group. The use of betel nut and cigarette was only enquired at phase 3. Only cigarette smoking showed a significant difference between the case and control group at phase 3 (Table 1: Mann Whitney U=26.0, p=0.055 for betel nut; Mann Whitney U=26.5, p=0.045 for cigarette smoking). As we only had detailed information regarding alcohol consumption in all phases of the study and the average amount of cigarette consumed in both groups appeared to be small, we speculated that alcohol contributed strongly to the differences between the case and control group. Hence, our analysis was focused on the relationship between alcohol and DNA methylation (
                     Table 2).

We determined the number of shared and group-specific differentially methylated genes in the normal and alcohol-dependent individuals for each phase (
                     Fig. 1). During the period between phase 2 and phase 3 of this follow-up study, 68 and 184 genes appeared to have been up- and down-regulated in their methylation levels in the control group. On the other hand, in the case group, 149 genes showed increased methylation, and 51 genes exhibited reduced methylation. The two groups shared three differentially methylated genes. In the control group, there appeared to be an overall down-regulation of methylation at the genome level. Yet, in the case group, there seemed to be wide spread hypermethylations in the genome.

The differentially methylated genes identified from our study have diverse molecular roles, including biological regulation, adhesion, response to stimuli, as well as apoptotic, immune system, metabolic, cellular, and developmental processes (
                     Fig. 2; Figs. S1 and S2). A larger proportion of the differentially methylated genes in the control group are involved in metabolic and cellular processes, while localization and developmental processes seemed to be enriched by case-specific differentially methylated genes. Overall, the case and control groups seemed to be similar in terms of the distribution of enriched gene ontologies, except for locomotion- and growth-related biological processes which were over-represented among the differentially methylated genes only in the controls.

Even though the case- and control-specific differentially methylated genes were associated with similar biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components, they might be involved in specific interactions with each other and play roles in different pathways. Thus, we attempted to identify the relevant biological pathways that are important in the case and control groups (Table 1). Differentially methylated genes in the control group seemed to be mostly involved in inflammation and immune system responses such as Kit receptor signaling, interleukin-11 signaling, IL-3 signaling. Cellular transport and some microRNA-regulated pathways were also over-represented among the differentially methylated genes in the control group. In contrast, signal transductions modulated by G-protein mediated pathways, Notch signaling, and p53 network appeared to be more important among the cases. In addition, amino acid and vitamin A metabolic processes, as well as susceptibility to sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), neuromuscular and nervous system diseases were also implicated in the case group.

In agreement with the pathway annotations, disease enrichment analysis revealed differences between the case and control group in terms of over-represented diseases (
                     Table 3). Differentially methylated genes in the controls were linked to diseases involving abnormalities in cell adhesion, metabolism, protein deficiencies, viral infections, and urological pathologies. However, changes in DNA methylation in the case group were associated with neuromuscular diseases, musculoskeletal abnormalities, brain ischemia, nervous system diseases and cardiovascular dysfunctions.

Utilizing publicly available protein interaction analytical tools, we have also uncovered potential interactions among control- and case-specific differentially methylated genes that may mediate the effects of chronic alcohol consumption and the possible dynamics underlying alcohol-induced damages (
                     Fig. 3). Further, correlation analysis identified potential associations between regulators of cellular stress responses and average monthly alcohol consumption over the 12 years between phase 2 and phase 3 (
                     Table 4). Some of these genes were implicated in the disease and pathway enrichment analyses as being involved in neuromuscular and cardiovascular diseases (creatine kinase, muscle, or CKM ), nervous system diseases (paired-like homeobox 2a, or PHOX2A), as well as Notch signaling (neural proliferation, differentiation, and control, 1, or NPDC1), and calcium regulation in the cardiac cell (adenylate cyclase type 9 or ADCY9).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Based on a longitudinal follow-up study of AUD in Taiwanese aborigines, our findings reveal genome-wide hypermethylation associated with alcohol dependence, consistent with other studies [10,12,13,15,17]. Further, we identified several epigenetic signatures associated with chronic alcohol consumption. Although the cases and controls did not differ in the enriched GO categories, compared to the control group, most of the differentially methylated genes in the case group appeared to be involved in signal transduction, calcium regulation, and cardiac contraction pathways.

Our results are in line with the observations that chronic alcohol exposure leads to alterations in p53 pathway [30], Notch signaling pathway [31], vitamin A metabolism [32], and regulation of the electron transport chain [33]. Interestingly, several differentially methylated genes in the case group are associated with the susceptibility to sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). There is evidence supporting that early pregnancy alcohol consumption can significantly increase the risk of SIDS in newborns [34]. Despite the fact that our study subjects were all adult males and direct associations with SIDS may not be immediately apparent, our results suggest that the effect of chronic alcohol intake and SIDS may share similar molecular pathways in which DNA methylation changes play a potential role. In addition, several studies have linked heavy alcohol consumption with increased susceptibility to neuronal injuries and impairments [35], as well as adverse cerebrovascular changes, cardiac disorders, and strokes [36]. This is reflected in our study in that chronic alcohol induced DNA methylation changes in genes involved in calcium regulation, Alzheimer’s disease-associated pathways, and muscle contraction processes. Our finding adds to the accumulating body of evidence that epigenetic mechanisms underlying chronic alcohol drinking may influence the development of neuromuscular and cardiovascular diseases.

According to our interaction network analysis, the differentially methylated genes in the alcoholic individuals appeared to be involved in complex interactions with each other (Fig. 3), and these relationships may mediate the effect of chronic alcohol on the associated pathways and diseases. This link between gene interactions and alcoholism-related pathways is evident in the association between AR (androgen receptor) and NCOR1 (nuclear receptor co-repressor 1). AR is known to have a modulating effect on craving during withdrawal in men [37], whereas NCOR1 is an established alcohol candidate gene whose expression in the mouse prefrontal cortex is responsive to ethanol treatment [38]. It has been demonstrated that NCOR1 directly interact with AR, suppressing AR transcription [39]. In our analysis, case-specific differentially methylated AR and NCOR1 were mapped to the SIDS susceptibility pathways and Notch signaling cascades, respectively. Moreover, both genes were associated with neuromuscular diseases. It is possible that the interaction between AR and NCOR1 may be affected by chronic alcohol exposure through DNA methylation changes, increasing the risk of neuromuscular impairments.

Protein interactions among differentially methylated genes in the alcoholic group also revealed associations among three genes that have been implicated in various cancer development and progression: TK1 (thymidine kinase 1), MYBL2 (Myb-related protein B), AURKA (aurora kinase A) [40–42]. Alcohol represents a major etiological factor in hepatocellular carcinoma [43]. Our observation that TK1, MYBL2, AURKA were differentially methylated after chronic alcohol exposure supports alcohol’s pathogenic role in the development of cancer and implicates the involvement of specific epigenetic alterations in this respect.

Aside from genes that were connected through the protein network analysis, several other differentially expressed genes in the case group appeared to be associated with various pathways related to alcohol induced alterations. For example, the AVP (arginine vasopressin protein) gene, which codes for a peptide hormone responsible for maintaining water balance and regulating arterial blood pressure, is linked to alcohol tolerance, craving, and alcohol-induced memory impairment [13,44,45]. The ALDH1A3 (aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A3) and CRABP1 (cellular retinoic acid-binding protein 1) genes are mediators of vitamin A homeostasis [46,47], an important process adversely affected by alcohol [32]. In addition, CRYAB (alpha-crystallin B chain), a breast cancer susceptibility gene [48], is also an essential neuro-inflammation suppressor [49], and is therefore mapped to the neuromuscular disease category in our disease enrichment analysis. These results indicate that alcohol-induced changes in methylation may modulate the susceptibility to cancer, affect retinoic acid metabolism, alter cellular physiology, and moreover, the nervous system.

Some of the differentially methylated genes in the case group are related to the various characteristics of AUD. For instance, CKM has been associated with alcohol dependence, withdrawal and delirium tremens [50]. According to our results, methylation of the CKM gene also appeared to be negatively correlated with alcohol consumption. As well, adenylate cyclase type 9 (ADCY9) belongs to a family of transmembrane proteins involved in learning and memory, synaptic plasticity, and neurodegeneration, in addition to having been implicated in the development of addiction and mood disorders [51]. Several members of the adenylate cyclase family are ethanol responsive [52]. This is consistent with our observation that chronic alcohol consumption might be associated with increased methylation of the ADCY9 gene. In addition, paired mesoderm homeobox protein 2A, PHOX2A, is a transcription regulator of the alpha 3 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit gene [53], whose overexpression has been shown to reduce alcohol intake in mice [54]. It seems that the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor may modulate alcohol drinking behavior through PHOX2A. That methylation of PHOX2A appears to be positively correlated with the amount of alcohol consumption offers an additional evidence for the association between PHOX2A and alcohol dependence.

Some of the genes correlated with chronic alcohol consumption have been implicated in cell damage and inflammatory response. For example, the HECT and RLD domain containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 5 (HERC5) gene is a regulator of inflammatory response [55]. Increased methylation of HERC5 after chronic alcohol exposure suggests that alcohol may attenuate HERC5’s ability to maintain a proper inflammatory response. NPDC1 (neural proliferation, differentiation, and control, 1) is a neural factor controlling neural cell proliferation and differentiation [56]. AUD can result in alcohol-related brain damage, but the exact mechanism of this process is not well understood. Given NPDC1’s role in neurogenesis and its de-methylation with respect to chronic alcohol consumption, it is possible that there exists a protective mechanism to compensate for alcohol’s inhibiting effect on cell proliferation.

Given the limited sample size in the present study, we integrated publicly available bioinformatics resources to systematically uncover novel candidate genes and relevant biological meanings from our array-based data in an attempt to explain the role DNA methylation plays in chronic alcohol exposure and alcohol-induced damages. To our knowledge, most groups have examined the association between DNA methylation and alcoholism with a cross-sectional population study approach, in contrast to our longitudinal study method.

However, we could not exclude the several limitations underlying our study. First, our findings are based on a small sample size of Taiwanese aboriginal males and are thus preliminary. It is likely that we might have identified male-specific epigenetic markers unique to the Taiwanese aborigines or overlooked genes of moderate effect. This is also the possible reason that we have observed only three genes whose methylation statuses were changed in both the case and control group. Second, our analysis could not establish a direct correlation between DNA methylation alterations and gene expression changes. Further confirmation at the RNA level is required. Third, our epigenetic profiling in the blood may not represent the situations in other tissues. Moreover, we did not perform any biochemical assays to measure the differences between the case and control groups with respect to various clinical indices, such as the levels of cholesterol and glucose. The participants׳ health conditions were based on self-reported responses during the follow-up interviews. We could not determine the extent to which other clinical parameters might have affected our results. Finally, the lifetime frequencies and the amount of cigarette smoking and betel nut use were assessed at phase 3 only. Although the average amount of cigarettes and betel nuts consumption appeared to be low in both cases and controls, we could not entirely rule out the possibility that cigarette and betel nut may also modulate DNA methylation.

Collectively, our study identified genes associated with chronic alcohol consumption at the epigenetic level in Taiwanese aborigines. Though various questions remain unanswered, by performing an integrative systematic bioinformatics analysis, we have presented a comprehensive epigenomic map of a longitudinal follow-up study on alcohol use disorder, and provided support for the emerging notion that epigenetics plays a role in alcoholism etiology and facilitate the effort of research in this area.

All authors declare no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence the presented study.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

In the present study, we examined the effect of chronic alcohol consumption on the DNA methylation in four major aboriginal peoples of Taiwan. Since 1986, we have been following up on the mental health conditions of Taiwanese aborigines. The 993 aboriginal people who underwent the phase 1 (1986) clinical interviews were followed up through phase 2 (1990–1992), and phase 3 (2003–2009). Selected individuals for the current study included 10 males from the phase 1 normal cohort who remained normal at phase 2 and became dependent on alcohol by phase 3 and 10 control subjects that have not had any drinking problems throughout the study. DNA methylation changes in the blood collected at phases 2 and 3 were profiled by an array-based approach. Gene Ontology, pathway, and disease enrichment analyses identified several biological processes related to immune system responses and aging in the control group, and susceptibility to infections, as well as pathways related to muscular contraction and neural degeneration associated with the case group. The methylation levels of six genes were found to correlate with alcohol consumption. These include genes involved in neurogenesis (NPDC1) and inflammation (HERC5), as well as alcoholism-associated genes ADCY9, CKM, and PHOX2A. Given the limited sample size, our systematic approach integrating array-based technology and publicly available bioinformatics tools uncovered genes and disease pathways associated with chronic alcohol consumption at the epigenetic level. Though our results may be specific to the Taiwanese aborigines, our findings offer a preliminary epigenetic map that improves our understanding of alcohol-induced damages and offers new targets for alcohol injury research.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This longitudinal study was supported by grants from the National Science Council, Taiwan (NSC91-2314-B-001-012, NSC92-2314-B-001-005, NSC93-2314-B-001-001, NSC94-2314-B-001-008, NSC95-2314-B-001-005, NSC96-2314-B-001-002, NSC102-2221-E-155-069). J.W. thanks J.H.C. for advices on the statistical analysis of the epidemiological data in this manuscript.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.12.003.


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary data Fig. S1. Molecular functions over-represented by differentially methylated genes in the control and case group.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary data
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary data Fig. S2. Cellular components over-represented by differentially methylated genes in the control and case group.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary data
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

