@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#An automatic tool to facilitate the statistical group analysis of DTI

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We design an easy-to-use tool for DTI analysis using a user-centred methodology.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our tool leads to a 96% reduction in analysis time compared to traditional pipeline.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our tool minimises the user errors and automates the DTI statistical group analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results in the study of depression in the elderly demonstrate its accuracy.


                        
                        
                           
                           The tool is currently being used by clinicians in a University Hospital.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Image analysis

DTI

FSL

Group statistics

Usability evaluation

User-centred design

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Users may have difficulty calculating DTI group statistics since they need to master several complex tools that require high user intervention. A tool called DTIStatistics for the automatic and easy calculation of DTI group statistics was developed to reduce analysis times and possible errors.
               
               
                  Methods
                  The proposed software was designed by using a user-centred methodology in which we performed an iterative usability evaluation with an expert committee. Once the experts׳ requirements were fulfilled, we performed a validation of the final version of DTIStatistics with target users, comparing the execution time of this tool and the standard pipeline normally used.
               
               
                  Results
                  Target users needed significantly less time to complete the tasks with DTIStatistics, reducing the analysis time from 1383.78 to 57.2s. They were able to complete all the tasks and barely made errors. Moreover, target users were not able to display the analysis results with the standard pipeline, but when using our tool they only needed 34s. Target users found DTIStatistics easy to learn, use and interact with, and they concluded that they could effectively complete the tasks with it. Additionally, we present example results in the study of depression to demonstrate the validity of DTIStatistics for clinical research.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  DTIStatistics facilitates and significantly automates the calculation of DTI group statistics by reducing the analysis times, which implies lower costs. DTIStatistics is highly applicable in clinical research, as demonstrated by the fact that it is currently being used at the University Hospital, University of Navarra (Spain).
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Neuroimaging has been increasingly applied to patients with brain disorders in order to investigate in vivo abnormalities in the brain [1–4]. The analysis and visualization of medical image data extracted from neuroimaging is crucial for prevention and diagnosis. Recent neuroimaging techniques such as Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) have arisen in order to characterize the structure of the brain. Fractional Anisotropy (FA), a measurement extracted from DTI, describes the fibre structure (
                     Fig. 1) and is used to analyse disease abnormalities in the white matter and compare FA between subjects in clinical research.

In clinical studies, after preprocessing the images, a statistical analysis between groups is usually performed to analyse the differences between subjects׳ brains due to the abnormalities caused by disease or aging. There are several techniques that can be used to carry out the analysis [5,6], including region of interest (ROI) analysis, tract analysis and voxelwise analysis.

Earlier studies have mainly used the ROI method [7–9]. BrainSuite [10], Brain Voyager QX [11] and FreeSurfer [12] include this technique. However, the fact that in this method the regions are drawn by hand makes it difficult to define ROIs between subjects in a reliable and accurate way [13]. Additionally, this method can miss significant information in non-selected regions.

More sophisticated methods use tractography, which is the tracking of the brain fibres, in order to compare FA values across subjects. In this approach, called tract analysis, white matter fibres are traced using ROIs. The UNC-Utah NA-MIC DTI framework [14] is an example of a tract-based tool based on Goodlett׳s quantitative tractography method [15]. The accuracy of the methods depends on the registration of each subject to the standard space. In addition, only the information that is extracted from the tracts is analysed.

Voxelwise analysis (VBA) methods attempt to solve the various limitations of the other methods by analysing the whole brain, which means that it is not necessary to specify any regions by hand. Moreover, automated registration is carried out to match all the images. Due to these improvements, several recent studies have used voxelwise analysis. Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) [16] and Tract-based Spatial Statistics [17], the latter being part of FSL Software [18,19], are two examples of voxelwise analysis software. Both methods differ in the spatial normalization of FA images and in the parameters applied in the smoothing. TBSS was developed to alleviate the alignment and smoothing problems of SPM. Despite some weaknesses in revealing tract specific features, TBSS has become the most popular tool for analysing DTI images.

Recently, several pipelines have been attempting to facilitate the processing of DTI datasets. Some of them provide an environment in which to design workflows within and between packages, and users need to construct pipelines that contain the steps and dependencies (MIPAV [20], JIST [21], Nipype [22] and LONI [23]). These types of powerful tools are designed for expert users. However, most of the time the target users are novices in programming and they may have difficulty processing DTI datasets and calculating group statistics. The recently published PANDA [24] does not require that the pipeline be defined, and it aims to overcome the handicap of complexity by adding a GUI. However, a usability study with end users is missing to objectively evaluate the tool׳s real ease of use. Usability testing is essential for determining whether a solution works with target users [25–28]. Moreover, the authors of PANDA do not detail their design methodology. Following a design methodology, such as the user-centred methodology, will provide a full understanding of the problems in existing tools and facilitate the development of a tool that fulfils the needs of the users.

Despite the appearance of pipelines, TBSS, or FSL in general, is the preferred tool amongst clinicians for statistical group analysis [29–32]. However, FSL requires advanced knowledge of DTI analysis, and due to its numerous features users are required to master the software. Therefore, they often get confused, as each step must be done manually. In addition, DTI statistical group analysis normally takes hours and sometimes more than one tool is needed for a complete analysis, further increasing the complexity of clinical research studies. For all these reasons, it is very important to automate the process in order to reduce user intervention and consequently minimise the number of errors, analysis time and costs.

In this paper, we present a novel medical tool, which we call DTIStatistics, for automatic statistical analysis based on FSL, MRICron [33] and R [34]. The main objective of DTIStatistics is to enable easy preprocessing and the calculation of group statistics from DTI datasets. Our proposal has a friendly graphical user interface and its automated pipeline minimises the need for user intervention. This tool was designed using a user-centred methodology [35]. Following this methodology, we performed an iterative usability evaluation with expert users in Human–Computer Interaction, Bioengineering and Medicine in order to create a suitable tool. Once the software met the experts׳ requirements, we validated the final version of the tool with our target users. To that end, we recruited Biomedical Engineering students to validate the tool, and the validation confirmed that our tool facilitates the preprocessing and statistical group analysis of DTI datasets. In order to demonstrate the validity of DTIStatistics in clinical research, we present example results obtained with our tool in the study of late-onset major depressive disorder in the elderly.

@&#METHODS@&#

In order to create a suitable tool for the final user, we followed a user-centred design methodology, which has been successfully applied in other recent studies [36–38]. This methodology tests which aspects of the system are adequate in order to improve the design. This methodology not only requires that designers analyse how the product is going to be, but that they also test their initial proposals in a realistic validation process with representative users. For this purpose we used the thinking-aloud technique with an expert committee throughout the whole design process. That is, the end users of our tool influenced how the design developed, and user requirements were considered from the beginning. These requirements were refined throughout the whole product cycle until a final solution was found (
                        Fig. 2). At each iteration, we developed a new design solution, based on our stakeholders and their interests, in order to fulfil their needs. By using user-centred design, we tried to optimize the product in terms of users׳ use and needs, instead of forcing them to adapt to a designer-defined product.

At the beginning of the project, an expert committee was formed by experts from the University Hospital and the Tecnun School of Engineering, both at the University of Navarra, in Spain. The University Hospital has highly specialized medical-surgical departments that offer cutting-edge treatment methods and techniques. The University of Navarra is a prestigious institution of higher education, and thus the combination of its School of Engineering and its University Hospital constitutes an ideal multidisciplinary environment for the evaluation of our automatic statistics tool for group statistics. In conducting a usability study, Nielsen recommends having five users evaluate the tool [39,40]. Our expert committee was made up of five users: one MD–Ph.D. (specialized in Psychiatry), one MD (specialized in Radiology) and three Ph.Ds specialized in Bioengineering, Computer Science and Human–Computer Interaction. This heterogeneous committee played the role of the user, and they conducted a complete evaluation of the tool until a useful and successful tool was developed. The expert committee evaluated the tool with a focus on the usability and effectiveness of the tool.

In the first steps of our evaluation methodology, we worked with the two medical doctors in order to identify their requirements. Those requirements were analysed with the three engineering experts in order to define the user task scenarios and task sequences users will need to perform within the environment. Our biggest concern in the design of the application was the ease of use. FSL runs on Linux and Mac OS X, and even though there is a GUI, most of the advanced features must be run from the command line, which can be a significant challenge for novice users.

In our case, we defined a list that contained the steps needed in order to run the statistics. An example of the typical pipeline of DTI group analysis was defined (
                        Fig. 3) based on the advice given by FSL developers in [41] and our experience. FSL executes the DTI measure calculation to obtain the FA images and the group statistical analysis of the FA images; this step is shown in purple in the pipeline figure. However, as is also shown in this figure, additional tools are usually needed to convert images from Dicom standard to NifTi, the image format available in FSL, or to calculate the statistical analysis for the data extracted from atlas regions using FSL. From our experience, MRICron and R are the best choice for these tasks, but any similar tool can be used.

We explained this pipeline to the experts and they defined the requirements of the tool based on the advantages and drawbacks of this pipeline. They also identified the most important improvements: (1) the need for a GUI together with a wrapper layer to encapsulate the entire pipeline and hide the underlying complexity from the user, and (2) the need to automate the process to reduce time, errors and cost. The experts highlighted that the main objectives were to facilitate the process and to eliminate the burden of switching from one programme to another. As shown in 
                        Fig. 4a, in a typical pipeline users have to access different tools independently. Based on expert requirements, we defined a GUI and a wrapper layer to isolate the interaction with the tools. In our tool, users only have to interact with the GUI to complete the whole pipeline and the execution of the different programs is transparent (Fig. 4b).

After we developed the first version of our tool, the experts understood the overall flow of the tool and analysed the system functionality and user interface. Using the information collected during this process, we obtained a list of improvements. The experts suggested that we fully automate the process, simplify the interface to avoid any user mistakes and make the buttons and dialogue boxes more informative.

This process was run iteratively, improving the existing features or adding more, until a successful solution was found. After that, the experts evaluated the tool and emphasized that the interface was simple and user friendly due to the clear organization of the buttons, that it was easy to use due to simplicity and automation, and that the error messages helped to guide the process and prevent further mistakes. Additionally, they concluded that the written results were clearer and more understandable.

Here, we present a novel automatic statistical tool based on FSL, MRICron and R called DTIStatistics to make it easy to preprocess and create group statistics from DTI datasets. This tool aims to facilitate the processing of statistics between groups of subjects for DTI datasets.

The tool followed the main steps in the example pipeline. In order to facilitate and automate the process, a GUI was needed. The experts claimed that the interface should be simple, clear and user-friendly. 
                        Fig. 5 shows a screen shot of the GUI.

There are three main components: the preprocessing, the group statistics and the result display. Users can execute any of the two main steps of the group statistic process via a single click in the main menu. Therefore, users can execute the whole group statistic process starting from DWI files with just a few clicks. The pipeline is designed to automate the whole process all at once. However, subtasks in the preprocessing or the group statistics can be executed one by one in the advanced menu.

DTIStatistics was programmed using C++, R and the shell scripting language in Linux. The GUI was developed using the QT library.

In order to prepare the DTI datasets for the calculation of group statistics, preprocessing is needed. This can be executed by a single click in the main menu. There are two main steps. First, datasets are converted from DWI Dicom to DWI NifTi. Dicom is a well-known standard for medical images, and we added the MRICron functionality to convert Dicom datasets into NifTi datasets since NifTi is the input format for FSL. Second, DTI measurements such as Fractional Anisotropy (FA) images are calculated from the DWI NifTi image. This step involves all the preprocessing needed for a subject before running the statistical analysis such as brain extraction, eddy current correction and the computation of DTI measurements. All these steps are performed using FSL software. Since FA has become the most commonly used measurement in order to describe abnormalities and understand brain diseases, FA is the image usually used for group statistics.

The FA differences between groups can be analysed for two and three groups using this tool. A Tract-based Spatial Statistics (TBSS) analysis is carried out and the resulting images are analysed statistically in order to present the results in a formatted document. TBSS is part of FSL and performs voxelwise statistical analysis of multi-subject diffusion data. In addition to the whole brain results, atlas-based results are also displayed using the JHU ICBM White Matter Atlas [42–44]. This is done by selecting the “Calculate Statistics” option in the main menu, and then all the following steps are performed.

With just few clicks, the TBSS group comparison process will be performed for 2 or 3 groups. The input for this process is a folder with the FA images. The study design files are created based on the information obtained from the folder, such as the number of groups and the number of subjects per group. The Randomise tool (Randomise v2.1 from FSL [45]) is responsible for the group comparison, performing a permutation-based non-parametric independent two-sample t test and a one-way ANOVA. Each test generates family-wise error (FWE) corrected test statistic images. These corrections allow us to avoid Type I errors, which incorrectly reject a true null hypothesis.

After running the statistics, the tool allows us to choose what to analyse for each comparison of the tests performed with TBSS. There are two options: to find whole brain significant clusters of voxels with reduced FA, or to analyse statistically significant atlas-based major tracts with reduced FA using the JHU ICBM White Matter Atlas, which is composed of twenty major tracts of white matter. All the statistics per tract are automated with R scripts. Both options can be also calculated together.

We can display both the statistical images, which are the output of the TBSS randomise step, or the results saved in the file from the previous step. Statistical images are the result of voxelwise cross-subject statistical analysis for the whole brain. These statistical images, which are images with the FWE corrected p, were thresholded. The user selects the statistical image depending on the comparison to be displayed by using FSLView; in addition to this image, a skeleton mean FA study-specific image and a structural template are also displayed to facilitate visualization (see 
                           Fig. 6).

Text results are presented in a formatted file which provides a summary of the results selected by the user. These results can contain, apart from whole brain statistics, additional atlas-based analysis results. For each test, the user can check the statistical values and whether the test is significant or not. An example is shown in 
                           Fig. 7. In a typical FSL pipeline, the user should execute 8 commands in FSL in a 2-group analysis (or 28 commands in a 3-group analysis) for the whole brain analysis. If an additional step is needed to analyse the results of the main white matter tracts, 66 commands are needed in FSL and 40 in R for a 2-group analysis (87 commands in FSL and 140 in R for 3-group analysis). DTIStatistics automates these steps: the user just needs to click a button to display the results.

As explained before, in order to create a usable tool, we followed a user-centred methodology. The proposed tool was successfully implemented following the recommendations of the expert committee. The tool needed to be able to automate and facilitate the preprocessing and the calculation of group statistics from the DTI datasets. Once the expert committee decided that the tool fulfilled their needs, we validated the final version of the tool with our target end users, Biomedical Engineering students, to demonstrate that the tool fulfils end user needs.

The validation has two main parts:
                           
                              1.
                              An experimental validation (user trial) comparing a typical statistical execution with FSL and our tool.

A questionnaire related to the ease of use, automation and validity of our tool.

This validation provided us with quantitative and qualitative data about the tool and we were able to measure the satisfaction of the target users. The first step in evaluating the tool was to perform user trials, with the aim of showing that the tool has good functionality and is accepted by the final users. Because user trials test the tool in a controlled environment where users perform a set of tasks, advance planning is required. First, we decided on the schedule of the trials, the number of subjects, the structure and the procedure. According to Nielsen, in cases where data is quantitative, having twenty users typically offers a reasonably tight confidence interval [46]. In our case, we selected thirty target users in order to guarantee significant results. After that, we defined the user trial scenarios, tasks and variables to measure.

In order to validate that the tool is easy to use, we performed a user trial with Biomedical Engineering students. Thirty students in the undergraduate programme in Biomedical Engineering at the Tecnun School of Engineering at the University of Navarra (Spain) volunteered for the user trial. We collected some basic information about the target users, such as their previous familiarity with FSL or computers. This was measured on a seven-point Likert scale where 1 represents no knowledge and 7 represents expert knowledge. This information is summarized in 
                        Table 1. The average user was 20 years old and 60% were females. None of the students had ever used FSL before.

In the user trial, we compared the typical pipeline and our tool, DTIStatistics, to demonstrate that our tool makes the process of running statistics with the traditional pipeline easier. This typical pipeline, as described above, is executed mainly through the FSL software, in addition to MRICron and R. For simplicity, in the following we will use the shorter term FSL to denote the example of the standard pipeline. Users were invited to come to the user trial one by one. We briefly explained the purpose of the test. We gave users the official user guides of all the tools, which we obtained from the websites, and brief documentation on our tool. Users were asked to perform three different tasks with both FSL and DTIStatistics: (1) to preprocess a DWI dataset, (2) to run a statistical analysis of two groups of DTI FA images, and (3) to discover whether there was any significant result in the whole brain statistical analysis. The choice of which tool was used first was randomly assigned. We recorded the time needed to complete each task, whether the task was finished, the number of errors and the number of times assistance was requested. The time needed to complete each task only takes into account the time needed by a user to execute the task, not the execution time itself. Once they finished the three tasks with both tools, users were asked to fill in a questionnaire about the ease of use and overall usability of DTIStatistics. In this questionnaire we collected qualitative information about the user trial that was aimed at extracting information. Users were able to grade our tool on different aspects such as interaction, realism, tool validity, how easy it was to perform different steps of the statistical process, and an overall mark.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The validation that was carried out with Biomedical Engineering students was divided into two parts: an experimental validation comparing a typical pipeline and our tool, and a questionnaire related to measuring the satisfaction of the target users.

In the experimental validation, all the users finished the three tasks using DTIStatistics (see 
                        Table 2). In contrast, when using FSL, all the users finished the first task and 28 of 30 finished the second one; no user was able to complete the third task.

With DTIStatistics, only one user made an error on the second task, though the user was able to recover from the error and continue with the task. With FSL, however, 29 of 30 users made at least one error on the first task, and all users had at least one error on the second task. On the third task, 9 users had errors, but this number is misleading since no user was able to complete the task. With FSL, users made 2.3 errors on average (SD=1.3) for the first task and 4.8 (SD=2.6) for the second one.

Users were asked to try to do the tasks by themselves. However, as they were novices at performing a statistical analysis of DTI images, they were able to use tool manuals and ask for assistance. When using DTIStatistics they were able to do the three tasks on their own; no one used any of the manuals or asked for assistance. On the other hand, when using FSL, all users used manuals on all three tasks. In addition to that, they got stuck many times and asked for assistance. For the first task, preprocessing the DWI images, each user asked for assistance at least once; the average number of times was 2.8 (SD=1.4). However, for task 2, statistical analysis, 28 users requested help, with a mean value of 3.9 (SD=2.1).


                        
                        Table 3 compares the time the users needed to complete the tasks with both tools. Users needed significantly less time to complete tasks 1 and 2 with DTIStatistics. For these tasks, on average, users took 1383.78s with FSL and 57.2s using DTIStatistics. There is no information collected for FSL completion times for task 3 because no user was able finish it, i.e.: they were not able to display the results with FSL.


                        
                        Table 4 and 
                        Fig. 8 show the results of the questionnaire related to measuring the satisfaction of the target users. The table includes the mean and the standard deviation (SD) of the results of the questionnaire, and the figure shows the box plots for the results of the questionnaire.

In the questionnaires, all 30 participants gave favourable responses. 6.5 was the lowest mean of the questionnaire, and 5 was the minimum value given. Users thought our tool is easy to use, learn and interact with, and the information is easy to understand.

The main purpose of this case study is to demonstrate the validity of DTIStatistics for clinical research. In order to fulfil this objective, we performed a clinical study on late-onset major depressive disorder in the elderly in order to compare our results with a preliminary study published in [47]. Twelve subjects were recruited from the University Hospital, University of Navarra, all above age 60. Subjects were categorized into two groups: a late-onset depressive (LOD) group (first episode after age 50, patient group) and a healthy control group. There are six patients (P) and six controls (C) (N=12). The images used in this study were the same as the ones used in Garin et al. [47] for the patient control comparison.

@&#METHODS@&#

We compared the results obtained in group analyses using DTIStatistics with the ones obtained in a preliminary study published in Garin et al. [47]. In that paper, where the traditional FSL pipeline explained in Fig. 3 was followed, trends in decreased FA were found in the whole brain and significant results were obtained in the right uncinate fasciculus and in the left temporal part of the superior longitudinal fasciculus.

In order to confirm the improvement in usability, we measured the time needed to obtain the results after group analysis using a chronometer. We measured the time cost in two different ways: following the traditional pipeline and using DTIStatistics.

@&#RESULTS@&#

We obtained the same numerical results as in Garin et al. [47]. Our tool does not add any error and there is no loss of accuracy compared to the traditional pipeline. DTIStatistics found trends in the whole brain analysis and significant results in the right uncinate fasciculus (p<0.0001) and in the left temporal part of the superior longitudinal fasciculus (p<0.002). These results are in line with the ones published by Nobuhara and Mettenburg [48–50].

Additionally, analysis time was reduced compared to the traditional pipeline. We measured the time needed to obtain the whole brain and atlas-based results after group analysis. It took 5h 4′ 54″ of repetitive manual tasks to obtain these results with the traditional pipeline that was presented in [47]. However, in DTIStatistics, it took 10″ of manual task time; user interaction was barely required since the process is fully automatic.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study presents the design and evaluation of a novel tool called DTIStatistics for the automatic statistical group analysis for DTI. Our results confirmed that our novel tool overcomes the problems defined by experts using existing systems and provides a fully automated and significant easy-to-use pipeline for the preprocessing and statistical analysis of DTI images using FSL, MRICron and R. The choice of these software tools was motivated due to the fact that they have become a reference in their fields. Although a variety of DTI group analysis software applications exist and despite its weakness in revealing tract-specific features, FSL is widely used in the literature.

Results from the validation performed with Biomedical Engineering students confirm that DTIStatistics fulfils its intended purpose in terms of ease of use, analysis times and user intervention. All the users remarked that DTIStatistics definitely facilitates the preprocessing and group statistical analysis. Our proposed tool reduces by 96% the time needed to analyse DTI images, and errors disappeared relative to the traditional pipeline. Therefore, our tool could reduce the costs of DTI analysis in the clinical research of neurological diseases. Additionally, when using DTIStatistics, user intervention is reduced to a minimum level. As explained in the case study, the time needed to calculate whole brain and atlas-based results with the traditional pipeline was reduced from five hours of repetitive manual tasks to an automatic process with barely any user intervention by using DTIStatistics.

In the case study presented, we demonstrated the accuracy of DTIStatistics by comparing its results to the results obtained from using the traditional pipeline. DTIStatistics produces exactly the same numerical results. Because FSL and its DTI statistics method, TBSS, were validated in [18,51], it can be concluded that DTIStatistics is also a precise and valid tool for clinical research.

Furthermore, the tool was successfully implemented and was recently used in our research centre in our collaboration with the University Hospital, University of Navarra on several projects on the analysis of the abnormalities caused by psychiatric diseases. DTIStatistics could be useful for biomedical research since it helps clinicians understand the brain abnormalities caused by diseases, and thus it contributes to the study of neurological disorders.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This article describes the development of a software tool as the solution to a specific problem in clinical research, using formal methodologies to design and evaluate such a tool. This research also demonstrates that the statistical analysis of DTI images using software of wider application like FSL can be significantly sped up by using an ad hoc tool. Developing a more usable and efficient software tool is worthwhile as it leads to shorter analysis times, which means lower costs. Furthermore, the learning curve will also be smaller, reducing the costs of training users on the tool.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

Analysing and visualizing DTI images is essential in the prevention of neurological diseases. Various powerful tools have been established for this task; however, due to the complexity of the existing tools, users may have difficulty analysing DTI images and calculating group statistics. Users need to master several tools, and user intervention is required in every step involved. Automating the pipeline could reduce analysis times and possible errors. Therefore, an automatic and easy-to-use tool for DTI image group analysis is necessary in order to speed up the process and reduce costs. We have developed a tool based on FSL, MRICron and R called DTIStatistics for automatic and easy preprocessing and calculating group statistics.

The proposed software has been designed using a user-centred methodology where we performed an iterative evaluation with an expert committee, focusing on the usability and effectiveness of the tool. Once experts’ requirements were fulfilled and the final version of the software was implemented, we performed a validation of the tool with a group of target users. We have obtained quantitative and qualitative information about the data by comparing the execution time of DTIStatistics and the standard pipeline that is normally used and gathering target users’ comments using a questionnaire. Additionally, we have demonstrated the accuracy of DTIStatistics by comparing its results to the ones that come from using the traditional pipeline. DTIStatistics produces exactly the same numerical results.

Our results confirmed that DTIStatistics significantly facilitates the preprocessing and group statistical analysis with DTI datasets. Our tool automates the process by reducing the analysis times, which implies lower costs. DTIStatistics is highly applicable in clinical research, as demonstrated by the fact that the tool is currently being used in the study of psychiatric disorders in collaboration with the University Hospital, University of Navarra in Spain.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank the “Beca Universidad de Navarra” from the University of Navarra, the University Hospital, University of Navarra, and QPEA Association for funding this work. We want also to thank to the expert committee and the Biomedical Engineering student volunteers that helped us to validate the tool. Additionally, we want to show gratitude for the developers of FSL, MRICron and R.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

