@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Computational comparison of three posterior lumbar interbody fusion techniques by using porous titanium interbody cages with 50% porosity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A numerical model containing porous cages and a lumbar segment was developed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The bone tissue ingrowth into the pores of the cage is considered.


                        
                        
                           
                           Bone fusion enhances the stability of the lumbar segment with a porous cage.


                        
                        
                           
                           Bone fusion also reduces the peak von Mises stress in the cortical bone and porous cage.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Porous interbody cage

Finite element method

Posterior lumbar interbody fusion

Bone ingrowth

Lumbar L3-4

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study investigated the biomechanical response of porous cages and lumbar spine segments immediately after surgery and after bone fusion, in addition to the long-term effects of various posterior lumbar interbody fusion (PLIF) techniques, by using the finite element method. Lumbar L3-L4 models based on three PLIF techniques (a single cage at the center of the intervertebral space, a single cage half-anterior to the intervertebral space, and two cages bilateral to the intervertebral space) with and without bone ingrowth were used to determine the biomechanical response of porous cages and lumbar segments instrumented with porous titanium cages (cage porosity=50%, pore diameter=1mm). The results indicated that bone fusion enhanced the stability of the lumbar segments with porous cages without any posterior instrumentation and reduced the peak von Mises stress in the cortical bones and porous cages. Two cages placed bilateral to the intervertebral space achieved the highest structural stability in the lumbar segment and lowest von Mises stress in the cages under both bone fusion conditions. Under identical loading (2-Nm), the range of motion in the single cage at the center of the intervertebral space with bone fusion decreased by 11% (from 1.18° to 1.05°) during flexion and by 66.5% (from 4.46° to 1.5°) during extension in the single cage half-anterior to the intervertebral space with bone fusion compared with no-fusion models. Thus, two porous titanium cages with 50% porosity can achieve high stability of a lumbar segment with PLIF. If only one cage is available, placing the cage half-anterior to the intervertebral space is recommended for managing degenerated lumbar segments.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Among 357,000 individuals who underwent lumbar spinal surgery in the United States, 122,000 were performed to manage degenerative disk disease [1]. Posterior lumbar interbody fusion (PLIF), a common surgical treatment strategy for managing degenerated disk disease from the posterior aspect of the lumbar spine, is used for inserting bone grafts, spacers, or interbody cages into a spinal segment to facilitate a biomechanical response leading to bone growth between two vertebral bodies and to enhance spinal stability [2–4]. Spinal interbody cages can restore the disk height and neuroforaminal space immediately after surgery and relieve pain and neuropathy symptoms. Conventional titanium cages combined with bone graft or bone morphogenetic protein can also achieve an adequate fusion rate; however, postoperative complications including stress shielding, migration, subsidence, mechanical failure of the cage, and osteoporosis can persist [5–11]. Cages composed of polyetheretherketone (PEEK), which has an elastic modulus closer to bone than to titanium, can reduce the stress-shielding effect and promote bone fusion [12,13]. Despite several reports indicating favorable outcomes from using PEEK cages to manage degenerative disease of the intervertebral disks [14–16], micromotion remains a problem because of poor osteointegration of the connective fibrous tissue between the PEEK cages and surrounding bones; this is unfavorable for achieving solid fusion and long-term stability [13,17,18].

Porous cages have also been used for managing degenerative disk disease and restoring disk height, in addition to use in various artificial implants [19–25]. The major advantage of using porous materials is that they facilitate bone tissue ingrowth into the connected holes of the cage, thereby enhancing long-term stability [19,23]. Porous cages composed of titanium alloy (titanium-6 aluminum-4 vanadium [Ti-6Al-4V]) fabricated using additive manufacturing methods can achieve more favorable osteoblast adhesion and differentiation than PEEK cages [18,26–28]. Moreover, they are structurally similar to the connected and open porous framework of cancellous bone. Porous cages function as scaffolds and maintain space within the bone. Bone cells then migrate into the space and form new bone tissue; therefore, no additional bone graft is required [29]. Additive manufacturing methods including additive laser selective melting (ALSM) and electron beam melting can be adopted to produce porous cages composed of Ti–6Al–4V with various porosities and pore sizes [30,31]. The crucial advantage of additive manufacturing methods is that they enable open pore connectivity. Porous titanium cages fabricated through ALSM have achieved high osteointegration and stability in sheep spines [32]. However, no mechanical study of porous cages has been conducted on the human spine, particularly after bone ingrowth into the pores of the cages. Moreover, the geometry and loading mode of sheep spines differ from those of human spines. Although a cadaveric study reported immediate stability of the cages, the long-term effects were not demonstrated. Moreover, the internal mechanical conditions, including the stress and strain of the bone and cages, are difficult to measure and analyze through cadaveric tests because no available sensor is sufficiently small and flexible to fit inside the inner surface of the pores. By contrast, the long-term mechanical effect of filling the pores with bone tissue can be calculated using a computer-aided engineering technique named the finite element (FE) method. The FE method is a numerical tool for obtaining biomechanical responses among all structures, including those immediately after surgery and those after the pores had been filled with bone tissue. The numerical FE method involves solving partial differential equations of complex problems. The strength of the FE method is that it enables calculating the internal stress on both the bone and the implants and that of the coupling effect of the implanted device, complex-shaped bones, and inhomogeneous materials under loading [33–38]. Therefore, this study used computer simulations to investigate the immediate and long-term biomechanical responses of porous cages and lumbar segments instrumented with these cages through PLIF. The range of motion (ROM) of the lumbar segment with a porous cage and von Mises stress in the cages and bone were measured. Furthermore, various PILF surgical techniques using single- or double-porous lumbar cages with and without bone ingrowth (bone fusion) were compared.

An FE model of the L3-L4 segment was developed to determine the immediate postsurgery and long-term effectiveness of bone ingrowth into the cage pores in degenerated lumbar segments, for which various PLIF surgical techniques were implemented to implant porous titanium interbody cages. The model was instrumented with one or two cages, and the volume of the pores was filled with bone tissue to simulate the long-term effect of bone ingrowth [39]. In addition, three more surgical techniques were involved: a single cage located at the center of the intervertebral space, a single cage located half-anterior to the intervertebral space, and two cages located bilateral to the intervertebral space.

A three-dimensional FE model of the L3-L4 lumbar segments of a human spine was developed using computed tomography images of a healthy 27-year-old man with no spinal disease. His body weight and height were 178cm and 78kg, respectively. The images were captured in 1-mm increments in a neutral position and processed using Avizo Version 6 software (VSG, Bordeaux, France) to determine the bone contours. The contours of the cortical and cancellous bone were dissociated according to a threshold of gray values in each image. The three-dimensional volume was calculated on the basis of the dissociated contour lines and edited to smooth the complex bony surfaces and reduce the number of elements in the subsequent mesh process. Retrieval of the facet joints was difficult because only a few of their images were obtained; therefore, a 0.5-mm gap was created between the facet joint surfaces according to the literature [40]. The intervertebral disk was created by encircling the volume boundary between the endplates of adjacent segments, including the nucleus pulposus and annulus fibrosis [41].

Porous cages were inserted into the intervertebral space to support the vertebral body and simulate the PLIF treatment of a lumbar spine with a degenerated disk. The porous cages used in this study were created using Solidworks 2012 software (Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks Corp., Waltham, MA, USA). The cage porosity was set at 50% according to the literature [39,42]. The cages were 22×9.9×10.5mm (
                        Fig. 1) with interconnected 1-mm pores (all pores in the computer-aided design (CAD) model were uniform in size),whose diameter facilitated using additive manufacturing equipment (EOSINT M 280; EOS GmbH, Krailling/Munich, Germany) to fabricate samples for material property testing.

Porosity can be expressed using the following equation:
                           
                              
                                 
                                    P
                                    =
                                    
                                       [
                                       
                                          
                                             (
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      V
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      0
                                                   
                                                
                                                −
                                                V
                                             
                                             )
                                          
                                          /
                                          
                                             
                                                V
                                             
                                             
                                                0
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       ]
                                    
                                    ×
                                    100
                                    %
                                 
                              
                           
                        where P denotes the porosity, V
                        0 the volume of the buck, and V the cellular volume. Higher values of P indicate more space for bone tissue growth but lower strength.

First, the disk was removed, but the facet joint was retained. Next, the cages were placed at the midline between the upper (L3) and lower (L4) vertebral bodies. The height of the cage (10.5mm) was defined on the basis of the original disk height to enable the cage to support the vertebral body after its insertion. Three PLIF surgical techniques and one or two cages were used; furthermore, conforming to the findings of a previous study [26], various horizontal cage locations in the intervertebral space L4 were used in the single-cage condition (
                        Fig. 2a–c). The long-term effectiveness of the bone fusion was modeled by filling the pores of the cage with bone tissue (Fig. 1b). In total, six models were employed in this study: a single cage located at the center of the intervertebral space, placed immediately after surgery, with (SCF) and without (SC) bone fusion; a single cage located half-anterior to the intervertebral space, placed immediately after surgery, with (SAF) and without (SA) bone fusion; and two cages located bilateral (left and right) to the intervertebral space, placed immediately after surgery, with (TCF) and without (TC) bone fusion. Thus, three surgical techniques and their effectiveness at two time points were evaluated.

The solid model was imported into ANSYS Version 14 software (Swanson Analysis, Houston, PA, USA) for computation. The bones and disks were meshed with quadratic elements (element type: SOLID187). The spring elements adopted for modeling the spinal ligaments were set to tension alone. The ligaments were defined by connecting the corresponding nodes on the bones. Seven spinal ligaments were created in the model: an anterior longitudinal ligament, a posterior longitudinal ligament, intertransverse ligaments, capsular ligaments of the facet joints, a ligamentum flavum, an interspinous ligament, and a supraspinous ligament.

The contact behaviors between the cages and cortical bones were set as frictional, with a frictional coefficient of 0.3 [43], in the model immediately after the surgery (no fusion), whereas the contact behaviors between the cages and cortical bones under the bone-fusion conditions were changed to bounding. The contact behaviors between the facet joints were defined as frictionless surface-to-surface contacts, and only normal forces could be conducted through them. The contact behaviors between the ligaments and bones were neglected.

The bone volume growth into the pores of the porous cages and the adjacent material of the cage were merged using the command “form new part” in ANSYS Workbench; the nodes consisted of the interface between the bone and cage.

All material properties were defined as linear elastic and homogeneous, the bone structure and disk were defined as isotropic, and the ligaments were set as tension only (
                        Table 1), according to the literature [44–46]. The elastic modulus of the solid titanium in the porous cages was estimated from experimental test data (
                        Fig. 3). The test samples were fabricated using the EOSINT M 280 operated with default settings. Variations in the manufacturing process were not employed in this study because they were previously investigated [30,31,47,48]. The dimensions of the test samples (height=10mm, gauge length=3mm, outer diameter=3mm) were confirmed using a caliper. The loading rate during the test was set to 1mm/min.

Preliminary simulations were performed on the intact L3-L4 model for validation. Two types of loading—1-mm compression and 10-Nm moment of flexion on the sagittal plane—were applied on the superior surface of the model. The peak intradisk pressure, ROM in flexion, and structural stiffness were plotted and validated by comparing with previous results [49–56]. The results of previous finite element and experimental studies were compared with those of the present study to confirm the credibility of the model.

In this study, the effectiveness was evaluated at two time points (immediately after surgery and after bone fusion). Three loading conditions, with a 400-N compressive preload, were used for evaluating the fusion effect and various surgical techniques: 2-N m loading immediately after surgery, 2-Nm loading after bone fusion, and 10-Nm loading after bone fusion. Four types of moments were applied at both time points: extension, flexion, side bending, and axial rotation (Fig. 2d–g). The loadings applied to the superior and inferior surfaces of the L3 and L4, respectively, were fixed to prevent planar displacement [57–60].

Theoretically, von Mises stress is often used to determine whether a material will yield when undergoing a complex loading condition. In biomechanical studies, von Mises stress can be employed as an index for evaluating the impact of loading on the tissue. Therefore, the higher the von Mises stress value, the higher the risk that failure will occur.

@&#RESULTS@&#

For validation, the results of the intradisk pressure, ROM in flexion, and compression stiffness of the intact FE model were plotted and compared with those under identical loadings from the literature [49–56]. The results of the present study were similar to those reported in the literature (
                        Fig. 4), with a similar tendency. The results indicated that the study׳s model exhibited biomechanical responses representative of the L3-L4 spinal unit.

The results of the study models immediately after surgery indicated that the TC model achieved higher stability (least ROM) and lower von Mises stress in the cages and cortical bones than did either single-cage model (
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        Figs. 5–9). The SC model demonstrated a maximum ROM of 1.18° during flexion, whereas the SA model demonstrated a maximum ROM of 4.46° during extension. The peak von Mises stress in the cortical bones of the TC model immediately after surgery was 14.382 and 7.138MPa during flexion and extension, respectively. Under 2-Nm loading, the peak von Mises stress in the cortical bones during extension was 4.6 times higher in the SA model than in the TC model. Among the single-cage models without bone fusion, the SC model under 2-Nm loading showed lower peak von Mises stress in the cortical bones during extension than did the SA model, whereas the SA model showed lower peak von Mises stress in the cortical bones during flexion, side bending, and rotation than did the SC model under the identical loading. The SC and SA models exhibited the highest peak von Mises stress in the cage during flexion and extension, respectively, yielding a 6.9-fold higher value than that of the TC model during extension (484MPa vs. 69.8MPa) under 2-Nm loading.

The L3-L4 segment instrumented with porous cages achieved more stability after bone fusion than that immediately after surgery under identical loading (2-Nm), particularly during flexion and extension in the SCF and SAF models, respectively. Under identical loading (2-Nm), the ROM was decreased by 11% (from 1.18° to 1.05°) in the SCF model during flexion and by 66.5% (from 4.46° to 1.5°) in the SAF model during extension compared with the no-fusion models (Fig. 5). Except for during extension, bone fusion decreased the peak von Mises stress in the cortical bones of the SAF and TCF models under 2-Nm loading; furthermore, the TC model demonstrated a lower von Mises stress in the cortical bones after bone fusion than did the single-cage models (Figs. 6–9). The peak von Mises stress in the cortical bones of the TC model was 7.046 and 13.516MPa during extension and flexion, respectively. Among the single-cage models, the SAF model achieved higher stability and lower von Mises stress in the cortical bones and cages during flexion and side bending compared with the SCF model, whereas the SCF model achieved higher stability and lower von Mises stress during extension than did the SAF model. Under 2-Nm loading, the peak von Mises stress in the porous cages decreased from 339MPa (SC) to 284.5MPa (SCF) during flexion and from 484MPa (SA) to 249MPa (SAF) during extension after bone fusion.

The TCF model achieved higher stability (less ROM) and lower von Mises stress in the cortical bones and cages than did the single-cage models after bone fusion under 10-N·m loading. The SAF model exhibited the largest ROM (4.1°) during extension, whereas, in the TCF model, the ROM during extension was only 0.6° under 10-Nm loading (Fig. 5). The peak von Mises stress in the cortical bones of the SCF model increased 3.7 times (from 97.737 to 26.68) during side bending compared with the TCF model. The TCF model achieved lower von Mises stress in cages during extension (193MPa), side bending (385.1MPa), and rotation (176.3MPa) than did the single-cage models, whereas the SAF model demonstrated lower von Mises stress (362.5MPa) than did the TCF model (465.2MPa) during flexion.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, the immediate postsurgery and long-term effectiveness of porous lumbar cages instrumented by employing various PILF surgical techniques was investigated using the FE method. The cage pores were created using CAD software and were considered in the computation for calculating the internal biomechanical response of the porous cages. In the present simulations, three distinct surgical techniques—a single cage at the center of the intervertebral space, a single cage half-anterior to the intervertebral space, and two cages bilateral to the intervertebral space—and two bone fusion conditions—no fusion and bone fusion—were employed. The results revealed that, under either bone-fusion condition, two cages bilateral to the intervertebral space resulted in the highest stability (least ROM) and lowest von Mises stress in the porous cages (except during flexion) and cortical bones compared with the single-cage models.

Bone fusion increased the stability of the lumbar segments instrumented with the porous cage, resulting in a decreased ROM in the fusion models compared with the no-fusion models. The cage, ingrown bone, and surrounding vertebral bone integrate as one through osteointegration after bone fusion. Therefore, both tension and compression forces can be transferred after bone fusion. Under loading, the tension force prevents the bone surface away from the center of rotation from migrating out of the cage, thus increasing the stability of the lumbar spine after bone fusion (
                     Fig. 10b). Otherwise, under nonfusion conditions, only normal force can pass through the contact surfaces, with no constraining force preventing the aforementioned migration under loading (Fig. 10a). Therefore, the nonfused lumbar segment demonstrates a larger ROM than the fused segment under identical loading.

Another advantage of bone fusion is the reduction of von Mises stress in the cortical bones during flexion, side bending, and rotation, as observed in the SA and TC models. A common complication in a lumbar segment managed with cages is the failure of bone contact with the cages, which subsequently results in the subsiding of the cages. From a mechanical perspective, high stress can cause bone failure; thus, decreasing the stress facilitates reducing the failure of bone contact. Under 2-N·m loading, 7.7% (from 33.258MPa to 35.845MPa) and 24% (from 28.2MPa to 35.07MPa) increases in the peak stress were observed in the SAF model during extension and the SCF model during rotation, respectively. Nevertheless, the area with relatively high stress decreased after bone fusion (Figs. 6–9). The SCF model demonstrated higher stress in the cortical bones than did the SAF and TCF models during flexion, side bending, or rotation under 2-Nm loading with or without bone fusion and 10-Nm loading. This was attributed to the cage being located close to the center of rotation. In addition, the bilateral cage model resulted in lower von Mises stress in the cortical bones and cages because of a larger contact area and moment of inertia compared with the single-cage models.

The location of the cage is a key factor that affects the force transfer of the instrumented segment without bone fusion by altering the length of the moment arm, particularly immediately after the surgery. With an increase in the moment arm, the ROM of the lumbar segment increased, whereas the lumbar stability decreased. The moment arm during extension was longer in the porous cage located half-anterior to the intervertebral space than in the porous cage located at the center of the intervertebral space (Fig. 10c and d). However, this condition was reversed during flexion. The moment arm during flexion was longer in the porous cage located half-anterior to the center of the intervertebral space than in the porous cage located half-anterior to the intervertebral space (Fig. 10e and f).

Research on sheep spines has shown that porous titanium cages promote bone ingrowth and reduce ROM compared with PEEK cages at 6 months postsurgery [32] because of enhanced osteointegration. The surface properties of the porous titanium cages following surface treatment that includes an oxide layer of titanium dioxide and rough surfaces can aid absorption of fibronectin and promote osteoblast attachment and osteointegration through the binding of adsorbed fibronectin to surface-expressed osteoblast integrins [27]. These data support using porous lumbar cages to manage degenerated lumbar segments, thus achieving stability and restoring the disk height and neuroforaminal space.

Posterior instrumentation (i.e., pedicle screws and rods) is typically employed to increase the stability of the lumbar spine when using PEEK cages, particularly when only one cage is involved; however, the high stiffness produced by the posterior instrumentation can cause the adjacent segment to degenerate. In this study, only cages without posterior instrumentation were considered because the aim was to dissociate their contribution to bone ingrowth. Here, the ROM of the L3-L4 segment without bone fusion was observed to be high, particularly during extension under 2-Nm loading. Thus, to reduce the excessively stiff fixation caused by titanium rods, softer posterior instrumentation, such as PEEK or PLGA rods, must be considered for clinical surgery. Another advantage of using cages with softer posterior rods is the favorable loading transfer pattern, where more force is transferred via the anterior column (i.e., the cages) than via the posterior column (i.e., the rods); this is very similar to the natural conditions in human lumbar spines. Additional studies on the relationship between porous cages and posterior instrumentation are required.

This study had some limitations. First, the model was developed using medical images of a healthy subject without any spine pathology. In this study, constant vertebral body coordinates were maintained during the PLIF modeling; therefore, the normal (neutral) position of the L3-L4 segment was maintained. In clinical practice, the degenerated disk collapses, and the surgeons restore the disk space according to their experience. Second, only cages with 50% porosity (in addition to full bone ingrowth) were employed, consistent with the findings of a previous study [42]. The effects of partial bone ingrowth and cages with other porosities were not studied and therefore remain unclarified. Third, the simulated bone ingrowth could not be validated experimentally. To simplify the simulations, all materials were assumed to be homogeneous and isotropic; this might be inaccurate for multidirectional loading conditions. Only one motion segment was considered in the present simulation because excessive calculations for the number of elements and nodes would have been required if the other lumbar segments had been considered. The study׳s conclusion is based only on the present FE model; however, results may vary when additional motion segments are constructed and considered. Finally, trunk muscles, which may decrease stability when muscle contraction forces are lacking, were not considered.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The present FE model enabled simulating the biomechanical behavior of porous interbody cages in the L3-L4 spinal segment. The ROM of these segments instrumented with porous cages immediately after surgery and following bone fusion was analyzed. The effectiveness of bone fusion in enhancing the stability of the L3-L4 segment and reducing the peak von Mises of the cortical bones and porous cages with one or two cages was demonstrated. Porous titanium cages with 50% porosity can enhance the long-term stability of lumbar segments with degenerative disk disease; furthermore, using two cages is superior for achieving high stability in the lumbar segment. If only one cage can be used when managing a degenerated lumbar segment, higher stability is achieved by positioning the cage half-anterior to the intervertebral space compared with positioning it at the center of the intervertebral space.

The authors of this study have no financial or personal relationships that could inappropriately influence the results of the study.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors sincerely thank Feng Yuan Hospital of the Ministry of the Health and Welfare and Central Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taiwan, for financially supporting this research under contract FYH1030709-1.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

