@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Development of a novel computerised version of the Month Backwards Test: A comparison of performance in hospitalised elderly patients and final year medical students

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined performance on verbal and computerised versions of the months backward test in medical students and elderly medical inpatients.


                        
                        
                           
                           Performance on the two versions of the months backward test was similar but with slower completion times and more errors on the computerised version.


                        
                        
                           
                           The computerised version of the months backward test had higher correlation with the MoCA, especially the visuospatial domain.


                        
                        
                           
                           The computerised version of months backward test can provide rapid and reliable testing of cognitive function in clinical populations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cognition

Assessment

Months Backwards Test

MoCA

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and aims
                  The Months Backwards Test (MBT) is a commonly used bedside test of cognitive function, but there is uncertainty as to optimal testing procedures. We examined performance among hospitalised elderly patients and cognitively intact young persons with verbal and computerised versions of the test.
               
               
                  Participants and methods
                  Fifty acute elderly medical inpatients and fifty final year medical students completed verbal (MBTv) and computerised (MBTc) versions of the MBT and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). Completion time and errors were compared.
               
               
                  Results
                  Thirty four participants scored <26 on the MoCA indicating significant cognitive impairment. The mean MoCA scores in the elderly medical group (23.6±3.4; range 13–28) were significantly lower than for the medical students (29.2±0.6; range 28–30: p<0.01). For the verbal months backwards test (MBTv), there were significantly more errors and longer completion times in the elderly medical patients (25.1±20.9 vs. 10.5±4.5; p<0.05). Completion times were 2–3 times longer for the MBTc compared to the MBTv (patients: 63.5±43.9 vs. students 20.3±4.4; p<0.05). There was high correlation between the two versions of the MBT (r=0.84) and also between the MBTc and the MoCA (r=0.85). The MBTc had higher correlation with visuospatial function (MBTc r=0.70, MBTv r=0.57). An MBTc cut-off time of 30s for distinguishing performance (pass/fail) had excellent sensitivity (100%) with modest specificity (44%) for cognitive impairment in elderly medical patients.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  The computerised MBT allows accurate and efficient testing of attention and general cognition in clinical populations.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Automatic word sequences such as days of the week, months of the year and letters of the alphabet are universal to vocabulary [1]. These sequences are established through rehearsal and repetition during childhood [2]. Forward recall is ordinarily easier to perform and thought to test “automatic speech” in conditions with dysphasia or dyslexia [3–5]. Conversely, backward recitation draws upon a wider range of functions including the ability to focus and sustain attention, working memory as well as visuospatial imagery [2,6]. Neuro imaging studies indicate activation of more complex neural networks for backwards versus forwards recall of automatic word sequences [1,7–12] which are especially susceptible to the effects of aging and more likely to be impaired in the early stages of cognitive decline [1,2].

The Months Backwards Test (MBT), also known as the months reversed or months of the year in reverse order test is a brief word sequence production test used to assess cognition [6]. The MBT has been documented as a test of attention [13–15], concentration [16], declarative and working memory [1], non-automatic speech [2], executive function [17], cognitive flexibility [18] mental control [1] and processing speed [19]. The test requires the participant to recite the months of the year in reverse order, starting with December and working backwards until they reach January or cannot continue [2]. The test is often undertaken at the bedside or in everyday patient consultations but can also be conducted over the phone [6]. Typically, cognitively intact participants are able to complete the test within 20s [6].

Performance on the MBT is considered in terms of the ability to complete the test accurately without error and the time taken to reach completion [6]. MBT duration is extremely variable but highly correlated with accuracy [1,2,19,20]. Ostberg and coworkers found that it generally takes twice as long to recite the months backwards than the months forward [1]. MBT performance is impacted upon by educational attainment and age, with peak performance in the 30–60 year age group and thereafter an exponential relationship exists between MBT completion time and increasing age [2,6,19,21].

The MBT is generally a simple test to perform and complete without error, so much so that poor performance or failure to complete the test is highly suggestive of impairment [6]. The MBT has excellent coverage with, for example, the majority of memory clinic attendees able to complete an assessment with the MBT [1]. Other work indicates that 89% of high school athletes and 92% of university athletes could complete the test without error׳ [19,22]. The test has been applied as a screening tool for delirium to determine the risk of delirium developing in hospitalised patients [23,24], in the assessment of mild cognitive impairment and dementia, in the evaluation of cognition in those with Parkinson׳s disease and to judge concussion severity in sports [1,12,21,25,26]. However, a recent review [6] highlighted considerable inconsistencies in the administration and interpretation of the MBT in clinical testing and concluded that computer-assisted technology could provide presentation platforms that minimise such effects. As such, we developed a computerised version of the test presented on a touch-sensitive tablet device that focuses upon visual presentation but with the same general rules for performance (i.e. identifying the months of the year in reverse order).

This study examines how this novel computerised version compares with the standard verbal version of the MBT as well as with other tests of cognition in two contrasting groups – hospitalised elderly medical inpatients and cognitively intact young persons.

@&#METHODS@&#

Participants were from two distinct groups; (i) acute elderly medical inpatients aged ≥65 at University Hospital Limerick (n=50), and (ii) final year medical students undergoing clinical placement at UHL (n=50). Patients were recruited by referral from the elderly medical team according to willingness and perceived suitability in terms of morbidity to undertake cognitive testing. Overall, one hundred and six potential participants were approached; of these, 100 provided informed consent, five refused to participate and one was unable to provide informed consent.

All participants completed a 20min assessment that included screening with the Confusion Assessment Method for possible delirium and a neuropsychological battery which consisted of a verbal and computerised version of months of the year backwards (MBT) test and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Tool (MoCA) [27]. Baseline data such as age, gender, dementia status and medical morbidities were collected from medical records.

The presence of possible delirium was assessed using the diagnostic algorithm of the confusion assessment method (CAM) [28]. This requires the presence of (a) acute onset or fluctuating course, (b) inattention and either, (c) disturbed consciousness or (d) disorganised thinking. The CAM is the most widely used screening tool for delirium and has well demonstrated accuracy for delirium detection across clinical populations [29]. Prior to commencing the study, the researcher (L.O’D) underwent formal training in use of the CAM to establish acceptable accuracy and inter-rater reliability with experts familiar with its use (M.L., D.M.) (see below).

participants were requested to recite the months of the year in chronological order as quickly as possible (MFTv). This gauges basic contextual awareness and the participant׳s ability to engage, comprehend and co-operate with testing procedures [1,2,6].

participants were asked to recite the months of the year in reverse order as quickly as possible without error. MBT accuracy considers participant׳s ability to complete the test without error. Successful completion of the test involves the ability to correctly recount the months with minimal prompting [23]. It also measures how far each participant can reach without error [6]. Errors can be categorised as omissions, (e.g. “December…November…September”) or commissions, (e.g. “August….June….July….June”) but for this work, in keeping with recommendations from a detailed review of the MBT [6], only omissions were included as errors. Completing the test within 90s and with no more than one error is considered a successful performance [6]. Completion time (i.e. the time from commencement to cessation) was recorded in addition to incorrect responses.

The Computerised version of the Months Backwards test (MBTc) was presented via a computerised touch-sensitive tablet device. The months were presented in a consistent prearranged format as a series of buttons in a 3×4 grid across an A5-sized screen. The format was chosen from a series of randomly generated examples by virtue of its representation of a variety of separations between the months. Participants were asked to touch each month in reverse order, beginning with December. The tablet automatically recorded performance including time to completion and errors of commission or omission.

The Montreal Cognitive Assessment tool (MoCA) 
                           [27] was used as a measure of general cognition. This explores 8 distinct cognitive domains including visuospatial skills, executive functioning, memory, attention, language, conceptual thinking, concentration and orientation. The test takes approximately 10–15min to complete and is scored out of 30. Less than 26/30 is typically considered to be an indicator of impaired cognition. It has a high sensitivity and specificity for cognitive disorders including presence of mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer׳s disease [27].

Data was collected over a two week period at the University Hospital Limerick. Raters attended a training day to standardise administration of the CAM, MBT versions and the MoCA. Testing was conducted at the bedside or in a quiet location on the wards. The same sequence of testing was applied for each participant as follows; MFT, MBTv, MBTv, MoCA.

The study was approved by the University Hospital Limerick Research Ethics Committee (UHLREC). The procedures and rationale for the study were explained to all patients and relatives but because many patients had cognitive impairment at study entry it was presumed that some might not be capable of giving informed written consent. Because of the non-invasive nature of the study, ethics committee approval was given to augment patient assent with proxy consent from next of kin (where possible) or a responsible caregiver for all participants, in accordance with the Helsinki Guidelines for Medical Research involving human subjects [30].

The statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS-21 [31]. All variables were expressed as means and standard deviations. Data was tested for normality using the Shapiro–Wilks test and non-normal data was analysed using non-parametric tests. Medians of MFT, MBT and MoCA variables were compared with Mann–Whitney U tests. Correlations between MFT, MBTv, MBTc and MoCA were analysed using Spearman Rho. Chi-squared tests were used to explore if completion rates differed between verbal and computerised approaches of the MBT. Independent samples t-tests were used to compare times for the verbal and computerised versions of the MBT and between the medical student and medical inpatient group. Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values were calculated for the accuracy of a completion time of 30s on the MBTc for identifying significant cognitive impairment as defined by a MoCA score of less than 26 points. The level of agreement between the MBTc and MoCA for identifying cognitive impairment in the overall population and specifically for the elderly medical group was assessed using kappa coefficients.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The demographic and clinical characteristics of participants are shown in 
                        Table 1. Only one case of documented dementia was noted and all participants were CAM negative. Thirty four participants (all patients) scored below the MoCA threshold (26 points) for significant cognitive impairment. The mean MoCA scores in the elderly medical group (23.6±3.4; range 13–28) were significantly lower than for the medical students (29.2±0.6; range 28–30: p<0.01).

The months of the year forwards test (MFT) was accurately completed by all 100 participants. The mean completion time for medical inpatients (5.2±1.9s; range 2.9–12.5) was longer than for medical students (4.4±0.9s; range 3.1–6.7) but not at statistical significance (p=0.1).

Performance on the verbal months backwards test (MBTv) is shown in Table 1. For the 50 medical inpatients, 44 successfully completed the test. Of the 6 that failed to complete the test, all 6 made more than 4 errors and two were unable to complete the test within 90s. The mean time to completion was 25.1±20.9s (range 8.9–189s). Ten of the medical patients made some error on the verbal test (1 error (n=4), 4 errors (n=1) and 5 or more errors (n=5). Conversely, all of the medical students successfully completed the MBTv with a mean completion time of 10.5±4.5 (range 5.6–30.9) which was significantly shorter than for the elderly medical patients (25.1±20.9; range 4.2–89.7) (p<0.001). None of the medical students made errors on the MBTv.

Performance on the MBTc is shown in Table 1 and 
                        Fig. 1. Thirty eight of the medical inpatients completed the test within 90s, while 31 achieved this with <2 errors. The mean performance time was 63.5±43.9s (range 23.1–205.8). Twenty-six of the inpatients made some error on the computerised test. For the medical students, all 50 completed the MBTc in less than 90s with fewer than 2 errors. Their mean time to completion was 20.32±4.4 (range 11–36). Four of the students made 1 error on the computerised MBT. Both completion rates and times for the MBTc were significantly better in the medical students.

The Completion times for the elderly medical patients were on average 2.5 times longer for the MBTc versus MBTv (p<0.05). For the medical students, there was also a considerable difference with MBTc completion times on average twice as long as for the MBTv (p<0.05). There was modest correlation between the MFT and the MBTv (r=0.34) and MBTc (r=0.30), while the correlation between the two versions of the MBT was very high (r=0.84 for all participants; r=0.73 for patient group). 
                        Fig. 2 shows scatterplots depicting the relationship between performance on the MBTv and MBTc for students and patients. The level of correlation was greater for subjects who completed the test in less than 30s but was less clear for those (mostly patients) who had longer test completion times.

The breakdown of MoCA performance into overall score and score for individual cognitive domains is detailed in 
                        Table 2. There were significant differences (p<0.001) between the two groups in terms of overall performance and in respect of performance means for the domains of visuospatial function, comprehension, memory, attention, language and orientation.

The correlation between MFT, MBTv, MBTc and various MoCA domains is shown in 
                        Table 3. In contrast to the MFT, both versions of the MBT correlated highly with mean total MoCA scores (MBTc=0.85, MBTv=0.72) (see 
                        Fig. 3). The correlation between versions of the MBT and MoCA domains was highest (all >0.5) for visuospatial, memory and language domain performance. The two versions of the MBT differed most in respect of higher correlation with visuospatial function for the computerised version (MBTc=0.70, MBTv=0.57).

In order to identify a suitable cut-off performance to assist in the identification of cognitively impaired participantswe performed a ROC analysis examining time to complete the MBTc in those who scored ≥26 on the MoCA (n=66) versus those who scored below this threshold (n=34). For the whole group, the AUC was 0.96 (95% C.I. 0.93–0.99), with the cut-off time of 30.5s allowing 100% sensitivity with 82% specificity. However, when the analyses were restricted to the elderly medical group, the AUC was 0.85 (95% C.I. 0.74–0.96) with a sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 44%. An alternate cut-off time of 40.7s allowed for a sensitivity of 77% with specificity of 81% in the elderly medical group.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study examines performance amongst two contrasting groups on the months backward test delivered in conventional and computerised formats. We also examined the relationship between performance on different versions of the MBT and the MoCA, including its subdomains. We found high correlation between the standard verbal version of the MBT and a novel visually-presented computerised version, but with longer completion time with the computerised version. Performance on both versions of the MBT correlated highly with overall performance on the MoCA, with completion time on the MBTc especially highly correlated with total MoCA scores and in particular the visuospatial domain of function. Not surprisingly, the medical students performed better on virtually all aspects of the testing procedures while a substantial number of the elderly medical inpatients had evidence of significant cognitive impairment. Using a cut-off of 30s, we were able to demonstrate high sensitivity for detecting significant cognitive impairment as defined by MoCA score of 25 or less in the elderly medical population. These findings add further support to recent studies highlighting the potential usefulness of the MBT in assessing for cognitive impairment associated with conditions such as delirium, dementia, mild cognitive impairment and concussion [21,23,24,32,33]. The availability of a computerised version of the test can add greater precision and consistency to testing procedures that may in turn improve detection and management of these important and common conditions.

The conventional verbal version of the MBT is a popular means of assessing cognition as it is brief, simple to perform and evaluate, does not require any formal testing materials, and performance is relatively independent of motor and visual function [6]. It correlates highly with other test of cognition and can be applied in isolation or in conjunction with other cognitive assessment tools [2,6,19,21,34]. Test–retest reliability was found to be 0.90 amongst elderly participants in addition to 0.82 and 0.97 for response duration and accuracy respectively in cognitively intact adults [19]. Its relatively universal content facilitates its application in patients across a variety of clinical scenarios and settings [1,2,6,19–23]. In support, both versions of the MBT had full coverage of the populations described herein, with all participants able to engage with the test. The range of performances identified suggests that the MBT is of a suitable level of complexity to capture and separate different levels of performance across these two groups of differing cognitive functioning and well-being.

However, despite the relative versatility of the MBT, there is a need for greater consistency in how the test is applied and evaluated [6]. Definitions of MBT completion vary considerably in terms of requirement to complete all 12 months or merely reach July (if >65years), with additional uncertainty as to the optimal approach to assessing errors [18,22,23,35]. Moreover, a variety of cut off times (e.g. 60, 75 and 90s) have been suggested, after which the participant is considered unable to successfully complete the test [12,19,35]. The computerised version of the MBT has considerable capacity to improve the consistency in test presentation and scoring and this work highlights how performance correlates highly with the traditional verbally-delivered version. Not surprisingly, the elderly medical inpatients performed less well than the medical students on both versions of the MBT. However, the differences in terms of error rate and completion times were more striking with the computerised version on the test. For patients, the frequency of any error of omission was more than twice as high on the MBTc compared to the MBTv. For students, none made an omission errors on the MBTv while four made errors on the MBTc. In addition, the completion times for the computerised version were considerably longer than for the verbal test, ranging from twice as long in medical students to 2.5 times as long in the elderly medical inpatients. However, it should be noted that although the computerised version of the MBT requires a slightly longer testing time than the traditional verbal testing, this increase is very small in absolute terms and the overall testing (including interpretation) is still less than two minutes per subject which compares favourably with most bedside tests of cognition. Moreover, the potential for greater consistency in testing procedures and scoring supports any small increase in overall testing times. These findings also demonstrate how the MBTc is a more onerous test in terms of the range of mental and physical demands it places upon subjects, including greater emphasis on visuospatial and motor skills. Therefore, visual impairment or deficit in motor abilities of the hands may affect performance times. However, the broader range of functions exercised by the computerised version of the MBT allow for greater correlation with measures of general cognitive function. In support, we found that performance on the MBT correlated highly with total MoCA scores which provides a measure of general cognition. The MoCA is increasingly popular and has now outstripped the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) in terms of usage worldwide [36]. However, like the MMSE, the MoCA takes approximately 15min to administer which limits its applicability in repeated routine assessment of cognition in busy and time-pressurised modern healthcare environments.

Introducing cognitive assessment into routine everyday practice has been advocated as a means of improving the underdetection of neurocognitive disorders. However, this has considerable resource implications such that a two-staged approach to assessment of cognition can allow for efficient cognitive assessment of all patients [37,38]. This requires a simple and brief initial screening tool with high sensitivity for cognitive problems. We found that applying a cut off of thirty seconds allowed for very high sensitivity in detecting significant cognitive impairment (as per total MoCA scores of 25 or less) and raises the possibility that a computerised version of the MBT could be applied as a cognitive vital sign for systematic monitoring for cognitive difficulties in hospitalised patients. O’Regan and colleagues [23] found that the verbal MBT was more accurate than a variety of approaches, including the spatial span test, as a screening method for delirium in a general hospital population. Similarly, Adamis and coworkers [39] compared the MBT with other bedside tests of attention (digit span, vigilance A test, serial sevens) in elderly medical inpatients and found that it was the most sensitive single test for identifying delirium. These studies highlight the potential value of the MBT as a brief cognitive assessment tool such that the MBTc described herein may provide a highly reliable version for efficient screening of hospitalised populations.

Our study has some limitations. The cognitive tests were presented in a consistent order whereby verbal testing preceded the computerised MBT. This may have impacted performance in terms of either practice effects and / or fatigue and may explain some of the disparity between the MBTv and MBTc. However, the overall testing times were relatively brief and the degree of learning between a verbal and visual-computerised test of universal knowledge is likely to be minimal. Future studies can explore these issues by including randomisation of the sequence in which tests are presented. Of note, although the overall correlation between MBTv and MBTc was high, this was less evident for subjects with longer completion times. This finding is relevant to the interpretation of the MBTc in those with poorer cognitive performance, such as those with neurocognitive disorders such as delirium and dementia. The hospitalised sample was a convenience group who were deemed suitable for cognitive testing and without delirium. Also, documented prior dementia was evident in only one patient. Given the frequency of neurocognitive disorders such as delirium and dementia in hospitalised populations [40,41], further work is needed to examine how the computerised version of the MBT performs in more representative sample of hospitalised elderly patients with neurocognitive disturbances. Such work can examine how well patients with neurocognitive impairment engage with the additional functional challenges of the computerised test. Factors such as frailty, sensory and motor impairment, education level, and performance fatigue were not examined in this study but are likely to be factors that determine performance. These challenges, along with issues of visual clarity may be more problematic with the computerised version compared to the traditional verbal testing. The incorporation of finger scanning and digital recording technology can allow for more detailed examination of test performance and can enhance future larger studies that explore how performance on the MBTc varies across populations (e.g. palliative care, ICU, nursing homes) with differing clinical profiles and neurocognitive burden.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The MBT is a simple and versatile tool that allows for efficient and convenient bedside testing of cognitive function. We describe a computerised version of the test designed to minimise inconsistencies in testing and interpretation. Performance on this computerised version correlates highly with the traditional verbal test, but with longer completion times. This reflects the wider range of functions engaged in the computerised test which may allow for a more generalised assessment of cognition and well-being among hospitalised populations. Future work can explore the use of this tool in a variety of settings where efficient testing of cognitive abilities is required.

All authors made substantial contributions to: (1) the conception and design of the study [LD, TE, CE, ML, CD, JM, DA, DM], acquisition of data [LD, ML], and analysis and interpretation of data [LD, ML, CD, JM, DA, DM], (2) drafting the article [LD, TE, CE, ML, CD, JM, DA, DM], and (3) final approval of the version to be submitted [LD, TE, CE, ML, CD, JM, DA, DM].

None of the authors have any conflicts of interest to declare.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

