@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A new computational method for automatic dental measurement: The case of maxillary central incisor

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A new automatic approach (CATM) to measure accurately human teeth is proposed.


                        
                        
                           
                           
                              CATM evaluates dimensional features in algorithmic way from a 3D discrete model.


                        
                        
                           
                           
                              CATM shown to be more repeatable and reproducible compared to traditional approaches.


                        
                        
                           
                           Measurements can be carried out quickly.


                        
                        
                           
                           
                              CATM does not require an operator with special skills (dentist or orthodontist).


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

3D biomedical image analysis

Computer methods for tooth analysis

Dental dimensions

Measurement accuracy

Measurement protocols in biomedicine

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This paper proposes a new automatic approach to determine the accurate measure of human teeth. The aim of the proposed computer based method is to reduce inaccuracy of measurement with respect to traditional approaches. Starting from a 3D model of the teeth which is obtained from 3D scanning, the method algorithmically evaluates the most important dimensional features detectable in central incisors. For this purpose, specific rules are put forward and implemented in original software with a view to identifying repere points, from which to detect dimensional features both unambiguously and accurately. The automatic method which is proposed here is verified by means of the analysis of real teeth and is then compared with the current state-of-the-art methods for teeth measurement.
               
            

In dentistry, knowledge of root morphology is of great importance for endodontic, periodontal and orthodontic reasons. Whereas the endodontic morphology has been looked at in depth in many studies, the gross anatomy of root surfaces has been somewhat neglected. This is probably for clinical and methodological reasons. Clinically the anatomical variability of the canals and the need to describe all the variations and anomalies found in a clinical examination is difficult. Methodologically no standard techniques have been clearly identified.

In dental anatomy textbooks [1,2] definitions of tooth surfaces, features of each tooth and different crown and root morphologies have been reported, but no information can be found concerning the methodology used to identify them. This gives rise to a lack of standard protocols to perform a valid comparison of results obtained in different studies. Although in the literature many attempts concerning the acquisition of the 3D geometrical model of the teeth are reported by using different technologies (intraoral camera [3], CT imaging [4] and [5], laser scanning system [6], radiographs [7]), currently the investigations concerning the dimensional and morphological characterization of teeth are carried out in vitro by using the traditional sliding calliper [8]. Indeed, the 3D geometrical model does not furnish directly dimensional and morphological information, but a complex processing of 3D data are required. The complexity derives from the fact that geometrical and morphological features have to be preliminarily recognized from discrete models which contain just low level geometric information. Hermann [9] provided a method to determine the loss of ligament attachment in molars. This method includes the 1-mm dissection of the root and the measurement of the tooth circumference taken from projected color slides with a calibrated opisometer. Gher and Dunlap [10] have also used this method to take measurements of the molar root area. Storrer et al. [11] carried out a morphometric study of the maxillary lateral incisor root length using the digital calliper and described the grooves on the root surfaces. Fantozzi et al. [12] tried to standardize and update the root anatomy information by using a manual calliper and by setting reference points in order to determine the root tapering in the anterior tooth. More recently, with a view to improving the MCI morphological characterization and seeking relationship patterns so as to establish morphological groups, Lazos et al. [14] identified some new dimensional features.

As shown by an investigation carried out by the present authors [15] in previous work, the measurement uncertainties obtained on biological objects by the manual calliper, could be too wide for a significant investigation of the anatomical dimensions to establish morphological groups.

This paper presents a new method to measure the most important dimensional features detectable in central incisors. In the following, we refer to this method as CATM (Computer-Aided Teeth Measurement). A further aim of this study is to demonstrate the efficacy and precision of the computer based method which can give us more precise information about the dental macroanatomy and remove any possible human contribution to measurement inaccuracy. For this purpose, the potential inaccuracy of the manual calliper are examined and used as a point of comparison with the merits of the new computer based method.

The measurement protocol used in this study is the same as that used by Lazos et al. [14]. Each step, reference point and dimension are shown in 
                     Fig. 1:
                        
                           –
                           The tooth is placed along its longitudinal axis in a red wax support. This support is molded in order to guarantee the stability and allow location of the longitudinal axis;

The maximum crown contour or anatomic equator (E) is drawn on the tooth׳s crown with a graphic pencil;

On its labial side, the most apical point of the cement–enamel junction (CEJ) is marked as Point 1;

The most apical points of the anatomic equator are marked as Point 2 on the labial surface, and Point 3 on the lingual surface;

The most basal points of the equator on the mesial and distal surfaces are marked as Points 4 and 5, respectively;

Two reference points are marked in the root tooth (Points 6 and 7). For this purpose, a line surrounding the whole root is drawn 3mm from Point 1. Points 6 and 7 are on this line in the middle of labial and lingual surfaces.

The following dimensional features are identified (Fig. 1):
                        
                           –
                           Crown length (CL): defined as the distance between the CEJ (Point 1) to the incisal edge of the crown;

Total length (TL): defined as CL plus root length to the apex (total tooth length);

Cervical axial diameter or cervical convexity (CC): measured from Point 1 to Point 2;

Major mesio-distal diameter (MD): from mesial Point 3 to distal Point 4;

Minor mesio-distal diameter (md): parallel to MD at labial Point 2;

Root mesio-distal diameter (Rmd): parallel to MD at Points 6–7 height;

Crown buccolingual diameter (Cbl): from labial Point 2 to lingual Point 3;

Root buccolingual diameter (Rbl): from root labial Point 6 to root lingual Point 7.

The proposed method is performed in seven phases, as shown in the flow chart of 
                     Fig. 2. The first four steps, in which some interaction with the operator is necessary, are typical of any 3D geometric scanning procedure and serve to set up the geometric model to be submitted to the automatic measurement method. These procedures are coded and are consequently easily reproducible and repeatable. Once a valid geometric model is available, the last three phases perform the dimensional feature measurements in an algorithmic way, without any interaction with the operator. The 3D point acquisition can be performed with a 3D scanner. The acquisition consists of a 3D point cloud. The raw data coming from the acquisition process must be processed in order to obtain a valid and manifold geometric model. Although the point clouds acquired by a 3D scanner are the direct and dense measurement of the corresponding objects, single or even cluster outliers can nonetheless appear. Since the acquired data are of high quality in the method here proposed, the outliers are easily detected on the basis of the distance deviation in their nearest neighbors.

Since a human tooth cannot be acquired with a single scan, it is necessary, to firstly perform the acquisition in two stages (Fig. 2a) and, then, to combine the different acquisitions in order to obtain a single coherent point cloud. For this purpose, the single point clouds need to be registered in each other (Fig. 2b). In this paper, the registration of the point clouds is performed by the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm, and is assumed to have been performed successfully when the mean distance between the two point clouds is lower than 0.05mm. Once the two point clouds are registered, a uniform point sampling is performed in order to make the density of the point uniform at 0.1mm. Data smoothing is subsequently carried out so as to reduce the random noise which typically affects any measuring process. In the method presented here, the data are smoothed using a Gaussian filter set so as to produce a mean displacement of the points not exceeding 0.02mm. Finally, the point cloud is tessellated by a mesh-growing method [17,18], and a closed and oriented surface is obtained, which defines the solid geometric model of the teeth. The geometric model is described in the form which is typical of the STL standard file format.

With a view to implementing in an objective and repeatable way the repere point identification, the method which is being put forth preliminary determines the Local Reference System (LRS) of the MCI. A repeatable identification of the LRS requires that it should be defined through a robust protocol, which is based on some geometric or morphological evidence detectable on the tooth.

When the tooth is acquired in the form of a three-dimensional geometric model, new evidence can be detected from the knowledge of the complete geometric description of the tooth, which overcomes the limitations of any traditional approach. The protocol introduced in this work identifies the LRS by evaluating the Principal Component of inertia of the tooth (PCA) [16], which is an automatic operation that can be easily performed once the geometric model is known. PCA is a common technique for finding patterns in high-dimension data. In this study it is carried out by the Principal Component Analysis of the polyhedral surface by considering the masses associated with the barycenter of the triangles of the polyhedrons which are proportional to its area.

The LRS consists of three mutually orthogonal axes which come from the tooth barycenter. The longitudinal axis ζG
                         is associated with the lower inertia moment of the geometric model; it is the direction that identifies the tooth height (
                        Fig. 3a). In order to identify the positive direction of the axis ζG
                        , two sections (Γ
                        1 and Γ
                        2) of the tooth performed with two planes (Π
                        
                           1
                         and Π
                        2) are analyzed. The sectioning planes, Π
                        1 and Π
                        2, are perpendicular to ζG
                         and distant 3mm from two extremes of the tooth identified on ζG
                         (Fig. 3b). The section which needs to be located highly is the one which is the worst approximation of a circle (Fig. 3c). In what follows this section is referred to as Γ
                        
                           c
                        . The mesiodistal (ξG
                        ) and the labiolingual (ψG
                        ) axes are orthogonal to ζG
                         and they are found by analyzing the principal component of inertia of the planar section Γ
                        
                           c
                        . Thus, the mesiodistal axis is associated with a lower inertia moment. The reference frame of the tooth consists of three mutually orthogonal planes (mesiodistal Π
                        
                           M
                        , labiolingual Π
                        
                           L
                         and transversal Π
                        
                           T
                        ) as shown in Fig. 3d. The labial side of the tooth is distinguished from the lingual one by analyzing the curvature of the sectioning curve Γ
                        3 obtained by the intersection of the tooth with the labiolingual plane (ΠL
                        ) (Fig. 3e).

The following Fig. 3f–h shows the result of identifying the LRS for a 3D scanned tooth (Fig. 2f), the labial view (on the mesiodistal plane – 
                        Fig. 3g) and the proximal view (on the labiolingual plane – Fig. 3h). The next section describes the methods to identify typical repere points which are found in the related literature to measure the MCI. The nomenclature used to identify the repere points is the same used in literature.

A set of repere points can be identified on the proximal view. The proximal view of a tooth is the minimal hull curve (Γ
                        4) which contains the projection of the points (
                           
                              
                                 
                                    P
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Π
                                       
                                       
                                          L
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        ) of the tooth surface onto the labiolingual plane (Π
                        
                           L
                        ). On the curve Γ
                        4 four repere points (
                           P
                        
                        2, 
                           P
                        
                        3, 
                           P
                        
                        6, 
                           P
                        
                        7) can be identified. 
                        Table 1 reports the related rules. The repere point 
                           P
                        
                        1 is identified on the curve Γ
                        3. The curve Γ
                        3 can turn out to be quite different from Γ
                        4 due to the particular morphology of the tooth. Therefore, the identification of the repere point 
                           P
                        
                        1 can be more robust when it is performed on Γ
                        3 rather than Γ
                        4.

The eight repere points on the labial view (
                           P
                        
                        4, 
                           P
                        
                        5, 
                           P
                        
                        8, 
                           P
                        
                        9, 
                           P
                        
                        10, 
                           P
                        
                        11, 
                           P
                        
                        12, 
                           P
                        
                        13) are identifiable on the curve Γ
                        5 which is the labial view of the tooth. It is the minimal hull curve which contains the projection of the points (
                           
                              
                                 
                                    P
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Π
                                       
                                       
                                          M
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        ) pertaining to the tooth surface onto the mesiodistal plane (Π
                        
                           M
                        ). 
                        Table 2 reports the related rules.


                        
                        Table 3 highlights the rules to evaluate the eight dimensional features. The first three dimensions (TL, CL and CC) are the projection of the distance between two repere points on the axis ζ
                        
                           G
                        . The other dimensions are defined as the distance between a pair of repere points.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In order to evaluate both the manual caliber (MC method) and the proposed computer based method (CATM method), a series of experiments have been conducted on a set of 20 incisors. The incisors are extracted from adults over 18 years of age. All the teeth have a normal morphology and are clean, free of restorations and decay, and without excessive evidence of incisal wear. The testers are 12 medical students, in the fifth year of their medical course and are appropriately trained. The intra-tester repeatability and the inter-tester reproducibility of the sliding calliper measurements have been made according to the previously reported protocol. All the testers have been blinded to the results of the measurements. The same set of teeth are scanned by a calibrated FARO® Edge, 9ft (2.7m) laser scanner (where single point repeatability varies from 0.024mm to 0.064mm and the average point spacing of the point cloud has been set to 0.1mm) and processed by an original software, coded in MATLAB, which implements the CATM method.

In order to evaluate the Intra-tester repeatability (TRA) of the MC method, the 12 testers performed 50 measures for each dimensional feature of a tooth randomly extracted from the sample. Regarding the CATM method the same tooth has been scanned 20 times by the 12 different operators, under the same operative conditions. Each set of measures were tested for normality using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. The Intra-tester repeatability is evaluated as the standard deviation of the performed measures. The 
                     Table 4 reports the results of the comparison between the two methods. Since the parameters obtained by CATM are calculated algorithmically, its variability is affected mainly by the scanning process and by the geometric model setup. The principal factors are:
                        
                           –
                           the sample rate of the model;

the measuring noise;

the registration process.

Except for the dimensional feature TL, whose repeatability is the same (0.08) in both methods, the uncertainty (TRA
                     
                        mean
                     ) of the CATM method is always lower, with a minimal decrease of 39% for CL and a maximum decrease of 87.5% for md (Table 4). The maximum value of uncertainty (TRA
                     
                        mean
                     ) for CATM method is performed for the dimensional features CC (0.11) and CL (0.1). Both these features are derived from the repere point 
                        P
                     
                     1, that is detected by the curvature analysis, which is very sensitive to measurement noise. The traditional method is not repeatable: the uncertainties can vary greatly from one tester to another as evidenced in the difference between the minimum and maximum values of the observed TRA. On the contrary, the uncertainty of the CATM method is quite independent from the operator which performs the scanning.

In order to evaluate the inter-tester reproducibility, each of the 12 testers performed three measurements of each dimensional feature of the same tooth, both by the caliber and by the 3D scanner. Each of the values of the dimensional features is performed as the mean of the three measures. The inter-tester reproducibility (TER) was evaluated as the standard deviation of the 12 measures performed, for each dimensional feature, by each tester. 
                     Table 5 reports the mean, the minimum, and the maximum values of the performed measures together with the inter-tester reproducibility for each dimensional feature, for the two methods. The reproducibility of the CATM method (Table 5) is higher than that shown by the calliper for all the dimensional features: the TER value is on average 6 times lower than that obtained with the calliper. Table 5 also reports the normalized standard deviation. It is possible to verify that, except for TL and CC, the results obtained with the CATM are, at least, one order of magnitude lesser of those from MC. The Ratio md/MD which is used to create morphological group [14] of MCI is also reported. Three different categories are identified:
                        
                           –
                           
                              Ratio md/MD >0.83: Stout;

0.72≤Ratio md/MD ≤0.83: Intermediate;


                              Ratio md/MD <0.72: Strangled.

The range of the Intermediate category is 0.11. Both the intra-tester repeatability and the inter-tester reproducibility represent about 15% of the Intermediate category interval. The uncertainty is so large that the minimum value measured (Table 5) identifies the Strangled tooth, whereas the maximum one identifies the Intermediate tooth. These results show calliper based morphological measurements are poor.


                     
                     Table 6 reports the mean, the minimum, the maximum and the standard deviation values for the eight dimensional features of the set of teeth used for the experimental tests. The data show that the set of teeth being used has characteristics which are similar to the set of teeth used elsewhere [14]. It is possible to observe that, in some cases, the two methods produce results concerning the same set of analyzed teeth, which are different. These differences are more evident in the case of dimensional features which are intrinsically more difficult to be measured by the calliper.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this paper we have presented a new computer based method for the automatic measurement of teeth. Starting from a 3d manifold discrete model of a tooth, the method algorithmically detects the associate local reference system, identifies the repere points and evaluates eight dimensional features. The greatest advantage of using the proposed method seems to be more evident when comparing the results reported in 
                     Table 7, where the dimensional features of four teeth, estimated with the two methods are compared. Regarding the performance of those two methods in the estimation of the parameter md/MD, it is possible to observe that the estimated value can yield a contradictory attribution of the morphology category of the teeth as defined by [14]. However, it is important to notice that the method which has been presented in this paper shows a degree of uncertainty in md/MD estimation which is an order of magnitude lower.

Measurements can be carried out quickly and the method does not require an operator with special skills, such as a dentist or orthodontist. Future improvements may take advantage of the 3D geometric data representation of the teeth, which, in turn, may enable the implementation of new dimensional parameters, which cannot be performed using traditional approaches.

The authors have NO affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants; participation in speakers׳ bureaus; membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest; and expert testimony or patent-licensing arrangements), or non-financial interest (such as personal or professional relationships, affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

