@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Application of an anatomically-detailed finite element thorax model to investigate pediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation techniques on hard bed

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A 10 years old child thorax FE model was used to evaluate CPR loading techniques and compression rates.


                        
                        
                           
                           The rib responses were studied and considered as a complementary evaluation for CPR quality.


                        
                        
                           
                           The effect of chest stiffness was studied by introducing a softer and stiffer chest.


                        
                        
                           
                           The child FE model provided the research community a more child-like surrogate for studying CPR.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cardiopulmonary resuscitation

Finite element model

Hard bed

Rib injury

Chest deflection

Compression rate

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Objectives
                  Improved Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) approaches will largely benefit the children in need. The constant peak displacement and constant peak force loading methods were analyzed on hard bed for pediatric CPR by an anatomically-detailed 10 year-old (YO) child thorax finite element (FE) model. The chest compression and rib injury risk were studied for children with various levels of thorax stiffness.
               
               
                  Methods
                  We created three thorax models with different chest stiffness. Simulated CPR׳s in the above two conditions were performed. Three different compression rates were considered under the constant peak displacement condition. The model-calculated deflections and forces were analyzed. The rib maximum principle strains (MPS׳s) were used to predict the potential risk of rib injury.
               
               
                  Results
                  Under the constant peak force condition, the chest deflection ranged from 34.2 to 42.2mm. The highest rib MPS was 0.75%, predicted by the compliant thorax model. Under the normal constant peak displacement condition, the highest rib MPS was 0.52%, predicted by the compliant thorax model. The compression rate did not affect the highest rib MPS.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Results revealed that the thoracic stiffness had great effects on the quality of CPR. To maintain CPR quality for various children, the constant peak displacement technique is recommended when the CPR is performed on the hard bed. Furthermore, the outcome of CPR in terms of rib strains and total work are not sensitive to the compression rate. The FE model-predicted high strains were in the ribs, which have been found to be vulnerable to CPR in the literature.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) was first introduced in the 1950s. In the past few decades, CPR gradually becomes a key emergency procedure for saving the life of victims with cardiac and respiratory arrest [1,2]. Without guidelines, CPR has been performed on floor, stretcher, ICU soft bed, etc. As can be expected, mechanical properties of the place where CPR performed would influence its patient outcomes. A number of studies have been performed to investigate the effect of beds׳ properties and back support for the quality of CPR [3–9]. These data show that the quality of CPR is better when CPR is performed on hard bed due to increased chest compression [3,8–10]. Despite these reports, emergency CPRs for children while in-hospital were performed mostly on soft bed [11,12]. In order to improve the quality of CPR on soft bed, a backboard was recommended to be inserted under the patient to decrease the deflection of soft mattress by the 2005 International Consensus on Resuscitation Science [13]. Despite this recommendation, there was still active debate as to what extent the beneficial or detrimental influence of backboards on the effectiveness of CPR [2].

In clinical environment, two conventional loading techniques are available: the constant peak displacement technique and the constant peak force technique. The blood flow during CPR is generally considered to be linearly correlated with the depth of chest compression [14] and the CPR guideline has clearly prescribed the chest compression depth for patients of different ages [13]. As a result, the constant peak displacement technique was mostly used since it offered a direct approach to control the chest compression. However, when the CPR was performed by a Thumper mechanical resuscitator (Michigan Instruments, Grand Rapids, MI) or by a smaller adult rescuer, who likely used his/her torso weight, the constant peak force technique was inevitably adopted [7]. Boe and Babbs [7] stated that for a fixed sternal depression distance, which is presented under the constant peak displacement condition, the actual chest deflection would decrease with increasing bed deflection. While the constant peak force technique could ensure enough depth of sternum-to-spine compression on all but the softest bed, at the expense of greatly increased work by the rescuer [7]. Dellimore and Scheffer [15–16] used the theoretical model developed by Boe and Babbs [7] to further study these two loading techniques and concluded that the constant peak force techniques provides reasonable prediction of chest compression mechanics over a range of clinically relevant chest compression rates during CPR. To date, no comprehensive comparison study of these two loading techniques when the CPR is performing on the hard bed for children has been reported.

Mechanical factors of victims also affect the quality of CPR. Nishisaki et al. [3] considered the effects of victims׳ mass for chest compressions and found that a lighter torso weight was associated with a larger mattress displacement thus resulting in a smaller chest compression for CPR performed on soft ICU bed without backboard. Dellimore and Scheffer [15] reported that the optimal chest compression performance strongly depended on back support stiffness, chest compression rate, and the thoracic stiffness of the patient being resuscitate. To the best of the authors׳ knowledge, most studies were based on resuscitation manikin or simplistic mathematical model without considerations of varying chest stiffness of the victim. Additionally, these surrogates did not include the complex anatomical structures of the thorax to allow the measurement of rib strain, which is an explicit indicator of the risk of rib fracture. Consequently, the global chest compression is used as the standard to judge the CPR quality. Unfortunately, while deeper chest compression CPR has a higher probability of saving lives, it may also has a higher probability of causing injuries, such as skeletal fractures, upper airway complications, pulmonary barotraumas, hemothorax, and lacerations of internal organs [1]. More studies are recommended to optimize CPR technique to maintain high life-saving probability while minimizing injury risk. Therefore, the potential injuries of victims need to be considered as a complementary standard for determining the quality of a CPR. The FE anatomically-detailed thorax model can be used to predict the exact rib strains and compare the strain predictions to the literature data on rib damage [17]. As such, the FE anatomically-detailed thorax model is needed and can be used as an important tool to study CPR.

To study how variations of the pediatric victim chest affect CPR quality and evaluate potential risks of injury due to pediatric CPR, a detailed biomechanical pediatric thorax surrogate is needed. Traditionally, adult cadaver subjects were used to evaluate safety countermeasures or to study how external impacts affect internal body responses [18–21]. However, due to regulatory and ethical concerns, pediatric cadavers are rarely used for biomechanical experiments. To the best of our knowledge, only a handful of experiments have used pediatric cadaveric specimens [22–24]. Furthermore, postmortem examination on pediatric subjects was also rarely performed to investigate patterns of injuries [25]. In recent years, FE models with detailed representation of complex anatomical features have been used to calculate regional responses, such as the tissue-level strain and stress, and to associate with the risk of injury upon impact [17,26,27]. These works proved that FE models could be used to study biomechanical injury and reduce the dependence on cadaveric studies. Therefore, some child FE models were developed and validated to study the biomechanics of injury in children. For example, a plurality of child head FE models were developed and validated against accident reconstruction or experimental data [27–30]; the other whole 3YO child FE model was also developed by Mizuno et al. [31] and validated against scaling responses data from that of adults. As such, the child FE models are very useful and important tools to study the biomechanics of injury in children. In this study, a 10 year-old (YO) child thorax FE model with detailed rib structures and internal organs was used to evaluate two different CPR loading techniques (constant peak displacement technique and constant peak force technique) with victims laying on a simulated hard bed. The rib responses during CPR were investigated and considered as a complementary standard for CPR quality aside from chest compression and work consumed during CPR. Lastly, the effect of chest stiffness was studied by introducing a softer chest and a stiffer chest in additional to a normal chest.

@&#METHODS@&#

A 10 YO child thorax model, which was originally developed by Jiang et al. [32], was adopted in this study. This model was chosen because it had been validated against clinical CPR data using the explicit simulation code: LS-DYNA (LSTC, Livermore, CA). Detailed developmental procedures of the model could be seen from Jiang et al. [32]. Briefly, the geometric data of this model was taken from clinical CT and MRI scans of children (10 years±6 months) treated at Children׳s Hospital of Michigan (CHM). A series of procedures were adopted to reconstructed 10 YO child geometry based on anthropometric external dimensions data reported by Snyder et al. [33]. The cartilage/rib length ratio and rib angle of the final reconstructed 10 YO child model were also match the literature values. The cartilage/rib length ratios of rib level 1–7 were 0.37, 0.19, 0.20, 0.23, 0.29, and 0.36 respectively in the FE model which fell within costal index function of rib level for the age group (8–11YO children) reported by Sandoz et al. [34]. The ANSYS ICEM CFD/HEXA (ANSYS, Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, USA) was used to mesh solid elements for the bony skeleton and organs. Hypermesh (10.0, Altair, Troy, MI, USA) was used to generate the shell/membrane elements for the cortical bones and skins. In total, 242,266 hexahedral, 1524 pentahedral and 188,318 shell and membrane elements were used. The CONTACT_AUTOMATIC_SURFACE_TO_ SURFACE and CONTACT_AUTOMATIC_SINGLE_SURFACE were used to handle the interaction amongst the skeleton, internal organs, and flesh.

In our pervious study [32], the ranges of material parameters for the 10 YO child were scaled from the adults׳ data [35–44]. Readers are referred to Jiang et al. [32] for details of the scaling methods. Despite the limitation of the scaling between child and adult, the similar scaling methods were also used by Mizuno et al. [31]. According to the 10 YO child average chest stiffness, the final material parameters for this 10 YO child thorax FE model which was shown in 
                     Table 1 was chosen by a material property sensitivity study in the scaled material parameters ranges [32]. The 10 YO child average chest stiffness was calculated from the clinical CPR data which were collected from six children (10.5±1.75 YO) as reported by Maltese et al. [45], and the value was 7363.5±1985.5N/m. The chest stiffness of the final 10 YO thorax FE model was 7359.2N/m, which was only 0.1% lower than the 10 YO child average chest stiffness. As such, the final FE model from Jiang et al. [32] was used as the baseline model with normal chest stiffness in this study. By altering the material parameters of the flesh, rib, coastal cartilage, and internal organs, the other two FE thorax models representing stiff and compliant pediatric chests were developed. Based on the normal stiffness model, the material parameters of the flesh, rib cortical, rib spongy, and internal organs were increased or decreased by 30% to obtain the stiff or compliant pediatric thorax models, respectively.

In the clinical CPR measurements, the average maximum chest deflection and force from a total of six cases were 37.5±1.9mm and 267.5±23.3N, respectively [45]. Based on these results, 267.5N was defined to simulate the constant peak force condition while 37.5mm was used to mimic the constant peak displacement condition. In the normal constant peak displacement condition, a sinusoidal waveform of the displacement–time curve was implanted at the center of gravity of the force–deflection sensor (FDS), and the maximum loading rate was consistent in the clinical CPR by adjustment of the loading curve period. The frequency of this sinusoidal waveform fell within the range which was stipulated by the CPR guidelines (at least 100 but not greater than 120 times/min). By altering the time duration of normal loading curve, the additional two constant peak displacement conditions representing a slow and a fast loading were obtained to study the effects of compression rate on CPR. In order to keep the maximum loading rate of fast and slow conditions within the maximum clinical thoracic deflection rate range (0.25±0.04m/s) of CPR [45], the time duration of loading curve was increased and decreased by 16% to obtain the slow and fast conditions based on the normal constant peak displacement condition, respectively. In the constant peak force condition, the loading curve was force–time curve which was obtained from simulation results of nominal model under the constant peak displacement condition, and was also implanted at the center of gravity of the FDS. The FDS model was placed on the chest midway between the manubrium and xyphoid processes, centered in the sagittal plane. The size of FDS model are set as 127mm long and 62mm wide according the clinical CPR data reported by Maltese et al. [45]. A rigid plate without any deflection was used to model the hard bed. The loading direction was perpendicular to the rigid bed. The CONTACT_AUTOMATIC_SURFACE_ TO _SURFACE was used to model the interaction between the thorax model, hard bed, and FDS. In order to generate a steady initial condition, a technique described by Tamura et al. [46] which applied gravity for 120ms to the thorax model to initiate contact with the bed and thorax was adapted.

In total, 12 cases of simulation were performed for studying the loading techniques and compression rates (
                     Table 2). In the each simulation, the displacement–time history was outputted at the top and middle face of FDS during the simulations. The contact force between the thorax and FDS was outputted at same output frequency as the displacement–time data. From the displacement–time and contact force–time curves, the force–deflection curve can be obtained and used to calculate the peak force, peak displacement, thoracic stiffness and total work.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The time step size of this FE thorax model was 5.4×10−4
                     ms. The total simulated time of each CPR simulation which included the loading and unloading stage of CPR were different for simulations with various loading rates. The computational time for one CPR simulation was about 36h with 32 nodes for a normal rate CPR compression with baseline thorax model.

A total of six simulations (cases 1–6) were used for analyzing the effects of different loading techniques. Each loading technique (constant peak force technique or constant peak displacement technique) was simulated for the normal, stiff, and compliant thorax models. Models calculated peak chest deflection, peak force, highest rib maximum principle strain (MPS), and total work are shown in Table 2. The maximum peak force was 300.3N predicted by the stiff chest model under the constant peak displacement condition (Case 6). The compliant chest experienced a maximum peak chest deflection of 42.2mm and a peak rib MPS of 0.75% under the constant peak force condition (Case 1). The total work was affected by the stiffness of thorax. Under the constant peak force condition, the total work decreased with increasing chest stiffness. Under the constant peak displacement condition, the total work increased with increasing stiffness of chest. Typical contour plots of the MPS for the normal child ribs are shown in 
                     Fig. 1. The locations of the highest MPS within each rib are shown in red (Fig. 1). The MPS were much higher for ribs 2–5 (Fig. 1). The peak rib strains in constant peak displacement loading condition were similar as those in constant peak displacement loading condition, while low stiffness model tends to experience high rib strains during constant peak force loading condition (
                     Table 3).

A total of nine simulations (cases 4–6 and 7–12) were analyzed for the effects of compression rate. Under the constant peak displacement condition, three loading curves with different time durations were simulated for the normal, stiff, and compliant thorax models. Model-predicted peak chest deflection, peak force, peak rib MPS, and total work are shown in 
                     Table 4. The maximum peak force and total work were 302.8N and 4.90J, respectively, predicted by the stiff chest model under the fast condition (Case 12). The peak rib MPS and peak chest deflection predicted by the same FE model were equal under the conditions with different loading rates.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, we investigated pediatric CPR on hard bed for three 10 YO thorax models with stiffness ranging from 6000 to 8000N/m. In real world, literatures indicated that the chest stiffness may vary from one individual to another, depending on age, weight, material property of tissues, and so on [23,47]. For example, Maltese et al. (2008) [45] reported that the chest stiffness of six children ranged from about 5000 to 10,000N/m. Also, the thoracic stiffness and viscosity were reported to decrease with time during the CPR [48]. The models used in this study reasonably represent the spectrum of pediatric chest stiffness.

On the hard bed under constant peak force condition, the highest rib MPS predicted by the compliant thorax model was 0.75%, an increase of 56.3% compared to the peak MPS predicted by the normal thorax model. Under the constant peak displacement condition, the highest MPS predicted by the low stiffness thorax model was 0.52%, an increase of only 13.0% compared to the MPS predicted by normal stiffness thorax model (
                     Fig. 2). This meant that the highest rib MPS was greatly affected by the stiffness of the thorax under the constant peak force condition on the hard bed. In clinical environment, when CPR was performed on the hard bed under the constant peak force condition, it is speculated that there was a greater risk of rib injury for the victim who had a low stiffness chest.

The target chest deflection for all constant peak displacement simulations was defined as 37.5mm. On the other hand, the resulting maximum chest deflection ranged from 34.2 to 42.2mm for the stiff and compliant chests, respectively, under the constant peak force condition. The chest deflection for the stiff thorax model under the constant peak force condition (Case 3) was 8.8% lower than that selected to represent the constant peak displacement technique. This finding demonstrated that a child with a stiff chest would experience a smaller chest compression using the constant peak force technique. On the contrary, chest deflection reached 42.2mm for the soft chest child under the constant peak force loading (an increase of 12.5% compared to the target displacement in Case 1). The extra chest compression would increase the highest rib MPS and then increase the risks of rib injury. These results indicated that the constant peak displacement technique, which allows accurate control of the chest deflection, can be used to avoid low-quality CPR as well as not to increase the risk of rib injuries.

Taking cases 1–6 into consideration, the highest rib MPS was 0.75%, predicted by the low stiffness chest model under the constant peak force condition. Such a value was still much less than the ultimate tensile strain reported for adult ribs (1.27%±0.55%) by Kemper et al. [37]. According to the age dependence of femoral cortical bone [49], many of studies had scaled the adults bone material properties and injury criteria to obtain that of children [31,50,51] and stated that pediatric bones were much softer than those of an adult, but could undergo larger deflection before fracture. As such, results of the highest rib MPS predicted in this study indicate that CPR usually does not cause rib injury in children, if the value of chest deflection falls within a reasonable range. The finding of the minimal risk of rib fracture is consistent with those reported in the literature [1,52]. On the other hand, although very rare, rib fractures were still found on child CPR victims. The positions of fracture occurred at the bilateral ribs 2–5 in one child, ribs 2–6 on the right side of the other child [53], and at the sternochondral junction of ribs 8 and 9 [1]. The anatomically-detailed thorax model could not only predict the magnitudes of MPS, but also the locations. The locations of the high rib MPS predicted by the FE models in this study were on ribs 2–5 (Fig. 1). Simulation results indicated that ribs 2–5 had a greater possibility of rib injury which was in line with literature findings. Such conclusions could not be yielded with a simple mechanical or mathematical model. In the current version of the thorax FE model, the sternochondral junction was simplified due to lack of detailed anatomical information of junction and appropriate mesh size. As such, the injury of sternochondral junction was not investigated. The newest clinical resuscitation guidelines prescribe target for CPR of the child chest compressions is one-third the anterior–posterior child chest depth [54]. For simulation cases in this study, all of the chest compressions were still lower than the clinical target. Using the baseline thorax FE model, one more simulation with 50.7mm compression depth which was one third of the anterior-posterior (AP) chest depth for a 10 YO child was conducted. Based on this simulation, the pattern of rib MPS contour was similar to the baseline Case 5 with 37.2mm compression depth. The highest MPS was 0.77%, and occurred in rib 3. This value of highest MPS was still much lower than the ultimate tensile strain for the adult rib tested by Kemper et al. [37]. As such, the risk of rib injury was low for 10YO children when the clinical recommended one third of the AP chest depth was adopted.

The simulation results have proved that the thoracic stiffness of patient has great effects on the chest compression and risk of rib fracture during the CPR. More factors of victims, such as the rib angle, cartilage/rib length ratio, and the thoracic organs/rib cage volume ratio also can be considered using the detailed thorax model, besides thorax stiffness in the future. Considering the effects of pediatric patients׳ thoracic stiffness is a vital step in improving the quality of CPR. However, the values of thoracic stiffness of different patients are varied [15,16,45,55] and the thoracic stiffness for the same patient changed during CPR [16,48]. Although using the automated feedback can eliminate the effects of patients׳ factor to improve the quality of the CPR, Ødegaard et al. [56] reported that the ambulance personnel were more afraid of causing patient injury and trusted their own opinions, thus causing shallow chest compressions. As such that, choosing a loading technique which has the least effects by the patients׳ factor for chest compression and less risk of rib fracture is an effectively method to improve the quality of CPR. Through computational simulation, the constant peak displacement method is recommended.

The thorax was considered as a viscous structure, and force–deflection curve predicted by the thorax model also demonstrated viscous responses during the CPR unloading stage, as seen in real world CPR [32]. However, the results on the effects of compression rate demonstrated that the compression rate had a minimal effect on CPR. Only the total work and peak force were slightly increased with high loading rate. Additionally, Using viscous rib definition referred to the adult model [42], we found that the changes of peak force, total, work and rib MPS were less than 1.5%, 1.6%, and 1.3% for high- and low-rate loading cases, compared to that from normal-rate loading case. Melvin et al. [57] reported that apparent initial stiffness was not affected when the loading velocities were lower than 1.3, and the plateau force was not affected for loading rates below 3.73m/s. The max compression rate (0.29m/s) during the clinical CPR was much lower than 1.3m/s. As such, the effects of compression rate on the rib injury risk, peak force, and peak chest deflection could be ignored under the constant peak displacement condition during the clinical CPR according to present study. However, the effects of compression rate on injury risk of viscous internal organs still need to be considered in the future due to the sensitivity of viscous materials to loading velocity.

Some limitations to this study should be mentioned. First, the model using in this study was developed previously and the material properties of this model were scaled from adults׳ data. More validations of scaling method such as Agnew et al. [58] are needed to further improve the accuracy of this model. In addition, the compliant and stiff pediatric chests were developed by decreasing/increasing the material parameters of the flesh, rib, coastal cartilage, and internal organs by uniform percentage (30%). Although this method could best maintain contributions of different tissues on the thoracic stiffness, changing the stiffness differently regarding the type of material may be more realistic. As such, two additional thorax models were simulated. Additional model 1: The rib stiffness was decreased, but the flesh and internal organs were not changed. Additional Model 2: The rib stiffness was increased, but the flesh and internal organs were not changed. These two models were exercised under the normal constant peak displacement condition, and the results were compared with those of compliant, normal, and stiff thorax models (cases 4–6). Putting together (shown in 
                     Table 5), peak force and total work from additional thorax model 1 fall in the range between stiff model and normal model. Peak force and total work from additional thorax model 2 fall in the range between compliant model and normal model. It should be noted that the additional model 1 with soft rib and normal soft tissue experienced highest rib MPS (0.54%) and the additional model 2 experienced lowest rib MPS (0.39%). Second, the geometry data of this model were taken from CT and MRI. The external dimensions were compared with the data reported by Snyder et al. [33] which were referred to develop the Hybrid III 10YO dummy [59]. If needed, the FE child thorax model presented in this study can be morphed to match the most updated morphology data. Third, although experimental validations of this model under dynamic loading condition were conducted [17], the organ injuries were still not considered due to insufficient validation data for organ responses under in vivo condition. Sandoz et al. [60] and Zhu et al. [61] reported in vivo mechanical responses of the child trunk during respiratory physiotherapy. However, the age range of children was from 45 days old to 7YO reported by Sandoz et al. [60]; and from 5 to 15 months old as reported by Zhu et al. [61]. More data about 10YO children are warranted to improve the FE model. Fourth, the soft bed and the stiffness of back support were not considered in this study, mostly due to the uncertain variances of the nonlinear soft bed stiffness. In the future, more clinical data will be collected from hospitals to further study the back support properties׳ effect on CPR. At last, the value of peak force was not equal to that of loading force and “constant” as suggested by the constant peak force condition. The main reason was that the force-balance status of FDS was not achieved at the termination time of simulations. In order to keep the consistent frequency of CPR similar to that in the real world and also all the normal-rate simulations in this study, the cases with the constant peak force condition were not extended to reach the force balance status.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The simulation results revealed that the thoracic stiffness of patients had significant effects on the quality of CPR. In order to reduce this effect, the constant peak displacement technique is recommended to provide stable CPR chest compression quality and minimize rib injury probability for the CPR on the hard bed. Furthermore, the outcome of CPR in terms of rib strains and total work are not sensitive to the compression rate under the constant peak displacement condition. In the future, the FE model can be further used to optimize the CPR puck shape to minimize thorax injuries, and to study the effect of varying backboard stiffness used with soft beds.

We declare that we have no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors appreciate Dr. Matthew R. Maltese from Children׳s Hospital of Philadelphia for his help on CPR simulation and useful discussion. The financial support of the first author is provided by a scholarship from China Scholarship Council. Lastly, Toyota׳s Collaborative Safety Research Center funded Wayne State Bioengineering Center for 10 YO Finite Element Model development.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

