@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Advising patients on selecting trustful apps for diabetes self-care

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A proposed method to help patients identify trustful apps for diabetes self-care.


                        
                        
                           
                           A pictorial identification schema is used to review diabetes self-care apps.


                        
                        
                           
                           This method does not require specific skills.


                        
                        
                           
                           Two different profiles apply the tool on the selected apps and discuss the results.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Medical informatics computing [L01.700.568]

Data display [F02.784.412.221]

Mobile applications [L01.224.900.685]

Diabetes mellitus [C18.452.394.750]

Self care [N02.421.784.680]

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  There has been a dramatic increase in mobile apps for diabetes self-care. However, their quality is not guaranteed and patients do not have the appropriate tools for careful evaluation.
               
               
                  Objective
                  This work aims to propose a tool to help patients with diabetes select an appropriate app for self-care.
               
               
                  Methods
                  After identifying the conceptual framework of diabetes self-care, we searched Apple US app store and reviewed diabetes self-care apps, considering both generic and diabetes-specific features. Based on an existing tool for representing the benefits and weaknesses of medical apps, we created the pictorial identification schema/Diabetes Self-care tool, which specifically identified medical apps in the diabetes domain.
               
               
                  Results
                  Of the 952 apps retrieved, 67 were for diabetes self-care, while 26 were excluded because they were not updated in the last 12 months. Of the remaining 41, none cost more than 15 USD, and 36 implemented manual data entry. Basic features (data logging, data representation, and data delivery) were implemented in almost all apps, whereas advanced features (e.g., insulin calculator) were implemented in a small percentage of apps. The pictorial identification schema for diabetes was completed by one patient and one software developer for 13 apps. Both users highlighted weaknesses related to the functionalities offered and to their interface, but the patient focused on usability, whereas the software developer focused on technical implementation.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes Self-care is a promising graphical tool for perceiving the weaknesses and benefits of a diabetes self-care app that includes multiple user profile perspectives.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a major public health concern worldwide. A recent report from the International Diabetes Federation, an organization with about 230 diabetes association members, noted that about 387 billion people are affected by DM globally, and that related health expenditures were estimated to be at least USD 612 billion in 2014 [1].

The concept of DM patient self-care, including the use of mobile applications or “apps,” has proved to be beneficial for patients [2]. While agreement on the definition of self-care is still being discussed [3], the concept of self-care is about the active involvement of patients in their own care and modifying their lifestyle behaviors. Patient self-care, including regular monitoring of blood glucose, was shown to improve glycemic control [4–6] and decrease glycosylated hemoglobin values. Recent evidence shows that the use of smartphone interventions to support self-care and blood glucose monitoring have beneficial effects that are even better than those obtained with other computer-based tools [7,8]. Support from mobile technologies is effective in promoting physical activity in patients with diabetes [9], and is associated with a better control of the progression of ketosis to diabetic ketoacidosis in young people [10]. Even though this evidence has yet to be confirmed [11], smartphone apps that provide reminders, disease monitoring, management, and education tools are thought to benefit both patients and health-care professionals [12,13], especially if combined with a telemonitoring approach [14–16].

However, the literature shows that these results were based on apps and mobile interventions evaluated in controlled environments using safe and reliable mobile tools and applications. Conversely, the app market is currently exploding [17] and about 100,000 health mobile apps are available in the major app stores [18], including apps for diabetes self-management. In addition, the problem of the reliability and safety of such apps is still being underestimated [19–27] and there is a huge gap between the scientific results for the development and use of medical apps and the apps available in the stores [28]. In this scenario, patients searching for an app to assist in their diabetes self-care are likely to find hundreds of options and experience difficulties selecting the appropriate one for their needs.

The problem of app selection is not only related to the cost of the app, but also the need to carefully evaluate the functionalities made available, its responsiveness to the patients’ needs, the reliability of the underlying information sources, and its usability and understandability [29,30]. Mobile apps also suffer from several limitations that are not easily detectable by an inexperienced user, including poor underlying clinical evidence and its integration with health-care information systems [31]. Regulatory bodies, despite the recent publication of Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidelines on medical mobile apps [32], are still far from providing valuable tools that are able to identify, in an easy and understandable way, the weaknesses and benefits associated with a single app, and helping patients in selecting the best-suited or the least-risky app [33]. Scientific reviews [26], reviewing site opinions (see 〈http://medicapp.info/appmediche〉 and 〈http://www.imedicalapps.com〉), and some attempts by UK National Health Services (NHS) to catalog medical apps (〈http://www.nhs.uk/pages/healthappslibrary.aspx〉) are the only available choices for patients to perform responsible decision-making about the appropriate apps to download and use. Reviewing initiatives like iMedicalApps and MedicApp provide app ranking and evaluations from health-care professionals or students who tested and used the app. They categorize apps according to their medical specialty and operating system, and the apps are ranked by specialized health-care professionals (see 〈http://www.imedicalapps.com〉). Even though this information is useful for patients, they are written from a health-care professional perspective, which may not have the same focus. In addition, it seems that the NHS catalog is under discussion for improvements. The new objective for the catalogs is to provide the consumers/patients an endorsed set of health and social care mobile apps (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-information-boards-workstreams). Furthermore, a few apps are currently available in the catalog for diabetes self-care.

The Pictorial Identification Schema (PIS) for medical apps [35] proposes a one-shot user-oriented identity card able to represent the weaknesses and benefits associated with an app. The PIS was designed as an evaluation tool that can be completed by any user profile (such as patients, health-care professionals, mHealth app developers, mHealth app promoters, or students) according to their specific skills and experience. Therefore, the value of the PIS is related to the “signature” of the author who completed the schema forms. The PIS identifies six attribute families (responsible promoters, offered services, searching methods, application domains, envisaged users, and qualifier and quantifiers) that each contain attributes defined from the review of the available apps. The schema uses a traffic light color code to represent whether the implementation of a certain attribute represents a strength (green) or a weakness (red) for the app under evaluation. In its present stage, the PIS is still being validated and its dissemination strategies have yet to be exploited [35]. However, the PIS was designed by reviewing the apps in three medical domains: cardiology, oncology, and pharmaceutical. Even though the PIS included attributes that are relevant for all medical apps, it still needs to include specialized focuses for other relevant medical conditions, including diabetes. Despite this limitation, given its graphical and intuitive interface, the concepts and the practicalities of the PIS could be well suited to give patients advice in the selection of appropriate apps for diabetes self-management. This requires the schema’s attributes be submitted to a validation and revision process.

In this work, we propose and test a Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care, specialized for diabetes apps that can be used as a simple and easily understandable graphical tool to represent the strengths and the weaknesses related to apps for the self-care of diabetes. This specialized identification schema is created by adapting the previously proposed PIS [35], building on a model for diabetes self-care [36], and reviewing the diabetes-related apps available on Apple’s US app store to extract the app characteristics. The schema is intended to be used to give advice to patients willing to select an app for their diabetes self-care.

To define the specialization of the PIS for diabetes self-care, we followed an approach similar to that adopted for the definition of the original version of the schema [35]: 1. Definition of the conceptual framework for diabetes self-care, which aimed to identify the critical patient actions that can be supported by functionalities in mobile health applications; 2. Review of the available apps (in Apple’s US app store) for diabetes self-care according to a set of defined characteristics; 3. Matching the diabetes self-care conceptual framework using mobile health apps to the characteristics identified in the available apps to define the specific attributes for the Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care tool; 4. Exemplary use of the one-shot pictorial schema/diabetes self-care tool by two user profiles (a patient and a developer) for the evaluation of a small sample of apps.

A conceptual model for the self-care of a chronic disease, heart failure, was presented by Riegel and Dickson [37]. Maintenance and management are the main concepts in that model. Maintenance relates to the monitoring of symptoms and treatment compliance to pursue and follow physiologic stability [37]. Management relates to the patients’ decision-making actions when some symptoms occur [37]. A third component, i.e., confidence, is included in the model for representing the relationship between self-care and outcomes. Higher levels of self-care confidence relate to better patient self-care abilities [37]. In other research, this model has been adapted to describe DM self-care [36] with the objective to uncover the relationship between self-care and DM health outcomes; glycemic control was the main target and patient decision-making a crucial factor [36] in terms of maintenance and management as described by Riegel and Dickson’s [37] model. In our design of a Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care, specialized for, we propose a model of DM self-care that highlights the aspects of data collection and analysis as key to improving DM self-care when the process is mediated by mobile health apps.

According to the American Association of Diabetes Educators, managing diabetes includes several actions, such as making healthy food choices, being physically active, monitoring blood sugar, and taking proper medications as prescribed [38]. Regular communication with the diabetes care team is also important to support problem solving, to reduce risks of complications, and to cope with lifestyle changes [38].

Multiple factors and activities to manage the disease properly were described on different time scales ranging from daily to long-term (
                        Fig. 1). These include blood-glucose tests, food intake, and physical activity management, which patients should perform daily, as well as their compliance with therapies or medications for comorbidities, which are conversely followed on a long-term basis. In Fig. 1, these activities are considered as input for patients to integrate all information and decide the best actions to control their disease according to their best knowledge (e.g., to select the proper medication). Information is tracked during this decision-making process; e.g., if the patient performs a blood-glucose test, this information is traditionally noted in a paper diary. Other useful data are related to activities and food intake. This tracked information (called “logs”) represents the present behavior of the patient and is an output of the process (see bottom of Fig. 1). Some of the information collected in the logs can be part of the process inputs, which help patients with their decision-making process, as represented by the “Feedback from ongoing status” arrow in the top of Fig. 1.

More specifically, the term “logs” refers to the fact that data are automatically stored without human intervention and are intended to be used by a computer or another device. For example, due to the hardware characteristics of smartphones, some mobile apps are able to record the smartphone owners’ physical activity and their related calorie consumption. In Fig. 1, the patients’ ongoing status acts as feedback, which influences their decision about the action to take. Comparing our model (Fig. 1) with DM self-care [36], patients decision-making about their self-care is affected by their current health status, daily evidence (self-care maintenance), and long-term evidence (self-care management). Process logs are used to support patients’ decisions about their self-care. At each iteration, composed by the pairs of “decision” and “action to take,” patients self-care ability increases (self-care confidence).

Therefore, a mobile application for diabetes self-management must, at the very least, implement data logging for heterogeneous types of data (blood-glucose, medication, activity, nutrition) [34]; however, when considering mobile devices, we also expect some additional functionalities, such as graphically representing the data collected on the screen (e.g., graphs, charts) and delivering it using e-mail, text messages, or cloud services. These other functionalities can be summarized as data representation and delivery. The above-mentioned functionalities do not include any kind of “algorithm” or “intelligence” devoted to the interpretation or analysis of the data collected, represented, or delivered. An insulin dose calculator is an example of such “intelligence.” Since decision-making models for the automatic interpretation of patient-related data in diabetes are still being developed [39], we considered functionalities that provide direct advice to patients as “advanced” features and did not include them in the “basic” features expected for a mobile app for diabetes.

Considering the framework shown in Fig. 1, we identified the basic features that a mobile app for diabetes self-management must implement, which are: 1. Data logging, storing data in a permanent way for later use; 2. Data representation, reliably representing the previously stored data on the device; and 3. Data delivery, allowing data to be shared with other people (e.g., family member, health-care professional) in multiple forms (e.g., text message, e-mail, cloud file).

Our research began by considering all related iPhone apps available in Apple app store on April 1, 2014 returned by searching the Apple app store using the keyword “diabetes.” Since the keyword was generic, but the main target of our study was multifeatured apps dedicated to diabetes management for both patients and health-care professionals, we introduced some exclusion criteria. Apps were excluded from our analysis by the following criteria: they were a limited version (i.e., lite or free app) of an available fully featured version; they were supported only a single feature (e.g., insulin calculator only); they did not support any diabetes-specific data collection, archiving, and analysis for time-monitoring (e.g., glycated hemoglobin converter, pills reminder); their target was not diabetes self-management (e.g., generic health trackers, activity trackers, cooking apps, educational apps) or if diabetes self-management was an incidental-only element within the app; or if they were a content-consumption-only app (e.g., magazine, journal). Considering the fast evolution of the app market, we also excluded apps that did not receive any updates during the 12 months prior to the search (i.e., from April 1, 2013 to March 31, 2014). All apps meeting the inclusion criteria were used for our review. Among these apps selected for our study, a subset including the apps freely available from the Italian Apple app store were downloaded to test the apps directly. We decided to download only the free apps to let the users participate in the study without incurring additional costs.

According to our conceptual framework, we reviewed all the apps meeting our inclusion criteria by considering general features related to the mobile market (such as app pricing, app updates), diabetes-specific features including basic features (data logging, representation, and delivery), and advanced features (e.g., community services, insulin calculators) [26,34]. We considered whether the app was reviewed by one of the known reviewing initiatives (〈www.imedicalapps.com〉, 〈http://medicapp.info/appmediche/〉, or 〈http://apps.nhs.uk/〉). The full list of these attributes is reported in 
                        Table 1.

The PIS is a graphical classification tool for mHealth apps that we proposed previously [35]. It defines six main families, which each include different attributes:
                           
                              1.
                              Responsible promoters (medical systems companies, drug companies, national services, hospitals, pharmacies, medical associations, publishing company), representing who holds the major perceived responsibility on the app, which does not necessarily mean the developer.

Offered services (handbooks, guidelines, newsletters, calculators, forecasters, GeoHealth, simulators, others), representing the type of services/functionalities available in the app.

Searching methods (alphabetical order, images, predefined comparisons, multiple sources, chemical structures, list scrolling, others), representing the tools for “consuming contents” available in the app.

Application domains (complex prescriptions, education, mobility, emergency, drug shortage, specific domain specialty, video manual), representing, besides the medical area, the domain in which the app is intended to be used.

Envisaged users (students, citizens, professionals, others) that are the main user categories.

Qualifiers and quantifiers (download number, user satisfaction index, timing, significant testimonial), representing the factors that are mostly considered by nonspecialized users in evaluating the app.

To classify an app, a traffic light color-coded score is assigned to each attribute. Attributes coded as red are to caveats for the potential user, whereas those coded as green are the strengths of the app. The yellow code means “something-in-between.” The interpretation of the green and the red coding depends on the attribute family. For instance, “offered services” are coded green when they are useful and appropriate for the field, whereas “searching methods” are coded green when they are not trivial and the result-set presentation is effective [35]. This implies that the schema was not intended to describe only what is provided by the app, but also to provide a judgment, from the viewpoint of the signee, on whether or not the feature/attribute is appropriate/works well. Any potential user type, who is required to “sign” the filled-in schema, can fill in the PIS. This signature is important because different profiles can judge the app differently (e.g., developer vs patient vs therapist).

A more detailed description of the PIS, including the rules for color coding, is provided in [35].

According to the methodology developed in [35], starting from the review of the apps selected for our work, we defined new attributes specific to the diabetes domain and removed those that were not relevant to it. For example, in the “searching methods” family, the “chemical structures” attribute is not relevant for diabetes self-care. That attribute indicates the possibility to browse chemical structures of drugs or other entities, e.g., proteins.

We then asked a patient with diabetes and a software developer to evaluate the subset of apps downloaded for free from the Apple’s Italian app store, and to complete the PIS forms specific to diabetes. As for the color-coded score, we adopted the same methods as described in [35]. For instance, considering an app update, a red label will be assigned if the app has not been updated for more than the average updating time we defined above, a green label will be assigned if the updating time is equal to or less than the average (updates are more frequent), and a yellow label if the updating time is somewhere in the middle of the earlier or later times.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The search of Apple’s US app store using the keyword “diabetes” returned 952 apps. Of those, we identified 67 (7.03%) apps for diabetes self-care. However, 26 apps were excluded because they were not updated in the last 12 months, from April 1, 2013 to March 31, 2014 (
                        Fig. 2A). Forty-one apps were selected after applying our exclusion criteria (4.31%). These 41 apps, which were updated in the 12 months prior to our search, received 3.6 updates on average. This means that an active (“living”) app is updated approximately every 3–4 months.

Considering app pricing, in the set of 41 selected apps, none cost more than USD 15. Twenty-seven apps (about 66%) were free; 8 apps (about 20%) cost less than $5, and 6 apps (about 14%) cost between $5 and $15 (Fig. 2B).

Regarding the data entry procedure, which is how data was inserted into the application, the vast majority (36 apps) implemented manual data entry (Fig. 2C). Seven percent of apps (3 apps) supported data input from a wired glucose meter and 5% (2 apps) supported a wireless connection (via Bluetooth) between the glucose meter and the smartphone.


                        Fig. 2D shows that the basic features that we defined in Fig. 1 (data logging, representation, and delivery) were implemented in at least 50% of the apps. Other advanced features, like an insulin calculator or the presence of a community behind the app, were implemented in a very small percentage of all the apps (17% and 12%, respectively).

The full results for all 67 applications for diabetes self-care found in AppleS iUS app store (before excluding those not updated) are available in a Supplementary Table 1, in which each row is dedicated to a single app that passed the selection workflow, and each column represents an attribute (see Section 2.3.).

After reviewing the available apps, we identified the attributes relevant for diabetes self-care to be included in the new Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes Self-care tool. Since many of the apps reviewed were not promoted by a specific stakeholder (e.g., hospital, scientific society) within the “responsible promoters” family, we added the attribute “private/independent/third party.” Within the “offered services” family, we added those attributes identified in Fig. 1, namely “data logger,” “data representation,” and “data delivery,” as well as the other attributes identified in the review (“community services” and “how-to guides”). In the “offered services” family, the “multiple source queries” and “structured queries” attributes were added. In the “application domains” family, the “specific domain subspecialty” attribute was replaced by “diabetes management.” Then, we added the “patients” attribute in the “envisaged users” family. Finally, in the “qualifiers and quantifiers” family, we replaced the “timing” attribute with those related to the last update and the frequency of update. We added also the ranking attributes available in Apple app store (“overall ranking” and “category ranking”).

The final setup of the Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care is represented in 
                        Fig. 3.

Using this specialized version of the PIS, we asked two different users with different profiles (one patient and one developer) to evaluate some apps by completing the schema forms. We asked them to download the 13 apps freely available in the Italian Apple’s app store from among the 41 apps reviewed. Fig. 3A and B shows the schema completed by the two profiles for a sample app called “Diabetes HealthMate”. This app supports diabetic patients in managing their disease mainly through the logging of relevant data and the ability to inspect them on a chart. The app supports tracking and visualizing blood sugar readings together with other information on patient lifestyle and provides some suggestions for positive lifestyle choices.

These two profiles provided a different evaluation in the “offered services” family. In Fig. 3A, the “data logger” attribute in the “offered services” family is colored yellow because even if all the data logs were implemented, some of them are incomplete and not contextual with each blood-glucose test. Conversely, in Fig. 3B, the same attribute is red because the patient highlighted the fact that the interface is overloaded with information and the correct steps for adding a new data log are not immediately clear.

When the two user profiles reviewed the remaining 12 apps using the Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care, their major disagreements were again in the “offered services” family (
                        
                        Figs. 4 and 5, and Figs. S1 and S2 in the Supplementary Material). Specifically, the “data logger” attribute is colored red 5 times out of 13 according to the patient’s assessment, and 9 times out of 13 according to the developer’s assessment. In addition, another attribute that was frequently given a red label is the “update frequency within a year” in the “qualifiers and quantifiers” family (for both assessments) because some apps were updated less frequently than the average. The apps that were given a red label for the “update frequency within a year” attribute were the same for the two profiles.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this work, we proposed and tested a Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care for apps addressing diabetes self-care that can be completed by heterogeneous profiles, users (e.g., patients, health-care professionals) and smart mobile device experts (e.g., developers, interface designers), and can give advice to patients about selecting the appropriate app to be confident in under the advice of their therapist.

When we reviewed the apps available on Apple US app store for diabetes self-management, we found that only 7% of all the apps identified using the “diabetes” keyword were intended to support patients’ management of the disease. Following this review, we identified some new attributes to specialize the PIS. The results of our review showed that, interestingly, no single app cost more than $15. Even though the mobile app market is usually cheap, diabetes is a specific condition in which patients are also motivated to spend money to improve their quality of life. Hence, we could have expected an app market including apps more expensive than $15, but this was not the case, and app prices were affordable for all users. Moreover, data entry was manual in the majority of the reviewed apps, even though it is prone to human errors. For example, if a patient tests his blood glucose when he wakes up in the morning and finds that the value is 250mg/dL, which indicates hyperglycemia), but he erroneously inserts 150mg/dL into the application. That single value would severely impact not only the daily average, but also the weekly average and possibly more. Another possible error would be to insert 250mg/dL for a different time or date than the test; again, that would compromise the validity of the data. Automatic data entry is only possible when the app directly communicates with a glucose meter, but this procedure is subject to compatibility issues, including those between the app and the operating system. Mobile operating systems (such as iOS, Android, Windows) usually receive a major update once a year and possibly minor updates throughout the rest of the year. This means that unless the developer of the diabetes self-care app is as fast as Apple, Google, and Microsoft in releasing an updated version of the app on the very same day an operating system update is released, the app may be subject to possible compatibility issues and might malfunction. Crashes and incorrect behavior cannot be excluded in these circumstances.

Regarding the available app features, our results showed that only basic features (i.e., data logging, representation, and delivery) were implemented in all of the reviewed apps, whereas advanced features (e.g., insulin calculator, community support) were rare. Therefore, mobile applications for diabetes self-care that constantly receive updates currently implement only basic features, which are still effective for proper management of the disease, but do not really exploit the full potential of the mobile technology by offering users an advanced multifeatured experience. We note that some people may use multiple single-function apps to suit their different needs (e.g., they may have a data logging app, an insulin dose calculator, and a peer communication app in their collection), but this selection of applications would require the hand transcription of some data, which may become a source of typos, with unexpected consequences.

As a preliminary assessment of the potentials of the Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes Self-care tool, we asked two different user types to complete their profiles. The first user profile was the patient, who is the natural target of the schema. The second was the developer. We chose these profiles because both regulatory bodies (such as the FDA [32]) and scientific framework proposals to ensure medical app quality [27] are based on the declarations of the app developers. Therefore, after the adoption of the PIS and in the light of a “responsible app development” [27], app developers would likely provide an evaluation of their apps. Another possible user profile could be a diabetes expert. However, the diabetes expert would have provided a judgment similar to those available on the peer-reviewing sites and, for this reason, we decided not to include this profile in the preliminary testing.

Even though with a limited sample size of potential users, our exploratory testing on 13 apps showed that different user profiles have different approaches to their judgments about what action to take to manage their disease, and, as for the original PIS, the profile of the user who completes the schema is relevant. In our experiment, the strategy used by the two profiles differed because the developer had a greater consideration of the function of the app (which features are implemented and whether they work the way they are supposed to) whereas the patient was focused on the usability and interfaces of the app (how the features are presented and the overall user experience). However, the main differences in the user judgments were in the “offered services.” The patient tended to highlight criticisms in the presentation of data (interface) that implies having difficulties in using the app, and the developer tended to highlight whether or not a specific functionality works. Interestingly, both user profiles provided a red label for the “update frequency within a year” attribute for the same apps, which suggests that both evaluators perceive this attribute as a critical factor.

The possibility of multiple evaluations from different profiles would enrich the information and knowledge grounding patients’ decision-making process. Each app should be associated with more than one PIS, according to the number of reviews that it will receive. The multiple viewpoints expressed by the different completed schemas will let patients understand the different weaknesses or strengths of the app and, in turn, perform a more informed and responsible choice.

Our search of Apple’s app store was performed on April 1, 2014. As more than a year has passed, we considered repeating our search so that we could include updated results in the paper. However, Apple has since changed the way search results in the app store are retrieved and presented. A limit to the number of results has been set according to the application program interface (API) for executing searches in Apple’s app store [40]. The default limit value for search results is 50, while a value from 1 to 200 can be assigned to it [40]. This means that less-popular apps will not be included and displayed in the result-set. Consequently, a lower number of apps could be retrieved and analyzed. Our original search using the keyword “diabetes” resulted in 952 apps. On November 9, 2015, we performed a keyword search using “diabetes self-care” on Apple’s app store and found two apps.

The issue of an effective dissemination strategy for the schema remains open. As already discussed in [35], the most important point is how to reach the users and how to make the PIS known to the general public quickly. Using standardization bodies was recognized as being ineffective because of their different scales in terms of time, but also paperwork, between the definition of a norm, the certification process, and the app development market. Conversely, the possibility of creating specific repositories guided by PISs, in which the patient can choose medical apps, seems more feasible. These might be ad-hoc repositories, organized as pharmacy shelves, where the patient can find only apps already tested and evaluated through the PIS that serves to guide their choices. However, this idea currently has no practical applications.

Finally, the Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care is an easily understandable way to map all of the app features so they can be seen at a glance. One of the strengths of this approach is the possibility of multiple stakeholders completing the schema, which provides different perspectives on the app, e.g., functional or usability viewpoints. This implies that the user who is searching for a trustful app can use the Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care to see the reviews of the app by multiple profiles, including other users.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

We showed that there are several available apps for patients with diabetes, but that those supporting diabetes self-management only implemented basic, and someway nonrisky, functions, whereas the more-advanced functions that are more useful for patient self-care in a context in which uncertainties and traceability are unavoidable, have not been implemented yet. In this arena, our proposed Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes Self-care tool is easy and intuitive for potential patient users to be guided into in perceiving the weaknesses and the benefits of apps and ultimately make a responsible choice.

Andrea Basilico, Francesco Pinciroli, Stefano Bonacina, and Sara Marceglia declare no financial affiliation/interest in the subject matter, materials, or products mentioned in this manuscript.

The results of the study were partially presented to the Conference Apps for Medicine Health and Home Care – Elements of Safety and Effectiveness-Politecnico di Milano-May 8th and 9th 2014 – Milan, Italy. (〈http://www.ehealth.polimi.it/appqa.asp〉). This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.02.005.


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                              Supplementary material
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

