@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A human-phantom coupling experiment and a dispersive simulation model for investigating the variation of dielectric properties of biological tissues

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The effect of tissue dispersion was studied using current and voltage stimulations.


                        
                        
                           
                           A novel method was proposed to systematically change the dispersion of the tissues.


                        
                        
                           
                           Current needs to be increased to generate activation under decreased impedance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Voltage needs to be decreased to generate activation under decreased impedance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Optimal pulse duration also depends on the pulse stimulation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Electrical stimulation

Simulation model

Human-equivalent phantom

Dielectric properties

Motor threshold

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Variation of the dielectric properties of tissues could happen due to aging, moisture of the skin, muscle denervation, and variation of blood flow by temperature. Several studies used burst-modulated alternating stimulation to improve activation and comfort by reducing tissue impedance as a possible mechanism to generate muscle activation with less energy. The study of the effect of dielectric properties of biological tissues in nerve activation presents a fundamental problem, which is the difficulty of systematically changing the morphological factors and dielectric properties of the subjects under study. We tackle this problem by using a simulation and an experimental study. The experimental study is a novel method that combines a fat tissue-equivalent phantom, with known and adjustable dielectric properties, with the human thigh. In this way, the dispersion of the tissue under study could be modified to observe its effects systematically in muscle activation. We observed that, to generate a given amount of muscle or nerve activation under conditions of decreased impedance, the magnitude of the current needs to be increased while the magnitude of the voltage needs to be decreased.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Simulation of electrical stimulation is required to adequately represent physiological, stimulation, and anatomical factors. Variation of the dielectric properties of the tissues (physiological factors) can happen under natural processes, like aging [1], or under natural conditions, such as moisture in the skin [2]. Muscle conductivity can be changed after acute denervation injury [3], and temperature can increase or decrease blood flow, which directly affects the impedance of the body [4]. Several experimental studies compared different stimulation schemes (stimulation factors), such as pulse stimulation (PS) and burst-modulated alternating stimulation (BMAS), to investigate which elicits greater muscle torque while keeping discomfort low and whether modulations in frequency facilitate current transmission deeper into the muscle. However, contradictory results have been reported regarding whether PS or BMAS produces more force while maintaining comfort [5–10]. As tissue׳s conductivity changes according to the pulse duration of the stimulation waveform, the effect of the tissue׳s conductivity variation may explain the outcomes of the experimental studies mentioned. In addition, in a previous study, we evaluated different morphologies to investigate their limitations and advantages for model implementation [11].

The study of the effect of the dielectric properties of biological tissues in nerve activation presents a fundamental problem, which is the difficulty of systematically changing the dielectric properties of the subjects under study and controlling tissue thickness variability, especially fat thickness. This can be tackled by simulations or experimental studies.

Simulation studies can be used to investigate the effect of the conductivity variation on the extracellular medium and neuronal excitation. Livshitz et al. [12,13] presented a model with three tissue layers to study the current density distribution through the tissues and force production; however, that study did not consider nerve model or muscle conductivity variation or anatomical characteristics.

In our previous simulation study [14], we investigated the effect of the conductivity of the tissues in nerve activation by implementing a non-dispersive 3D multi-layer (skin, fat, muscle, and nerve) model of the thigh during current stimulation. The result showed that the variation of the skin conductivity did not modify muscle recruitment (without considering the effect of the electrode׳s moisture or perspiration), and an increment of fat׳s conductivity decreased the recruitment for current stimulation. We also presented a novel method that combined a fat-equivalent phantom, with known and adjustable dielectric properties, coupled with a human thigh [15]. In this way, the dispersion of the tissue under study could be modified to systematically observe its effects in muscle activation.

In this study, we investigated the effect of tissue conductivity in a larger number of subjects using current- and voltage-controlled stimulations. An improved model is used to account for the effect of a larger range variation of the dielectrically dispersive properties of the tissues.

@&#METHOD@&#

The tissue-equivalent phantom has a relative dielectric constant and conductivity similar to biological tissues, primarily in the study of the effect of electromagnetic field for high-frequency applications [16–18]. A customized fat-equivalent phantom was fabricated to match low-mid-frequency for electrical stimulation, presented in detail in [15]. Three different conductivity dispersions were designed for the fat-equivalent phantom: σ
                           
                              L
                           , σ
                           
                              M
                           , and σ
                           
                              H
                           , as shown in 
                           Table 1. Relative permittivity and conductivity of the fat-equivalent phantom were verified using an LCR meter (HIOKI, IM3533-01, Nagano, Japan) within a frequency range from 1Hz to 200kHz, showing a similar frequency response in the literature [19,20], 
                           Fig. 1.

Measurements of the dielectric properties in multiple phantoms confirmed the robustness of the recipe. In addition, storage in a refrigerator and measurements during one week showed that the phantom retained its dielectric properties across one week. In a previous study, the distribution of the voltage in the phantom was measured to verify the model; then a two-layered plate, composed of two phantoms, was used to measure the voltage distribution within the two layers to investigate the interface effect, which is similar to the one between the human thigh and the tissue-equivalent phantom [15]. The phantom was used 20min after refrigeration and a sample of the employed phantom was always measured to verify its properties before each experiment. The room temperature was kept around 20°C during the experiment and the skin was cleaned with alcohol.

Eleven healthy subjects (age 23.7±3.4, height 174.3±5.7cm, weight 65.9±10.9kg, BMI 21.7±3.2, mean±SD) participated in the study. All subjects were informed of all experimental procedures and signed a statement of informed consent, as approved by Chiba University.

In order to analyze the effect of the conductivity variation of the tissues in muscle recruitment, a semicircular fat-equivalent phantom, coupled with a human thigh, was used to mimic a variable tissue׳s conductivity during nerve activation. The phantom׳s distal edge was placed 10cm from the knee, and two square electrodes of area 25cm2 were spaced 3cm edge-to-edge and 7cm over the middle of the phantom. An accelerometer was placed on the electrodes to determine the smallest detectible contraction that current or voltage stimulation produced (hereafter referred to as Motor threshold, MT), as shown in 
                           Fig. 2.

A monophasic voltage-controlled and a current-controlled stimulation were employed with a square pulse of 250μs with a period of 266Hz, using a purpose-built device for voltage stimulation and a Trio 300 device (ITO Co., Ltd, Tokyo) for current stimulation. The duration of the stimulation pulse was chosen to be small enough to introduce high harmonics, to take into account the dispersion effect of the tissues, and because it is commonly used in electrical stimulators. 99% of the power spectral density of the pulse signal is reached at 41kHz for a bandwidth of 100kHz, which demonstrates that the frequency response of the phantom covers the spectrum of the pulse, shown in Fig. 1. Stimulation voltage ranged between 17V and 73V and the stimulation current between 7mA and 46mA to generate muscle activation in the different experiments.

Two configurations for the model morphology were considered to model the thigh. First, a cylindrical model (CM), composed of skin, fat, muscle, cortical bone, and bone marrow, was used. Second, a fat-equivalent phantom was added to the CM in a similar configuration to the human-phantom coupling experiment regarding the geometry and dielectric properties of the fat-equivalent phantom and human thigh (CM Coupling). Square electrodes were modeled with an area of 25cm2 and separated by an inter-electrode distance of 3cm and 7cm from edge-to-edge. A monophasic voltage and current stimulation with a 250μs square pulse was simulated to investigate the effect of the dispersion variation. The geometries and model parameters are shown in 
                        Fig. 3 and 
                        Table 2, respectively.

Dielectric properties of the body tissues were dispersive and isotropic for all tissues with the exception of the muscle tissue, which was considered anisotropic (transversal and longitudinal conductivities). The dispersion was obtained from the works of Gabriel et al. and our measurements of dispersion of the phantom tissues [19,20].

A two-step method was implemented to calculate activation in the muscle [21]. In the first step, the voltage distribution within the tissues (V
                        
                           e
                        ) was computed. As the stimulation waveform was not harmonic, the dispersive nature of the conductivity and permittivity of the biological tissues should be evaluated to have a robust model (from now on called the dispersive capacitive model, Eq. (1))
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 ∇
                                 ⋅
                                 [
                                 σ
                                 (
                                 ω
                                 )
                                 +
                                 j
                                 ω
                                 
                                    
                                       ε
                                    
                                    
                                       0
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       ε
                                    
                                    
                                       r
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    (
                                    ω
                                    )
                                 
                                 ]
                                 ∇
                                 
                                    
                                       V
                                    
                                    
                                       e
                                    
                                 
                                 =
                                 0
                              
                           
                        where ω is the angular frequency (rad/s), σ the dispersive conductivity (s/m), and ε
                        
                           r
                         the dispersive relative permittivity.

First, we computed the Fourier series of a square wave stimulus current and determined the amplitude and phase, I(ω). Second, the frequency-dependent impedance Z(σ(ω),ε(ω),x,y,z) was calculated. Third, V(ω,x,y,z) was obtained by multiplying I(ω) and Z(σ(ω),ε(ω),x,y,z). Fourth, V(t, x,y,z) was obtained back in the time domain [22].

The Dirichlet and von Neuman boundaries were imposed to control current values at the electrode surface to confine current flow within the model.

The model was constructed, discretized, and solved using COMSOL Multiphysics 4.4. The models were discretized into 1,707,907 tetrahedral elements. As result, 986,312 degrees of freedom were computed in the system matrix. The model was solved using an iterative linear solver (conjugate gradients) at each point within the tissues domain to determine the potential distribution; it took 200s to solve for the CM with one quad-core INTEL® Core™ i7-960 processor at 3.2GHz and 24.0GB of RAM memory.

The second step was to obtain the voltage at each point of the nerve to calculate its MT; a detailed model of the nerve can be used to obtain the temporal–spatial behavior of the action potential. For this, a compartment model for the nerve was used to explain the influences of applied electric fields in target neurons. McNeal [21] developed a compartment model for a myelinated nerve fiber and its sub-threshold response to external point source stimulation. He represented the myelinated nerve using an equivalent circuit of the node of Ranvier and assumed that the myelin sheath was a perfect insulator. The Chiu–Ritchie–Rogart–Stagg–Swenney (CRRSS) model [23,24] was used to calculate the ionic current on the nodes of Ranvier and described the nonlinear gating of ion channels across the unmyelinated neuronal membrane. The internodes were assumed to be a passive membrane (constant membrane conductance).

One straight myelinated fiber, 63mm in length, was placed under the center of the electrode to investigate its MT. The current and voltage stimulation amplitude was modified by using a binary search algorithm to find the MT until the error was lower than 1% of the magnitude. An action potential was considered elicited when the trans-membrane potential exceeded a threshold of 80mV. We confirmed convergence by increasing the number of degrees of freedom. The MT was ensured to differ less than 0.1% when the DOF were doubled at least four times.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        
                        Fig. 4 shows the normalized MT using three different fat-equivalent phantoms (σ
                        
                           L
                        , σ
                        
                           M
                        , σ
                        
                           H
                        ) for the human-phantom coupling experiment and simulation (CM Coupling). Fig. 4a shows that MT is higher for the higher conductivity dispersion of the fat-equivalent phantom in current stimulation. On the contrary, Fig. 4b shows that MT is lower for higher conductivity dispersion in the case of voltage stimulation. The simulation results were congruent to the human-phantom coupling experiments.

Variation of the inter-electrode distance can affect the impedance seen from the electrodes that may influence the result of the human-phantom coupling experiment. 
                        Fig. 5 shows no difference with respect to the trend in Fig. 4.

A larger dispersive variation than the experimental setup was considered in order to observe its effect on muscle activation. Two different simulations were investigated: 1) variation of the dispersion of all the tissues by a scaling factor of the dielectric dispersion of the CM, from 0.5 to 8, and 2) variation of only the dispersion of the fat tissue by the same scaling factor in the CM. 
                        Fig. 6 shows that the MT increased for both cases during current stimulation; MT first decreased and then increased during voltage stimulation.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study employed tissue-equivalent phantoms with different conductivity values to explain how variation of the dielectric properties of tissues might affect muscle recruitment during current and voltage stimulation. Impedance could be altered by muscle denervation, obesity, and external temperature variation [3,4]. Our hypothesis is that the effect of the impedance variation (positive or negative) on muscle activation depends on the stimulation type: voltage-controlled or current-controlled stimulation. In this study, a human-phantom coupling experiment was designed to observe the effect of dielectric dispersion variation in human muscle recruitment.

The validity of the human-coupling phantom experiment was verified by the robustness of the dielectric properties of the phantom, voltage distribution verification, and coupling effect of the phantom. Fig. 4a showed that the fat-equivalent phantom with higher conductivity had a higher MT during current stimulation, though more energy would be expected to be transfer to the nerves axons for lower impedance. In the case of voltage stimulation, Fig. 4b presents the opposite result to current stimulation. The simulations were in agreement with the results of human-phantom coupling experiment. In addition, the validity of the coupling between phantom and thigh was also indirectly supported by the fact the MT of the thigh experiment was similar to the human-phantom coupling experiment using a low impedance (lower voltage drop in the phantom) and high impedance (lower longitudinal current only flowing through the phantom) during voltage and current stimulation, respectively.

Petrofsky et al. [4] modified the impedance of the skin by superficial temperature variation (hot and cold packs). Hot packs induced higher blood flow, which reduced the impedance by vasodilatation, incrementing the amplitude of the current-controlled stimulation for motor threshold. This result confirms our findings during current stimulation. However, this study did not control directly the impedance variation, verify the effect of voltage-controlled in muscle activation, and consider the dielectric dispersion of the tissues by using a harmonic stimulation signal. In contrast, our approach can address these three factors, as we did.

A wider variation of the dispersion was considered in the simulation in Fig. 6, where the same tendency of the experimental study was obtained in the simulation of the current stimulation. In the case of voltage stimulation, the MT first decreased and then increased for higher dispersive conductivities (after-increment effect); therefore, a future experimental study should investigate higher variations to verify this effect. In addition, as the inter-electrode distance may affect the amount of lateral and transversal current in tissues, its effect on the MT was investigated using inter-electrode distances of 30mm and 70mm. As a result, its variation did not show any significant difference, as shown in Fig. 5.

The experimental and simulation results can be understood by simplifying the analysis of the fat layer׳s impedance as a resistor. In the case of the current stimulation, a lower conductivity generates more current crossing directly to the thigh without transversal currents in the fat layer; if conductivity increases, more transversal current will flow through the fat layer without going inside the muscle, and consequently, the MT increases. In the case of voltage stimulation, a lower conductivity has higher MT because more voltage drops at the fat layer and MT increases; if the conductivity increases, more voltage drops in the muscle layer and MT reduces. If we, however, continue increasing the dispersive conductivity, the fat tissue behaves as a short circuit and increases the MT again. For the same reason, the effect of the fat thickness is negligible for lower conductivities during current stimulation and is negligible for high conductivity during voltage stimulation, within reasonable limits of dielectric property values.

An increment of the conductivity of the electrode׳s hydrogel during the experiment was noticed by Copper et al. [25] during a long period of electrode usage. This variation offers an additional explanation for the attenuation (no after-increment effect) of the MT during voltage stimulation for larger dispersive conductivities in the human-phantom coupling experiment. The simulation in 
                     Fig. 7 shows that the MT decreased for higher electrode conductivities; the combined effect showed an attenuation of MT for higher conductivities of the phantom-tissue during voltage stimulation.

Finally, voltage stimulation and current stimulation were found to have different transfer functions that depend on the geometry, dielectric properties of the tissues, location, and frequency. The transfer function is a low-pass filter for current stimulation and a band-pass filter for voltage stimulation, as shown in 
                     Fig. 8. Long pulses (low frequency) have a larger voltage at the muscle for PS current stimulation, and shorter pulses (high frequency) have a higher voltage at the muscle for PS voltage stimulation. Petrosfky et al. [7,9] also showed a low-pass filter of the transfer function during current stimulation, where PS (low frequency) was better than BMAS; however, there is no advantage of BMAS over PS from the point of view of impedance variation if they have the same pulse duration. The disadvantage of high-frequency stimulation is that it exceeds the absolute refractory period for the sarcolemma [26]. However, there are some mechanisms that explain the function of BMAS: threshold voltage decreases in accordance with an increase in the number of alternating current cycles per burst, as determined by the burst duration (Gildemeister effect) [5].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The present study shows that the effect of the dielectric tissue variation behavior on muscle activation differs between voltage and current stimulation. The dispersive model simulation and the novel human-phantom coupling experiment showed that current stimulation needs a larger stimulation magnitude to generate muscle activity for lower impedance, which contradicts the studies that claimed that lower impedance increases the voltage transmission to the muscle. Voltage stimulation needs a lower activation threshold for lower impedance; however, the simulation also showed that a larger increment of the dispersive dielectric properties of the tissues can increase its MT. Considering only the effect of pulse duration under the same dispersive tissues using PS stimulation, a long pulse has a larger voltage output during current stimulation, and a shorter pulse has a higher voltage at the muscle during voltage stimulation, from the point of view of the impedance variation.

None declared.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows No. 14J06745 from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

