@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of the intermetallic compound microstructure on the tensile behavior of Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joint under various strain rates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The IMC roughness and tensile strength of solder joint has a positive correlation.


                        
                        
                           
                           The tensile strength has a positive correlation with the strain rate.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ductile fracture in the bulk solder plays dominant role at the low strain rate.


                        
                        
                           
                           Brittle facture in the IMC layer plays dominant role at the high strain rate.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The effects of the intermetallic compound (IMC) microstructure and the strain rate on the tensile strength and failure mode of Pb-free solder joints are investigated. The samples of Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joints are aged isothermally at 150°C for 0, 72, 288 and 500h, and the thickness of the IMC layer and the roughness of the solder/IMC interface are measured and used to characterize the microstructure evolution of the IMC layer. The tensile tests of the aged solder joints are conducted under the strain rates of 2×10−4, 2×10−2 and 2s−1. The results indicate that both the thickness and roughness of the IMC layer have influence on the strength and failure mode of the solder joint. With the increase of the aging time, the thickness of the IMC layer increases and the roughness of the solder/IMC interface decreases, as a result, the tensile strength of the solder joint decreases and the dominant failure mode migrates from the ductile fracture in the bulk solder to the brittle fracture in the IMC layer. There is a positive correlation between the tensile strength of the solder joint and the stain rate applied during the test. With the increase of the strain rate, the failure mode migrates from the ductile fracture in the bulk solder to the brittle fracture in the IMC layer.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Solder joints are commonly used to interconnect chip with substrate in first level packages or to interconnect component with printed circuit board (PCB) in board level packages. The mechanical behavior of solder joints is a key reliability issue for those packages. A solder joint consists of three constituents namely, the bulk solder, the Cu substrate, and the intermetallic compound (IMC) layer between the solder alloy and the Cu substrate, and two interfaces namely, the solder/IMC interface and the IMC/Cu interface. Thus the mechanical behavior of the solder joint is closely related with the mechanical behavior of these constituents. When the solder joint is under service condition or isothermal aging process, the microstructure of the three constituents evolves continuously [1,2], and this leads to the mechanical property change of the solder joint. Therefore, it is indispensible to investigate the effect of the microstructure evolution of the constituents on the mechanical behavior of the solder joint.

During an aging process, the microstructure coarsening of the bulk solder was observed, but it has little influence on the tensile strength of solder joints [3], and thus more attention are paid to the microstructure of the IMC layer and its effect on the mechanical behavior of solder joints. The thickness of the IMC layer is one key parameter to characterize the IMC microstructure, and it has drawn a lot of attention. The growth kinetics of the IMC thickness under the soldering and isothermal aging conditions has been investigated extensively [4–6]. The effect of the IMC thickness on the tensile strength [7,8], on the shear strength [9–11] and on the fracture toughness [12] of solder joints has also been investigated. The roughness of the solder/IMC interface is another key parameter to characterize the microstructure of the IMC layer. A few investigations were reported on the roughness evolution during the soldering process [13–15], however, how the solder/IMC interface roughness evolution influences the mechanical behavior of the solder joint has not been well understood. Therefore, the effect of the solder/IMC interface roughness on the tensile strength and failure mode of the solder joint is investigated in this paper.

Solder joints in portable electronic applications experience high strain rate deformation under conditions such as accidental drop/impact. Thus the effect of the strain rate on the mechanical behavior of solder joints is another important issue. Under the high strain rate deformation, the three constituents in the solder joint will exhibit different mechanical behavior because they have different sensitivities to the strain rate. The strain rate effect of the bulk solder has been investigated for various strain rates [16–19]. However, it is different from the strain rate sensitivity of the solder joint since the IMC layer is ignored. With increasing integrity and miniaturization of portable electronic devices, the size of the solder joint decreased, and the volume fraction of the IMC layer in the solder joint has been increased relatively [20]. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the effect of the IMC layer when examine the strain rate sensitivity of the solder joint. The effect of the strain rate on the tensile behavior of the solder joint has been examined at the strain rates ranging from 10−5 to 10−1
                     s−1 
                     [21,22], but few studies have been reported on the tensile behavior of the solder joint under the strain rate more than 1s−1, which is the strain rate experienced by solder joints during mechanical shock [23]. The tensile strength of Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joints was experimentally measured over the strain rate range 2×10−4–2s−1 in this paper.

The purpose of this experimental investigation is to examine the effects of the IMC microstructure and the strain rate on the tensile behavior of the Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joint. The average thickness of the IMC layer, the root mean square roughness of the solder/IMC interface and the average distance between two neighbored interfacial asperities in the solder joints with different isothermal aging time were measured and used to characterize the microstructure evolution of the IMC layer. The tensile strength of the aged solder joints were measured under the strain rates of 2×10−4, 2×10−2 and 2s−1, and the failure mode of the solder joints with different IMC microstructures and strain rates were examined. Based on our experimental observations, the effects of the microstructure of the IMC layer and the strain rate on the tensile behavior of the solder joint were presented, especially the effect of the solder/IMC interface roughness was emphasized.

The geometry of the Cu/Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joint is depicted in Fig. 1
                     . To fabricate the sample, a Cu plate (99.9wt.% purity) was machined into dog-bone shape, and then it was cut into two identical pieces. The end faces of the two cut pieces were grounded carefully with 600#, 1000#, 1500# SiC paper and were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath to prepare for soldering. Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu solder bar was rolled and cut into thin sheets with a dimension of 4.2mm×1.5mm×0.5mm, and then the solder sheet was clamped between the two prepared Cu pieces covered with rosin flux by using screws in a soldering fixture. The entire fixture was put into a reflow oven. The total reflow time was 630s with the peak reflow temperature fixed at 250±1°C for 10s. The as-reflowed solder joint samples were isothermally aged at 150°C for 0, 72, 288 and 500h, respectively. After the isothermal aging, all the samples were polished with polishing pastes.

To observe the IMC layer, the aged solder joints were packaged in epoxy resin, followed by grinding and polishing with 1μm diamond paste. To capture clear picture of the solder/Cu interface, the polished interface samples were etched by a solution containing 5% HCl and 95% C2H5OH. The microstructure of the IMC layer was observed by using a FEI Quanta 650 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The composition of the IMC layer was determined by Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX) analysis. For each aged solder joint, five zones along the solder/Cu interface were selected evenly and were observed.

To characterize the microstructure of the IMC layer, the average thickness of the total IMC layer, d
                     ave, was measured by quantitative image analysis. For each observed zone, the area A of the IMC layer, i.e., the hatched area in Fig. 2
                     , was measured and then was divided by the layer length L to obtain the average thickness as
                        
                           (1)
                           
                              
                                 
                                    d
                                 
                                 
                                    ave
                                 
                              
                              =
                              
                                 
                                    A
                                 
                                 
                                    L
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

The average thickness of the IMC layer after a particular aging time was then obtained by averaging the thickness of the five observed zones.

Other two parameters, the root mean square roughness R
                     rms and the average distance between two neighbored asperities, λ
                     ave, were used to characterize the roughness of the solder/IMC (Cu6Sn5) interface. The root mean square roughness R
                     rms was defined as
                        
                           (2)
                           
                              
                                 
                                    R
                                 
                                 
                                    rms
                                 
                              
                              =
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          1
                                       
                                       
                                          N
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          ∑
                                       
                                       
                                          i
                                          =
                                          1
                                       
                                       
                                          N
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          y
                                       
                                       
                                          i
                                       
                                       
                                          2
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     where N is the number of the measured data yi
                     , the yi
                      is the distance of a peak or valley point on the interface to the mean surface level (MSL), as depicted in Fig. 2. The MSL was taken as the average thickness of the IMC layer defined by Eq. (1). For each solder joint, its R
                     rms was obtained by averaging the roughness of the five observed zones. This kind of roughness was also used in Refs. [14,15] to characterize the solder/IMC interface during soldering process.

The average distance between two neighbored asperities, λ
                     ave, was determined by measuring the distances between all adjacent asperities which were above the MSL as
                        
                           (3)
                           
                              
                                 
                                    λ
                                 
                                 
                                    ave
                                 
                              
                              =
                              
                                 
                                    1
                                 
                                 
                                    N
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       ∑
                                    
                                    
                                       i
                                       =
                                       1
                                    
                                    
                                       N
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    λ
                                 
                                 
                                    i
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     The λave for each aged solder joint was then obtained by averaging those for the five observed zones. The combination of a smaller Rrms and a greater λave represents more planar solder/IMC interface.

To investigate the effect of the IMC microstructure and the strain rate on the tensile behavior of solder joints, six solder joint samples for one aging time and one strain rate were tested on an INSTRON 5948 testing machine at room temperature in air. Four aging time, 0, 72, 288, 500h, and three strain rates, 2×10−4, 2×10−2 and 2s−1, were designed to be tested. The microscopic fracture morphologies of all the fractured samples were observed by a FEI Quanta 650 SEM.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                        Fig. 3
                        a–d shows the morphology of the Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu interfacial IMC layer. For the as-reflowed or the 0h aged solder joint, a IMC layer consisting of the Cu6Sn5 η-phase was observed (Fig. 3a). The solder/IMC interface showed scallop shape and was extremely rough. The Cu3Sn ε-phase was not observed. For the aged solder joints, with the increase of the aging time, both the Cu6Sn5 and Cu3Sn layer became thicker and the solder/IMC interface became more planar (Fig. 3b–d).


                        Fig. 3e–h shows the SEM micrographs of the Cu6Sn5 grains, which are the top views of the IMC layer. For the as-reflowed solder joint, the Cu6Sn5 grains appeared to be round-like, and the deep channels between grains were observed (Fig. 3e). For the aged solder joints, the grains appeared to be polygon-like, and the grain size increased with increasing aging time (Fig. 3f–h).

The thickness of the IMC layer, the roughness R
                        rms and average distance between two neighbored asperities, λ
                        ave of the solder/IMC interface under different aging time were listed in Table 1
                        .

As shown in Table 1, with the increase of the aging time, the thickness of the Cu6Sn5 layer, the thickness of the Cu3Sn layer and the total thickness of the IMC layer (Cu6Sn5
                           +Cu3Sn) all increased. The three thicknesses are plotted against the square root of the aging time in Fig. 4
                           . When the aging time was less than 288h, the slope of the Cu3Sn thickness curve was lower than that of the Cu6Sn5 thickness curve, indicating the growth rate of the Cu3Sn was slightly slower than that of the Cu6Sn5, but after the 288h, the growth rate of the Cu3Sn was obviously faster than that of the Cu6Sn5. The reason can be that when the Cu6Sn5 layer grows and reaches a certain thickness, it acts as a barrier to inhibit the diffusion reaction between the Sn atoms from the solder and the Cu atoms from the Cu plate, and thus the growth rate of the Cu6Sn5 phase is slowed down. Meanwhile, the Sn atoms in the Cu6Sn5 phase can react with the Cu atoms from the Cu plate easily. As a result, the growth rate of the Cu3Sn layer is increased. This phenomenon has been also reported in Ref. [5].

The total thickness of the IMC layer, d, was found to follow a linear relationship with the square root of the aging time t, expressed as
                              
                                 (4)
                                 
                                    d
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          Kt
                                       
                                    
                                    +
                                    
                                       
                                          d
                                       
                                       
                                          0
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where d
                           0 is the thickness of the IMC layer after reflow, K is the layer-growth coefficient, which is related to the diffusion coefficient of the atoms in the IMC. Eq. (4) suggests that the thickness data follow the Fick’s diffusion law. The coefficient K was determined by the linear regression of the observed data in Fig. 4, thus K
                           Cu6Sn5+Cu3Sn
                           =4.41×10−18
                           m2/s. Ref. [4] gave K
                           =1.08×10−18 and K
                           =3.5×10−17
                           m2/s for the IMC layer at the Sn3.5Ag/Cu interface aged at 125 and 170°C, respectively. Ref. [6] gave K
                           =7.47×10−18
                           m2/s for the IMC layer at the Sn4.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu interface aged at 150°C. The difference of K is possibly from the different solder composition and the different aging temperature.

As shown in Table 1, with the increase of the aging time, the root mean square roughness R
                           rms of the solder/IMC interface decreased and the λ
                           ave increased. It indicates that the solder/IMC interface becomes more planar with increasing aging time. The reason could be that the solder in the valley of the scallop-like solder/IMC interface is closer to the Cu plate, the Sn atoms from the solder and the Cu atoms from the Cu plate reach each other faster, and this leads to a relative higher growth rate in the valley region than other parts of the IMC layer. As a result, the valley is filled up and the R
                           rms decreases. At the same time, in the lateral direction of the Cu6Sn5 layer, the neighbored grains merge with each other, the size of the Cu6Sn5 grain increases, as observed in Fig. 3, and this leads to the increase of the λ
                           ave. This evolution of the solder/IMC roughness during aging process is completely different from that under soldering. During the soldering process, the roughness increases with the increase of the reflow time [15].


                        Fig. 5
                         presents the tensile stress–strain curves of the aged solder joints under different strain rates. These curves were obtained by subtracting the elastic deformation of the Cu plate from the recorded overall displacements of the sample. The peak stress of the curve in Fig. 5 was taken as the tensile strength of the solder joint, then the tensile strength, the thickness d
                        ave of the IMC layer and the roughness R
                        rms of the solder/IMC interface are plotted in Fig. 6
                        . This figure presents a more clear relationship between the tensile strength of the solder joint and the evolution of the IMC microstructure. With the increase of the aging time, the thickness of the IMC layer increased and the roughness of the solder/IMC interface decreased simultaneously, and the tensile strength decreased. The same trend was observed for all the three strain rate levels.

Under the two lower strain rates, 2×10−4 and 2×10−2
                        s−1, although the tensile strength of the solder joint had a general tendency of decreasing with increasing aging time, the tensile strength of the 288h aged solder joint corresponding to an IMC thickness of approximate 5μm, was higher than that of the 72h aged solder joint, as shown in Fig. 6. Similar results had been reported by other researchers [8,21]. This fluctuation of the tensile strength cannot be attributed to experimental data scatter, and it may be the result of the combined effect of the thickness and roughness of the IMC layer. On the one hand, thicker IMC layer contains more dislocations and microcracks which make the IMC layer vulnerable, therefore the increase of the IMC layer thickness will degrade the solder joint strength; on the other hand, the reduced solder/IMC interfacial roughness means a relatively planar interfacial morphology, which mitigates the effect of the stress concentration at the root of the protruding Cu6Sn5 grains, and thus it will strengthen the solder joint. As shown in Fig. 6, the roughness R
                        rms of the 72h aged solder joint was almost the same as that of the 0h aged solder joint, but the thickness d
                        ave was much greater. Thus, compared with the 0h aged solder joint, the tensile strength of the 72h was lower. For the 288h aged solder joint, the thickness of the IMC layer increased, but the roughness decreased greatly, indicating the solder/IMC interface became more planar than that in the 72h aged solder joint, and thus the stress concentration caused by the rough solder/IMC interface was reduced greatly. As a result, the tensile strength of the 288h aged solder joint was slightly higher than that of the 72h aged solder joint. For the 500h aged solder joint, it had the most planar solder/IMC interface and the thickest IMC layer, and it had the lowest tensile strength. It suggests that both the IMC layer thickness and the solder/IMC interfacial roughness have influence on the tensile strength of the solder joint, but after the IMC layer reaches a critical thickness, such as 5μm, the thickness plays a dominant role in the strength.

Under the higher strain rate of 2s−1, the tensile strength of the solder joint decreased monotonously with increasing aging time, and there is no fluctuation observed as that under the strain rates of 2×10−2 and 2×10−4
                        s−1. The reason may be that the Pb-free bulk solder material is sensitive to the strain rate. Under a higher strain rate, the bulk solder in the solder joint becomes harder and stronger [18], the deformation localization caused by the roughness of the solder/IMC interface cannot be well developed, and thus the effect of the roughness is suppressed. As a result, the IMC thickness plays a dominant role, and the tensile strength of the solder joint decreases monotonously with the increasing IMC thickness.


                        Fig. 6 also shows that for the same aging time, the tensile strength of the solder joint had a positive correlation with the strain rate.


                        Fig. 7
                         presents the fractograph of the fractured solder joints. At the strain rate of 2×10−4
                        s−1, for the 0h aged solder joint, dimples were observed, indicating a typical ductile fracture occurred completely in the bulk solder (Fig. 7a). For the 72h aged solder joint, dimples were also observed but broken Cu6Sn5 grains were found at the bottom of some dimples (Fig. 7b). This indicates that the protruding Cu6Sn5 grains along the solder/IMC interface were broken firstly and then the crack propagated into the solder. For the 288h aged solder joint, dimples could also be observed but fewer broken Cu6Sn5 grains was observed in these dimples (Fig. 7c). This suggests that the crack occurred predominantly in the bulk solder. For the 500h aged solder joint, a large area of dimples and a small area of cleaved Cu6Sn5 grains coexist on the fractured surface (Fig. 7d). This suggests that the crack occurred partly in the bulk solder and partly in the IMC layer. Considering the results presented in Fig. 6, it seems to suggest that the solder joint with thicker IMC layer and more planar solder/IMC interface tends to crack in the IMC layer, and more cracking in the IMC layer results in lower tensile strength.

At the strain rate of 2×10−2
                        s−1, the situation was similar to that at the strain rate of 2×10−4
                        s−1. The difference was that the size of the dimples observed was smaller, because at the higher deformation speed, the dimples had not enough time to grow or coalesce. The other difference was that at the higher deformation speed, the solder joint was more possible to crack in the IMC layer. This feature was evident by comparing Fig. 7h with Fig. 7d. In Fig. 7h, a larger area of cleaved Cu6Sn5 grains was observed.

At the strain rate of 2s−1, the situation was very different. In the fractured surfaces of all the aged solder joints, plenty of broken Cu6Sn5 grains were observed, and almost no ductile dimples was observed (Fig. 7i–l). This suggests a completely brittle fracture occurred in the IMC layer. Based on this observation, the tensile strength labeled the strain rate 2s−1 in Fig. 6 can be interpreted as the tensile strength of the IMC layer, and there is a negative correlation between the tensile strength and the IMC thickness or volume.

Almost all the observed cracking path neighbored upon the solder/IMC interface. In the solder joint, the region close to the solder/IMC interface is the weakest in strength because it shows great stress concentration caused by the rough interface and the bi-material interface.

To show the relationship between the failure mode and the aging time and the strain rate clearly, the statistic results of the failure modes for all the fractured samples are presented in Fig. 8
                        . The failure mode was categorized into three types: (a) the ductile failure occurred completely in the bulk solder, (b) the mixed failure occurred partly in the bulk solder and partly in the IMC layer simultaneously, and (c) the brittle failure occurred completely in the IMC layer. The percentage of the failure mode in Fig. 8 was defined as the ratio of the number of samples fractured in a specific type of failure mode to the number of the tested samples. For example, for the 72h aged solder joints tested under the strain rate of 2×10−4
                        s−1, there were 5 samples fractured in the ductile failure mode among 7 tested samples, then the percentage of the ductile failure mode in this group was 71.4%.

Under the two low strain rates, the ductile failure and the mixed failure were the dominant failure mode. With the increase of the aging time, the percentage of the ductile failure decreased, and the percentages of the mixed failure and the brittle failure increased. This failure mode migration had been observed by other researchers [9,24]. The thickness of the IMC layer and the roughness of the solder/IMC interface might relate to the failure mode migration. With the increase of the aging time, the increase of the IMC thickness degrades the tensile strength of the IMC, and at the same time, the decrease of the interface roughness reduces the stress concentration in the bulk solder neighbored on the interface. These two factors drive the failure mode migrating from the ductile fracture in the bulk solder close to the interface to the brittle fracture in the IMC layer close to the interface.

With the increase of the strain rate, the percentage of the brittle failure in the IMC layer increased greatly. Under the strain rate of 2s−1, the percentage of the brittle failure in the IMC layer increased to 80%, becoming the dominant failure mode of the aged solder joints. The reason could be that on the one hand, the Pb-free bulk solder is sensitive to the strain rate and it has greater strength when it experiences high speed deformation, and this leads to the IMC layer more vulnerable. On the other hand, under the high strain rate, the deformation localization in the bulk solder close to the interface, which is caused by the roughness of the solder/IMC interface, is suppressed, and thus enhances the brittle fracture in the IMC layer.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The behavior of Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joints was investigated over a variety of IMC microstructure and strain rate. Based on the experimental results and the discussion, following important points were derived:
                        
                           (1)
                           There is a negative correlation between the IMC thickness and the tensile strength and a positive correlation between the IMC roughness and the tensile strength of the solder joint. The roughness plays a more important role at the two lower strain rates, 2×10−4 and 2×10−2
                              s−1, and under the aging time of 288h or the critical IMC thickness of approximate 5μm.

Under the same aging time, the tensile strength of the solder joint has a positive correlation with the strain rate.

The thickness of the IMC layer and the roughness of the solder/IMC interface affect the failure mode of solder joints. With the increase of the thickness and the decrease of the roughness, the failure mode migrates from the ductile fracture in the bulk solder to the brittle fracture in the IMC layer.

With the increase of the strain rate, the failure mode migrates from the ductile fracture in the bulk solder to the brittle fracture in the IMC layer.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) No. 10972012 and the Doctoral Fund of Innovation of Beijing University of Technology.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

