@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Study of wrist pulse signals using time domain spatial features

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Wrist pulse signals are analyzed using spatial features obtained from a bi-modal Gaussian model.


                        
                        
                           
                           Statistically significant group differences are found for two cases: before and after lunch, before and after exercise.


                        
                        
                           
                           A recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine classifier is used for classification.


                        
                        
                           
                           High classification accuracy is obtained for both exercise case (99.71%) and lunch case (99.94%).


                        
                        
                           
                           There is tangible scope for using these results in various healthcare applications.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Wrist pulse signal

Gaussian model

Spatial features

Support vector machine

Biomedical signal processing

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Blood travels throughout the body and thus its flow is modulated by changes in body condition. As a consequence, the wrist pulse signal contains important information about the status of the human body. In this work we have employed signal processing techniques to extract important information from these signals. Radial artery pulse pressure signals are acquired at wrist position noninvasively for several subjects for two cases of interest, viz. before and after exercise, and before and after lunch. Further analysis is performed by fitting a bi-modal Gaussian model to the data and extracting spatial features from the fit. The spatial features show statistically significant (p
                     <0.001) changes between the groups for both the cases, which indicates that they are effective in distinguishing the changes taking place due to exercise or food intake. Recursive cluster elimination based support vector machine classifier is used to classify between the groups. A high classification accuracy of 99.71% is achieved for the exercise case and 99.94% is achieved for the lunch case. This paper demonstrates the utility of certain spatial features in studying wrist pulse signals obtained under various experimental conditions. The ability of the spatial features in distinguishing changing body conditions can be potentially used for various healthcare applications.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Pulse pressure is a manifestation of arterial palpation of the heart beat. When heart contracts oxygenated blood flow occurs from left ventricle to aorta. At that time a pulse waveform is produced by the heart. After blood is ejected into aorta, blood continues its flow to the other parts of body because of compliance of arteries. The velocity of pulse pressure waveform depends on the compliance of arteries. During systolic period the pulse wave travels away from the heart and during diastolic period the pulse wave reflects back towards heart. Hence the pulse wave is a combination of forward wave and reflected wave [1]. The person’s pulse can be felt at any place that allows an artery to be compressed against a bone, such as at wrist (Radial artery). The wrist pulse has been recognized as the most fundamental signal of life, containing vital information of health because any pathological changes of a person’s body condition are reflected in the wrist pulse. In order to detect the pathological changes in the body, pulse diagnosis is gaining importance in recent times. As an important source on health status evaluation, pulse signal contains much more information such as pressure and temperature. This paper mainly addresses the processing of wrist pulse pressure signal.

Normally palm of physicians supports the wrist of patient and pulse examination is done using fingertips. Without the benefit of any physical recording and analysis, the diagnosis requires a long period of study and practice by individual physician [2]. Hence there is a need to use the power of digital signal processing to make a computerized analysis of pulse signals.

A heart beat generates pressure wave which propagate throughout the arterial system. The shapes of wrist pulse waveforms are altered by their continuous interaction with the non-uniform arterial system. These waves expand the arterial walls as they travel along and the expansions are palpable as the wrist pulse. A typical pulse signal has a multi period trend. Systolic wave with higher amplitude constitutes the main component of the pulse signal. The diastolic wave has lower amplitude accompanied by a phase shift. The information regarding heart is contained in the systolic wave whereas the secondary wave provides information on the reflection sites and the periphery of the arterial system [3]. Many efforts have been made recently to process wrist pulse pressure signals using efficient signal processing techniques [4–9]. Though several non-linear techniques [10–11] have emerged lately for processing of signals, they are mostly data driven, while we have used a model driven approach in this work. In this paper, we extract time domain spatial features from wrist pulse signals and then use these features for the analysis of wrist pulse waveforms recorded under various experimental conditions. The wrist pulse typically has two maxima and three minima in one cycle. The magnitudes and time indices of these extrema points and various combinations of differences between these times are termed as spatial features of the pulse wave. The spatial features will be useful in the understanding and classification of the wrist pulse signals recorded before exercise and after exercise, as also before lunch and after lunch. There is very limited literature on analysis of wrist pulse signals in case of exercise [12] and also in case of food intake [13], hence this work attempts to contribute towards understanding the behavior of the cardiovascular system during physical activity as well as during food consumption using wrist pulse signals. This parallel study of both exercise and lunch cases aims at better understanding of the application of spatial features to understand biological signals. The next section on methods discusses preprocessing of the pulse signals, feature extraction and classification. This is followed by results, discussion and conclusion.

@&#METHODS@&#

We have used wavelet de-noising technique for removal of noise from recorded pulse signals. Wavelet methods [14] allow us to find low frequency information during long intervals and high frequency information during short intervals. By using a properly chosen mother wavelet function we obtain decomposition of the signals. Usually high frequencies appear in low scales whereas low frequencies appear in high scales. Upon removal of these low and high scale detail coefficients we can obtain cleaned signals. Usually wrist pulse signals are contaminated by noise due to electronic nonlinearities (high frequency) and due to movement of hand during recording (low frequency).

Segmentation of single period pulse waveform is useful in further analysis. The aim is to segment the complete wrist pulse time series into single period waves [15]. An amplitude threshold is chosen manually by inspection. A simple peak detection algorithm is employed to find the peak of the pulse signal which crosses the threshold. We next find the local minimum which occurs before this peak. We search points in the reverse direction from peak until a positive derivative is reached, and that point is chosen as the pulse’s starting point. One cycle is taken as the signal from the starting point of the current pulse to the starting point of the next pulse.

Welch’s power spectral density (PSD) is obtained for all subjects in both exercise and lunch cases. The spectrum is divided into four equally spaced frequency bands in the range 0–8Hz. Energy of the signal in each of these bands is calculated and normalized to reflect relative energies. These normalized energies are tabulated and compared between the groups.

The magnitudes and time indices of the two maxima and three minima points of a single period pulse wave, and various combinations of differences between these times are together termed as spatial features of the pulse wave (original and derived). Such spatial features are obtained for both before exercise and after exercise. Totally seventeen spatial features are compared and classified.

It is necessary to see if the spatial features show statistically significant difference across groups. A paired t-test is performed between before exercise and after exercise groups using all the features of all the subjects. Resulting p-values are used to see if the parameters are statistically significant or not.

It is important to see if the spatial features can distinguish between the groups. A Recursive Cluster Elimination based Support Vector Machine (RCE–SVM) is used to classify between the groups [16]. Though there are advanced neural network methods used for the classification of biomedical signals [17], using them to classify recursively still remains difficult. They also do not provide information about those top classifying features which contributed maximum towards a high classification accuracy. The RCE–SVM classifier divides the data into training and testing sets and does classification over many iterations. In this work six hundred iterations are used. Moreover RCE–SVM iteratively reduces the number of features used in classification and gives classification accuracies for various reducing number of top-classifiers. It also gives those top-classifiers which are responsible for giving highest accuracy. Average accuracy across all iterations is obtained and the highest accuracy across clusters are obtained along with the corresponding top classifying features.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS@&#

USB 6009 NI-DAQ (Data Acquisition System) has been used to acquire pulse signals. A bi-morph sensor is connected to the DAQ which in turn is connected to the Personal Computer (PC). Lab view software is used in accordance with USB to acquire signals onto the PC. Signals are acquired at 500Hz sampling rate by placing the bi-morph sensor at a position where the pulse is efficiently sensed on the wrist. We recorded wrist pulse signals from seven subjects, with four pulse cycles/segments per subject, giving 28 segments in total. 28 segments each were obtained both before lunch (12 noon) and after lunch (2pm). Similarly 28 segments each were obtained both before exercise and after exercise.


                        Fig. 3.1
                         shows an example of wavelet de-noising. Fig. 3.1(a) shows noisy pulse signal and Fig. 3.1(b) shows signal after wavelet denoising. It is clear that noise has been considerably removed through wavelet denoising.


                        Table 3.1
                         shows normalized energy values in various frequency bands for the cases of before exercise and after exercise. The values reflect relative distribution of energies in various bands of frequencies. It is observed that there is a slightly higher energy concentration in the mid bands (2–6Hz) for the after exercise case.


                        Table 3.2
                         shows normalized energy values in various frequency bands for the cases of before lunch and after lunch. It is observed that there is considerably higher energy concentration in the lowest band (0–2Hz) for the after lunch case. This corroborates with the fact that body processes slow down after lunch owing to increased blood flow to the stomach, which is reflected in the wrist pulse signal. Consequently there is higher concentration in the mid bands (2–6Hz) for the case of before lunch.

A typical wrist pulse signal has two peaks and three extrema in general as shown in Fig. 3.2
                        . We have marked the various spatial parameters of interest in the figure.

We can see from Fig. 3.2 that the first peak (hb
                        ) of pulse is related to the blood ejaculation by heart contraction; the second (hd
                        ) peak reflects the artery recovery and peripheral vessels’ reflected wave. ti
                         is the time at which hi
                         occurs. tc
                         is the starting point of the diastole, T is the signal length. These spatial features can be used to derive more features are shown below. Here tab
                         is same as ta
                        
                        −
                        tb
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 tba
                                 /T
                                 =time of ascent part of primary wave÷period


                                 tcb
                                 /T
                                 =time of descent part of primary wave÷period


                                 tdc
                                 /T
                                 =time of ascent part of secondary wave÷period


                                 ta′d
                                 /T
                                 =time of descent part of secondary wave÷period


                                 ta′b
                                 /tba
                                 
                                 =time of descent part of pulse wave÷time of ascent part of pulse wave


                                 hc
                                 /hb
                                 
                                 =amplitude of dicrotic notch at c
                                 ÷amplitude of primary peak


                                 hd
                                 /hb
                                 
                                 =amplitude of secondary peak÷amplitude of primary peak


                        Table 3.3
                         shows the values of averaged spatial features for the exercise case. Table 3.4
                         shows the values of averaged spatial features for the lunch case.


                        Fig. 3.3
                         shows bar graphs of averaged spatial features for the case of before and after exercise. Blue represents before exercise and red represents after exercise case. Fig. 3.4
                         shows bar graphs of averaged spatial features for the case of before and after lunch. Blue represents before lunch and red represents after lunch case. All the values are normalized. Table 3.5
                         shows the look up table of spatial features for Figs. 3.3 and 3.4.

From Table 3.3, the ratio of primary wave time of ascent to the signal length is less after exercise. However, before exercise, the ratio of primary wave time of descent to length, the ratio of secondary wave time of ascent to length and the ratio of total time of descent to length have lower values. This could imply that the reflected waves are relatively quicker than the forward waves after exercise. That would mean that the body is responding relatively quicker than the heart after exercise. These inferences could be useful while trying to understand more complex biological phenomena.

From Table 3.4, the ratio of primary wave time of ascent to the signal length is more after lunch. However, after lunch, the ratio of secondary wave time of ascent to length and the ratio of total time of descent to length have lower values. This could imply that the reflected waves are relatively slower than the forward waves after lunch. That would mean that the body is responding relatively slowly than the heart after lunch. These observations have a one-to-one correspondence with the observations made for the exercise case and could be useful in understanding complex biological phenomena. These results also show the efficacy of our model driven approach, compared to other popular data driven nonlinear approaches [18,19] recently gaining importance.

A paired t-test is performed using the spatial features of all the subjects. A p-value of 
                           
                              9.1
                              ∗
                              
                                 
                                    10
                                 
                                 
                                    -
                                    4
                                 
                              
                           
                         is obtained for the case of before and after exercise (threshold=0.001), showing that these spatial features are statistically significant between before exercise and after exercise cases. Similarly, a p-value of 
                           
                              1.1
                              ∗
                              
                                 
                                    10
                                 
                                 
                                    -
                                    4
                                 
                              
                           
                         is obtained for the case of before and after lunch (threshold=0.001), showing that these spatial features are statistically significant between before lunch and after lunch cases.

RCE–SVM classification is carried out using all the seventeen spatial features of all the subjects for both exercise and lunch cases. 17 clusters are chosen initially, with a decrease of 0.2, meaning the second iteration will have 
                           
                              10
                              -
                              0.2
                              ∗
                              10
                              =
                              8
                           
                         clusters, with decimal values being rounded off. In the same way, number of clusters is decreased until only two clusters remain; and this is performed recursively for six hundred iterations. Average classification accuracy is obtained across clusters, along with the highest classification accuracy. Fig. 3.5
                         shows average classification accuracies obtained for all clusters for the case of before and after exercise.

Maximum classification accuracy obtained is 99.71%, using all seventeen features. This clearly shows that all spatial features have a high distinguishing ability. A high accuracy of 99.38% is obtained using six top classifiers. These 6 top classifiers are hc
                         (incisure point), hd
                         (peak of dicrotic wave), hd
                        /hb
                        , tcb
                        , tba
                        /T and T
                        −
                        tc
                         (diastole time). Fig. 3.6
                         shows average classification accuracies obtained for all clusters for the case of before and after lunch.

Maximum classification accuracy obtained is 99.94%, using all seventeen features. This clearly shows that all spatial features have a high distinguishing ability. A high accuracy of 99.52% is obtained using three top classifiers. These 3 top classifiers are tcb
                         (p-wave descent time), tdc
                         (s-wave ascent time) and ta
                        
                        ′
                        
                           b
                        /tba
                         (pulse descent time/pulse ascent time).

These results demonstrate that the spatial features used to analyze wrist pulse signals contain useful information, which are statistically significant between groups and have high distinguishing ability resulting in high classification accuracy.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The wrist pulse signal of a person contains significant and important information about the condition of the cardiovascular system. Extracting this information through digital signal processing techniques is important for computerized pulse diagnosis. In this study we have analyzed wrist pulse signals by extracting useful spatial features from the signals recorded before and after exercise and also before and after lunch. It has been shown that the spatial features are very effective in detecting the changes in signals obtained under the two recording conditions for both the cases. The spatial parameters have been used as features for further statistical study. The parameters are found to be statistically significant (p-value=0.00091 for exercise case and p-value=0.00011 for lunch case) with high classification accuracy of 99.71% for exercise case and 99.94% for lunch case, which clearly demonstrates the efficacy of the parameters. Further work is needed for studying the potential of these parameters in detecting abnormality condition in the cardiovascular system.

The highlight of the work is that it has demonstrated the feasibility of spatial features obtained by using bi-modal Gaussian model for effectively detecting the changes in wrist pulse signals. Statistically significant (p
                     <10−3) differences between the two groups have been shown for both the cases viz. before lunch and after lunch cases as also before exercise and after exercise cases. The work has potential applications in healthcare.

Processing of wrist pulse signals has a lot of potential for various healthcare applications. However, it appears that not many studies have been made on wrist pulse signals and this study is an attempt in the direction. This study is important since it attempts to address the issue for signals recorded under two experimental conditions and illustrate the efficacy of spatial features for the purpose. While the paper demonstrates the feasibility of the use of spatial features for wrist pulse signals for two experimental conditions, there is a need for applying these results for various healthcare applications. This can be accomplished only by recording wrist pulse signals from patients in hospitals and then comparing it with signals from normal subjects. Efforts are being made in this direction.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank the Robert Bosch Center for Cyber Physical Systems at Indian Institute of Science for their support. The authors would also like to thank Prof. T. Srinivas for many useful discussions.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

