@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A new routing protocol for energy efficient mobile applications for ad hoc networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A new Energy-Aware Span Routing Protocol (EASRP) for wireless ad hoc networks is proposed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Proposed protocol can minimize utilization of energy source by combining energy saving approaches Span and AFECA.


                        
                        
                           
                           It uses the Remote Activated Switch and wakes up the sleeping nodes during inactive time for reduce latency problem.


                        
                        
                           
                           The performance parameter of proposed protocol is tested under Network Simulator-2.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

MANET

Energy conservation

Span

AFECA

Remote Activated Switch

Zone Routing Protocol

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) is an infrastructure-less collection of nodes that are powered by portable batteries. Consumption of energy is the major constraint in a wireless network. This paper presents a new algorithm called Energy-Aware Span Routing Protocol (EASRP) that uses energy-saving approaches such as Span and the Adaptive Fidelity Energy Conservation Algorithm (AFECA). Energy consumption is further optimized by using a hardware circuit called the Remote Activated Switch (RAS) to wake up sleeping nodes. These energy-saving approaches are well-established in reactive protocols. However, there are certain issues to be addressed when using EASRP in a hybrid protocol, especially a proactive protocol. Simulation results for the EASRP protocol show an increase in energy efficiency of 12.2% and 17.45% compared with EAZRP and ZRP, respectively. The EASRP protocol also proves to be effective in by producing a better packet delivery ratio for low- and high-density networks as measured by the NS-2 simulation tool.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

MANET [1] is a collection of nodes that act independently but depend on each other for their operation in the network. The process of route discovery, route maintenance and error reporting happens collectively rather than centrally. The importance of MANET is increasing with the increased dependence on personal devices, such as Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs), smartphones and laptops for information exchange. These devices can be linked into a network at any time without any infrastructure using MANET. They are mainly being used in the defence field, where the possibility of setting up infrastructure in hostile areas is not feasible. However, MANET is also used for civilian applications, such as for transferring data during a meeting that was arranged in a short time [2]. MANET has some unique features: (1) absence of centralized control, (2) time-varying wireless link characteristics, (3) route changes occur due to mobility, (4) the limited range of wireless transmission and (5) packet losses due to the hidden terminal problem [3]. In addition to these unique features, they have the common features of wireless communication systems, such as unreliable links and restricted bandwidth resources.

The process of routing is complex in MANET due to its unique features. Thus, the routing protocol of MANET plays a crucial role in determining the performance of the network. It controls the route establishment time, throughput, Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) and the energy consumption of the entire network. Energy is consumed due to the route discovery process, which involves the transmission of overheads. The number of overheads is proportional to the rate of change of the network topology.

Depending upon the route discovery process, the routing protocols [4,5] are divided into three types:
                        
                           1.
                           Reactive protocol (or “on demand”), where the route discovery is carried out when the node has some data to transmit. The nodes do not periodically update the topology information. Thus, the route establishment time is high, but the overheads are minimal. Examples are Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV) and Dynamic Source Routing (DSR).

Proactive protocols (or “table driven”), in which the nodes periodically update the changes in network topology, regardless of whether they have data to send. At any time, each node knows the route to all other nodes. Thus, the route discovery time is minimal, but more overheads are needed. Examples of proactive protocols are Hierarchical State Routing (HSR) and Destination Sequenced Distance Vector (DSDV).

Hybrid protocols combine the pros and cons of the previous two types of routing protocols. Examples of such protocols are the Zone Routing Protocol (ZRP) and the Hybrid Ad hoc Routing Protocol (HARP).

Energy saving [6,7] can be achieved in MANET in three ways:
                        
                           1.
                           
                              The Power Save Approach – The nodes are designed to sleep for a particular period by use of an efficient scheduling technique.


                              The Power Control Approach – Transmission power is controlled and the least energy is used to route the data packets. It utilizes the power based on-distance rule: a short-distance transmission [8] expends less energy than a long-distance transmission.


                              The Power Management Control Approach – In the ad hoc power saving mode of IEEE 802.11 [9], nodes are placed into sleep state using the Adaptive Ad-hoc Traffic Indication Message (ATIM) window and beacon interval at the Medium Access Control (MAC) layer. Thus, they increase the network lifetime [10]. Power management faces three challenges: beacon contention, timing synchronization and neighbour maintenance. Based on the traffic announcement message, the node awakens until the end of the beacon interval and the other nodes remain in the sleep state to save power until the ATIM interval is over. The total energy saving depends on the time spent in sleep state and the number of nodes. Thus, the overall lifetime of the network is enhanced.

This paper focuses on the first issue, namely, an energy efficient scheduling technique. In this paper, we combine the energy-saving approaches of AFECA and Span with Zone Routing Protocol and finally incorporate the hardware circuit Remote Activated Switch to wake up the sleeping nodes in the network. The EASRP is a promising solution for the energy efficiency of the network and for increasing the network’s lifetime. It is possible to reduce energy consumption and increase the PDR by optimizing the Span coordination algorithm for a high-density network.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we present recent developments in routing protocol systems. In Section 3, we describe the proposed protocol. In Sections 4 and 5, the simulation setup and results are discussed with supporting graphs. In the last section, the advantages of EASRP are presented, and the scope for further research to improve its performance is put forth.

@&#RELATED WORKS@&#

AFECA [11] is a power-save approach used with the routing protocols. It provides a procedure to select the idle nodes and rotate nodes into the sleep, listen and active states. AFECA is the enhanced form of Basic Energy-Conserving Algorithm (BECA) with a new sleep interval based on neighbours. Energy saving is achieved by changing the states of the nodes periodically.

Span [12] adaptively selects coordinators from the network from amongst all nodes. It rotates the coordinator role amongst nodes to balance the energy savings. Thus, coordinators act as backbone routers for the whole network and provide guaranteed connectivity by ensuring that at least one active node is in the coordinator’s range. The coordinators are selected based on their remaining energy and the utilization of the node [13]. If two nodes cannot reach each other, those nodes become a coordinator node, which produces better throughput and energy efficiency.

An algorithm named Energy-Aware Geo-location-aided Routing (EAGER) [14] is based on a hybrid routing protocol, which belongs to a topology-based technique. The routing protocol divides the network into different proactive cells based on self-location information. It reduces the number of nodes participating in the route discovery process and transmission range [15]. It uses RAS to wake up a sleeping node to active communication. The performance of EAGER shows better energy efficiency than that of ZRP.

Genetic algorithms based upon heuristic approaches provide methods to reduce the energy consumption in MANETs. An example of such an approach is Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [16] in routing protocols. ACO is based upon the natural behaviour of ants; it finds the shortest route by depositing pheromones in their food. These approaches are rugged with respect to the dynamic topological changes, which are characteristic of MANETs.

In [17], Geography-informed Energy Conservation (GAF) conserves energy based on location information obtained through GPS. In this approach, the whole network is divided into virtual grids of minimum size. Communication between the neighbouring virtual grid nodes is present. Energy saving is achieved by a power-save technique to place the nodes into the sleep state. The nodes are in three states, namely, route discovery, sleep and active. The states are rotated to balance the residual energy in a distributed manner. The node stays in the active state for a random time interval and then enters an energy-saving state. Many topological-control, energy-efficient routing protocols have been proposed [18,19].

Gossip-based Sleep Protocol (GSP) is proposed for synchronous and asynchronous networks. Each node changes its state into the sleep state for a random time interval based on the gossip probability P, which in turn reduces its energy consumption [20].

In [21], AFECA/Span with AODV resulted in very low energy consumption, but with some drawbacks. AODV is a reactive routing protocol: a node starts searching for a route to the destination when it has data for that node. Hence, the time needed to establish the route is long; it increases the end-to-end delay. In addition, Span makes the idle nodes sleep for a certain period of time. During this time interval, the node cannot transmit any data packets; hence, the packets may drop. To avoid this, the source node depends on retransmission of data to the sleeping node until there is an acknowledgement. This repeated transmission of data leads to more energy consumption. Further, in the case of a route request or reply, the time to establish the route is increased.

In this approach, Span is combined with the existing combination of ZRP and AFECA [22] to increase the energy efficiency; this is more efficient than AFECA alone. The methodology adopted to merge Span/AFECA with ZRP is discussed in the following section.

ZRP [23] is a hybrid routing protocol utilizing the concept of zones to determine whether to use reactive or proactive routing for transmitting data to a particular node. Fig. 1
                         shows the network of nodes with zone radius 2. The nodes within the zone use Intra Routing Protocol (IARP) [24], i.e., a proactive routing protocol. If the nodes outside the zone use Inter Routing Protocol (IERP) [25], this is equivalent to using a reactive protocol. The zone is formed based on the number of hops to reach a node instead of the transmission range. The number of hops is known as the radius of the zone. Each node has a separate zone of its own and all of the zones overlap with each other. Once a node receives a data packet for transmission, it checks whether the destination node is inside or outside of its zone. If it is inside the zone, the packet is transmitted through proactive routing; otherwise, the path discovery process is started, and the route request is sent to all nodes.

Bordercasting is used for spreading the route discovery request to all of the peripheral nodes. It removes the repeated transmission of the request to the same node. The Bordercast Resolution Protocol [26] forms a tree structure that comes under the IERP of the ZRP. In IARP, the node has to be periodically updated with its neighbour information. Neighbour Discovery Protocol (NDP) is used to find the neighbours and uses the “HELLO” message to update the neighbour node information.

In EAZRP, ZRP was combined with AFECA and RAS and the results proved that EAZRP performed well with respect to network size. AFECA is an enhanced technique based on the BECA. The sleep time is constant in BECA, whereas in AFECA, the time varies according to the network density. AFECA has three states, called active, listen and sleep. The sleep interval is changed depending on the number of neighbours in the network. The nodes switch between the various states depending upon route establishment. If a node is idle for a certain time interval, it enters sleep mode. T
                        a, T
                        l and T
                        s values represent active, listen and sleep times. AFECA has the advantage that the sleep time can increase with an increase in the number of neighbours. The sleep time of AFECA is T
                        sa
                        =
                        T
                        s
                        ∗Random (1, N), where T
                        sa is the adaptive sleep time and N is the number of neighbours. Due to this variation of the sleep time, more energy is saved than with BECA. In AFECA, latency occurs due to more retransmissions between a source and a sleeping node participating in the transmission of packets. It reduces the energy consumed by the network by 34.78% [22].

Span is a well-known reactive protocol, but for it to be usable in hybrid protocols, certain modifications are required. In Span, energy saving is achieved by choosing coordinators, which serve as a backbone in the routing process of the entire network. Thus, energy is saved by placing the remaining nodes in sleep mode. The coordinators act analogously to a router and all other nodes can be reached from one of these coordinator nodes. The role of coordinator is distributed amongst all nodes to provide equal opportunity to every node. This is implemented to overcome the undue power advantage that non-coordinator nodes have over coordinator nodes. The coordinator selection and coordinator withdrawal processes are used in distributing the role of coordinator.


                        Fig. 2
                         shows an example of a connected backbone network. Nodes are connected with dotted or solid lines depending on whether they are outside or within radio range. In this picture, black nodes act as coordinators, and the others are non-coordinators. Packet transmissions between nodes 3 and 1 and 4 and 5 are forwarded by the coordinators. If node 2 were elected as a coordinator, it would mean that the bandwidth of nodes 3 and 1 would not with the bandwidth of nodes 4 and 5.

The coordinator selection/withdrawal process is invoked by all nodes periodically. For this process, the node needs all neighbour information and the utility of the nodes, regardless of whether they are coordinators. Along with this information, the remaining energy of that node is also considered in the selection process. This information is piggybacked with the “HELLO” messages, which contain all of the necessary information. Using this information, a delay period is calculated for each of the nodes before announcing a coordinator. The delay period is indirectly proportional to the remaining energy and number of neighbours and is given by
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   1
                                                   -
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               En
                                                            
                                                            
                                                               r
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               En
                                                            
                                                            
                                                               m
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          +
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   1
                                                   -
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               Ca
                                                            
                                                            
                                                               i
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  
                                                                     N
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                     i
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                            
                                                               2
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          +
                                          R
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 ∗
                                 
                                    
                                       N
                                    
                                    
                                       i
                                    
                                 
                                 ∗
                                 T
                              
                           
                        In Eq. (1), Enr is the remaining energy, Enm is the maximum energy, Ni
                         is the number of neighbours, R is a random number between 0 and 1, Ca
                           i
                         is the number of additional new connections if i selected and T is the packet round-trip delay.

The Route Discovery of EASRP appears in Fig. 3
                        . In this schema, the red
                           1
                           For interpretation of colour in Fig. 3, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.
                        
                        
                           1
                         colour represents the Span backbone coordinator nodes and the blue colour represents the non-coordinator nodes. Node A is sending data to node B via the Span backbone coordinators as shown with arrows. RAS and AFECA procedures are implemented in all of the nodes. The coordinator role is periodically rotated by the coordinator selection/withdrawal algorithm to ensure equal participation by all nodes in the network.

Placing Span on top of ZRP is quite insignificant. Span exchanges the hello message periodically to update the coordinator changes and neighbouring information. In general, IARP uses the hello message to update all the information required for routing. In EASRP, hello messages are extended to include information about coordinators and neighbour nodes. In IERP the route requests are sent out by the peripheral nodes to find routes. The next extension of Span is to construct the backbone coordinator nodes. Here, the peripheral nodes are selected as the coordinators for sending the route request. Span makes the node sleep when it is idle. In addition to this modification, the Remote Activate Switch (RAS) based on RF tagging [27,28] is incorporated in all nodes to wake up the sleeping nodes remotely. Thus, it decreases the number of retransmission by waking up the sleeping node. Additionally, the modification reduces the latency and increases the performance of the routing protocol.


                        Fig. 4
                         shows the layered architecture of this novel protocol designed to reduce energy consumption. However, to validate the actual performance of this novel protocol the energy consumption should be reduced without a drastic reduction in the throughput or increase in the overhead.

The EASRP is represented by the algorithm as shown in Table 1
                        , which gives detailed steps of the protocol i.e., NDP, bordercasting, IERP, IARP. The step numbers in the algorithm are used to indicate the looping of the functions. Step 2 describes the Span, and step 15 is used for the waking up of the sleeping node using the RF circuitry.

The simulations are performed with the NS-2 software [29], and protocols ZRP, EAZRP and EASRP are compared. The parameters used for comparison are average consumed energy, PDR, throughput and normalized overhead.
                        
                           
                              Simulation range: 800∗800m2.


                              Transmission range: 200m, thus the maximum number of hops to reach anywhere is 10.


                              Number of nodes: 35–65 nodes in steps of 10. Low-density is 35, high-density is 65 nodes.


                              Zone radius: 2.


                              Movement: Nodes follow a random way point model with the speed set at 5m/s.


                              Traffic: 20% connection is simulated with CBR packets. The packet size is 2000kb.


                              Packet interval: 0.1s.


                              Simulation time: 200s; the results provided here are the averages of 25 simulations.


                              Energy: Every node is provided with an initial energy of 100J.


                              Protocol parameters: Listen, sleep and initial active time are taken as 1s, 5s and 50s, respectively.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The key parameters examined for evaluating a routing protocol are energy efficiency and packet delivery ratio. These two parameters have opposite effects; an increase in energy efficiency pulls down the PDR value and vice versa. The throughput and overhead are also analysed and compared.


                        Fig. 5
                         shows that the average energy consumed by EASRP is lower than ZRP alone. The use of Span usually reduces energy consumption by 5% compared with EAZRP. The topological changes should be updates periodically to network, and the nodes cannot spend more time in sleep mode. This can be proved by analysing the energy values for various simulations taken for number of nodes from 35 to 65. If the number of nodes increases, the energy differences increase. The number of idle nodes increases; therefore, the energy efficiency decreases for high-density nodes. From Fig. 5, it is evident that ZRP consumes 3.9J of energy in the low-density environment, whereas EAZRP uses 3.45J of energy but EASRP uses only 3.28J. The difference in energy consumption is 0.62J less for EASRP than ZRP. This shows that the introduction of AFECA and Span in ZRP saves more energy than ZRP alone. Different energy levels consumed by nodes 35–65 for all protocols appear in Table 2
                        . Total average energy consumed by this simulation for ZRP is 82.05%, EAZRP 76.8% and EASRP 64.6% compared with the initial energy of 100J.

Looking at Fig. 6
                        , ZRP maintains delivery ratios of 96% and 73% in the low- and high-density networks, respectively, but EAZRP has delivery ratios of 92% and 70% in the low- and high-density simulations. The EASRP has 98% and 95% for low- and high-density networks. In EAZRP, the decrease in delivery ratio can be attributed to the following reasons: (1) number of re-transmissions due to sleeping node, (2) collision of the packets due to increased overhead during update of route information. In EASRP, use the RAS provides greater influence on the PDR values. Whenever a node has data for a sleeping node, instead of relying on the conventional method of re-transmission, RAS is used to wake up the destination node, and the number of re-transmissions is reduced.


                        Fig. 7
                         shows comparison of the throughput for different number of nodes. The throughput of the EASRP is higher than the ZRP and EAZRP. This result is attributed to the involvement of the Remote Activated Switch. The influence is analogous to that for the PDR.


                        Fig. 8
                         represents the normalized overhead values for the different number of nodes. In ZRP the overhead is larger, compared with EAZRP and EASRP. As the number of nodes increases the overhead also increases. In EASRP, the values drop off less than that of ZRP. For low density nodes, the difference is low, whereas it is high for high density nodes.

Performance measure is a new factor proposed in this paper to compare protocols on the basis of energy consumption and PDR. It is defined as the product of the remaining energy and the PDR and is expressed as a percentage. From Fig. 9
                        , it is clear that the performance measure for EASRP is greater than that for ZRP. The performance measures for EASRP are 85.48% and 88.36% for the low-density and high-density network settings, respectively. If number of nodes is higher, the maximum traffic flowing through the network will be higher. It can be seen that the EASRP routing protocol outperforms ZRP.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The proposed Energy-Aware Span Routing Protocol resulted in lower energy consumption with a better packet delivery ratio compared with the Zone Routing Protocol and the Energy-Aware Zone Routing Protocol. In EASRP, coordinator nodes can construct the network backbone through which the information is forwarded with less energy, and non-coordinator nodes can save their energy. The results showed better performance with the total energy saving for EASRP being 35.4% and its increase in PDR being 2% for low-density and 22% for high-density network settings compared with the other protocols. This protocol substantially reduced the overhead compared with ZRP. It also achieved good throughput compared with ZRP. For the experiments conducted for 35–65 nodes there are 15–30 coordinators and the remaining are non-coordinator nodes; the ratio of coordinators chosen is 3:7. The energy saving is achieved by maintaining the ratio of coordinators and rotating the Span coordinator role amongst all of the nodes. Extensive simulations show that EASRP provides better test results than the other protocols.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

