@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#System design and mechatronics of an air supply station for air-powered scooters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           An air supply station with mechanical and electrical systems was built.


                        
                        
                           
                           Two operation modes were designed for charging air bottles.


                        
                        
                           
                           An air-powered scooter was used to evaluate the design specifications and charging performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results confirm that the station produced high-pressure air for vehicles.


                        
                        
                           
                           Theoretical analysis and performance simulation will be conducted in the future.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Air-powered

System design

Mechatronic

Vehicle

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               Graphical abstract
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Image, graphical abstract
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

@&#MOTIVATION@&#

The rise of green energy and environmental protection laws worldwide has prompted the use of several types of zero-emission energy, such as solar, hydrogen, wind, and electrical energy, on various platforms. Because energy used in transportation influences the environment substantially, automobile manufacturers worldwide have increasingly focused on developing vehicles powered by green energy. In particular, electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), and plug-in HEVs have been equipped with different configurations or combinations of lithium batteries, fuel cells, supercapacitors, air motors, and electric motors. For meeting zero-emission requirements in the future (particularly municipal requirements), electrical, hydrogen, and air power are the three major options. In consideration of the cost and maturity of air power, the technology appears to have promising potential for application in green vehicles. Therefore, the efficient supply of air to vehicles is crucial for commercialization. This paper presents the design of an air supply station with two operation modes. The function of the station was verified using a modified air-powered scooter.

Electrical energy charging systems as well as many fast-charging batteries and battery swapping technologies have been developed in past decades to promote the production and use of EVs [1,
2]. The development of air-powered vehicles has occurred relatively recently; thus, a few studies have investigated air supply systems. However, research on air-powered vehicles, engines, and motors has become increasingly crucial. For air-powered systems, various methods for producing high-pressure air were have been compared [3]; for example, high-pressure air was supplied to the vane-type air motor of a hybrid pneumatic/electric motor [4]. In addition, an adaptive backstepping sliding mode control was used to control a highly nonlinear vane-type air motor [5]. Similarly, a fuzzy model reference adaptive control (MRAC) controller was designed for vane-type air motor systems [6]. A lumped-parameter system based on control volume and isentropic nozzles was used to simulate an air motor to investigate the detailed parameters of the vane-type air motor of air-powered vehicles [7]. In another study, an air-powered light-duty motorcycle was developed, and its performance was evaluated, with particular attention paid to its cruising mileage and speed [8]. Furthermore, a vehicle with a conventional engine was converted to an energy-saving hybrid vehicle by using a pneumatic power system to recapture wasted energy from the exhaust pipe [9]. Another study reported that the air supply for air-powered vehicles can be in one of two forms: compressed gas or cryogenic liquid [3]. Engines related to these two forms have been investigated.

The air piston engine has become widely used because of its higher efficiency compared with that of other air motors. In [10], a low-cost hybrid drivetrain with a pneumatic system consisting of an air tank and compressor–expander was developed and showed 26% efficiency for a round trip. In [11], a new air engine for a motorbike was also presented. A mathematical model was constructed for specification evaluation. Next, a prototype engine was constructed and compared with a simulated engine. The performance efficiency was approximately 70–95%. In [12], a high-efficiency pneumatic motor system was developed. The energy in compressed air/pressurized hydraulic oil was converted to mechanical energy by using a hydraulic motor. This experiment confirmed that theoretical evaluation is possible. Moreover, in [13], a four-stroke gasoline engine was converted to a two-stroke air engine, and the performance and cost were compared. Finally, in [14], a mathematical model was formulated for an air engine, and the calculation results were compared with experimental results. Thus, the relationships among dimensionless parameters (rotational speed, exhaust pressure, inertia) were studied.

The aforementioned literature indicates the growing focus on air power for transportation vehicles. Thus, the aim of this study was to develop an air supply station for air-powered vehicles. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the system design and mechatronics of the proposed air supply station. The system configuration is introduced first, an air-powered scooter is then established and tested, and finally the system specifications are presented. Section 3 describes the development of the air supply station. Section 4 details the experimental results of the air-charging station to demonstrate the feasibility of the design. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the contributions of this research.

The system configuration of the proposed air supply station is illustrated in Fig 1
                        . An air compressor delivers compressed air to a low-pressure cylinder for storage. At the output of the cylinder, a 110 ACV solenoid valve (SV) directs the compressed air into a pneumatic boosting cylinder according to the pressure received from the air accumulator tank that is downstream from the pneumatic boosting cylinder. The pneumatic boosting cylinder increases the output pressure to a value 10 times that of the input pressure. Once the pressure in the accumulator tank decreases because of the air flow to the vehicle's air tanks, the pressure transmitter delivers a signal to the SV to input more air into the accumulator tank. The high-pressure air then flows to multiple high-pressure tanks controlled by their own SVs and switches. The four check valves shown in Fig. 1 are used to prevent air backflow. The normal charge mode requires the user to take the empty air bottle to a supply station; once the bottle connector is engaged, air is fed to the air compressor to be compressed, and the bottle is filled with high-pressure air. In the tank exchange mode, the user directly replaces the empty bottle with an already filled bottle.


                        Fig. 2
                         illustrates the hardware arrangement of the key components. AC 220-V electric power is used for the air compressor (1) to pump the compressed air into the low-pressure cylinder (2). The stored air is then controlled by a SV (3) and delivered to the pneumatic boosting cylinder (4) to further increase the air pressure. The air travels through a check valve that prevents backflow (5) and into the high-pressure accumulator (6), which stores high-pressure air. The flow meter (7) downstream from the accumulator tank controls the flow rates of air entering the flow distribution devices (8), where the air flow for the user's air tank (9) is controlled by a set of SVs. Several pressure transmitters measure the pressures of the bottles and the high-pressure accumulator for control issues.

To determine the system specification of the air supply station, a dynamometer test of an air-powered scooter was implemented. A 130-kg electric scooter was modified into an air-powered scooter according to the procedure used in a previous study (Fig. 3
                        ). Because the modified scooter is rear drive, the same as the original electric scooter was, a 1-kW four-blade vane-type air motor was mounted onto a plate adjacent to the rear wheel. One gear was linked directly to the output shaft of the air motor, and the other gear was connected to the rear-wheel shaft. A chain was linked between the shafts to enable the air power to be transmitted to the wheel at a reduction ratio of 3:33. The air tank (high-pressure accumulator in Figs. 1 and 2) delivered high-pressure air into the air motor through the air pipes. The air flow rate (power) was controlled by a controllable electric air valve.


                        Fig. 4
                         illustrates the test configuration. The scooter depicted in Fig. 3 was fixed on a dynamometer, with the rear wheel attached to the roller set. The roller set was connected to a 15-kW AC motor and used to simulate the road load. According to the driving parameters input to the dynamometer (Table 1
                        ) and Eq. (1), the road force (F) is calculated as follows:

                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    F
                                    =
                                    0.5
                                    ρ
                                    C
                                    d
                                    A
                                    
                                       V
                                       2
                                    
                                    +
                                    μ
                                    m
                                    g
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

A proportional–integral–derivative (PID) controller was used for the autopilot throttle position, with the requested voltage sent to the vehicle controller. The vehicle controller then sent the requested voltage to the proportional valve so that the high-pressure tank could govern the air flow energy from the air compressor. The results of a steady-state test of the air-powered scooter are listed in Table 2
                        . The results show that at five throttle positions (20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 100%), the steady-state vehicle speed varied from 2.9 to 33.8 km/h, with a corresponding air flow rate of 191.5–653.7  L/min. The system specifications for the air supply station were designed according to these test results (Section 2.3).

According to Table 2, we assumed that the pressure and capacity of the air tank for the user were 100 kg/cm2 and 20 L, respectively. Therefore, the total air volume in the tank was 2000 L (at 1 atm). The cruising mileage was set to 1.5 km per tank [8]. Therefore, the mileages for the five throttle positions according to calculations were 0.5 km (20%), 1.1 km (40%), 1.3 km (60%), 1.6 km (80%), and 1.7 km (100%) (Table 2). These values indicate that the middle-to-high throttle position can meet the cruising mileage requirement. Hence, two-stage pressure boosting (first stage from the compressor, second stage from the boosting cylinder) from 1 to 100 atm was feasible. We selected the specification of the air compressor to be a maximum of 7.5 hp/5.5 kW and set the output pressure to 12 
kg/cm2. The output pressure of the boosting cylinder was 10 times the input pressure, yielding a total of 120 
kg/cm2, which satisfied our design requirements. The storage capacity of the low-pressure accumulator tank needed to be higher than that of the users’ air tank (2000 L). Therefore, the specification was 304 L/10 
kg/cm2, which is equivalent to nearly 3000 L (at 1 atm). Other components and sensors are depicted in Fig. 5.
                        
                     

Three 110 ACV high-pressure SVs (Fig. 5(b)) can accommodate a pressure of 142 
kg/cm2, and the low-pressure SVs (Fig. 5(c)). A pressure indicator (110/220 ACV) (Fig. 5(d)) displays the pressure variation measured from the pressure transmitter (Fig. 5(e)), which can accommodate a maximum pressure of 400 bar (nearly 392 atm > 100 atm). An air flow meter (Fig. 5(f)) measures the air flow rates; the maximum flow rate is 229 
m3/h (3817 L/min). The maximum working pressure of the high-pressure check valve (Fig. 5(g)) is 3000 psi (nearly 204 atm > 100 atm). A data logger (Fig. 5(h)) receives the values of the key parameters. A dial pressure indicator (Fig. 5(i)) also shows the pressure variation for the experiment. These components were designed and appropriately integrated to establish the air supply station.

The two operation modes for the air supply station are normal charge and quick tank exchange. Fig. 6
                         illustrates the control strategy for the two operation modes. When an air tank is connected, the connector sensor delivers a signal to the control unit to record the priorities of the tanks connected to the air pipes. When a mode is selected, its relay is switched on, activating the production of high pressure air. When the air tank pressure rises because of the increase in air mass, the mass flow rate decreases. Once the flow sensor detects that the air flow rate is less than 10 L/min for 3 min, the charge is considered complete and the relay switches off.


                     Fig. 7
                      illustrates the completed air supply station. The front panel with the user interface shows the values of the key parameters, such as the air flow rate and tank pressure, which can be displayed online (Fig. 5(a)). The three air connectors were pulled from the back board (Fig. 7(b)). The back side of the station includes a discharge fan for preventing overheating, a flow distribution path for the three air tanks, a pressure transmitter for measuring pressure, and a fuse for protecting the electrical circuits. Apart from the air supply station for user operation, the other key components include the low-pressure cylinder, high-pressure accumulator, and pneumatic boosting cylinder (Fig. 8
                     ).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

This section discusses the key parameters for the high-pressure air production and driving cycle test of an air-powered scooter on a dynamometer. Fig. 9
                      shows that the pressure of the low-pressure cylinder increased gradually from zero to approximately 10 kg/cm2. This was the
                      maximum pressure that could be achieved because the maximum output pressure of the compressor was 12 kg/cm2. The initial air flow rate suddenly increased to 780 L/min because of the large pressure difference between the low-pressure cylinder and the air compressor. The air flow rate then dropped and gradually reached the final flow rate of 525 L/min because of the higher final air compressor power (see Fig. 8).

For the high-pressure side of the pneumatic boosting cylinder, the flow rate initially reached more than 30 L/min because the accumulator was empty with an air pressure of 1 atm. The air flow rate then decreased compared with that on the low-pressure side. The pressure of the high-pressure accumulator gradually increased to its final value of nearly 100 kg/cm2, which is approximately 10 times that of the low-pressure cylinder. The 40-L high-pressure accumulator charged completely within 3 hours. The consumed electrical energy for the compressor was measured at 13.5 kW h. As shown in Fig. 10, the consumed power of the compressor gradually increased from approximately 3–5 kW. The pressure of the high-pressure accumulator thus gradually increases because of the input compressed air.


                     Fig. 11(a) illustrates the operation of the air-powered scooter in a modified standard vehicle testing scenario: an ECE40 driving cycle with three acceleration periods. The scooter was fixed on a 250-N m chassis dynamometer with a PID throttle autopilot, as described in Section 2.2. During the first period of the driving cycle, the air flow rate varied slightly because of the slow transient dynamics of the air valve, which led to low acceleration. Similarly, in the first deceleration period, the decrease of the vehicle speed was slow because of the vehicle's inertia and the slow decrease of the air flow rate of the air throttle. The results were similar in the second and third periods. The vehicle speed could reach nearly 35 km/h, meaning that the compressed air could provide sufficient power (air flow rate) to the vehicle. Fig. 11(b) illustrates that at the acceleration periods, increasing the pressure and air flow rate accelerated the vehicle, and reducing the pressure and air flow rate decelerated the vehicle. The results confirm that our designed air supply station can be used to supply air energy to air-powered light-duty vehicles.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study presents an air supply station for air-powered scooters. The conclusions of this research are summarized as follows:

                        
                           (1)
                           
                              Air supply station mechatronics: The hardware includes a high-power air compressor, low-pressure cylinder, high-pressure accumulator, pneumatic boosting cylinder, and other components, with the specifications set according to the steady-state test results of an air-powered scooter. A two-stage pressure-boosting process was conducted. The user interface, software, and sensors for pressures and air flow rates were integrated.


                              Experimental results: The detailed parameters for the key components at the air charge process were investigated. The results of testing the modified ECE40 driving cycle confirmed that the air supply station can be used to provide air energy to vehicles.


                              Industrial contributions: The air supply station design and testing results can be used to promote the use of air energy for transportation and other applications.

Future research will conduct a theoretical analysis by modeling and simulating the performance of the air station and air scooter.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors thank the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan, ROC for financially supporting this research under contract numbers 103-2221-E-003-022, MOST 103-2218-E-150-002-MY2, and MOST 103-2218-E-003-001. We also acknowledge support received through the Industrial Technology Research Institute project for advanced vehicle control.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

