@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#An experimental study of attacks on the availability of Glossy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Presentation of novel attacks aiming to break Glossy's constructive interference.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results showing Glossy’s robustness except for attacks on relay counter.


                        
                        
                           
                           Discussion of potential security solutions to protect Glossy-based networks.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Glossy

Security attacks

Sensor networks

Network security

Distributed communication

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Glossy is a reliable and low latency flooding mechanism designed primarily for distributed communication in wireless sensor networks (WSN). Glossy achieves its superior performance over tree-based wireless sensor networks by exploiting identical concurrent transmissions. WSNs are subject to wireless attacks aimed to disrupt the legitimate network operations. Real-world deployments require security and the current Glossy implementation has no built-in security mechanisms. In this paper, we explore the effectiveness of several attacks that attempt to break constructive interference in Glossy. Our results show that Glossy is quite robust to approaches where attackers do not respect the timing constraints necessary to create constructive interference. Changing the packet content, however, has a severe effect on the packet reception rate that is even more detrimental than other physical layer denial-of-service attacks such as jamming. We also discuss potential countermeasures to address these security threats and vulnerabilities.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT) has increased the demand on distributed, embedded low power applications as it requires more complex communication patterns than the tree-based many-to-sink communication paradigm that is predominant in conventional wireless sensor networks (WSNs). A recent protocol targeting this domain is Glossy [1], a highly reliable, low latency network flooding mechanism that offers in-built network-wide time synchronization within a microsecond accuracy. The Low-power Wireless Bus (LWB) [2], built on top of Glossy, provides a shared communication bus like infrastructure with a flat network hierarchy. Together, these protocols provide a performance that has not been achieved by tree-based protocols. Furthermore, the LWB supports the diverse IoT communication patterns under a simple single layer communication solution. Network-wide flooding enables the support of one-to-many, many-to-one, and many-to-many communication patterns.

Real-world deployment of WSNs, and hence Glossy, require security as WSNs are often deployed in unattended environments and wireless packets are easy to intercept. Furthermore, WSNs are connected through lossy wireless links and require multi-hop communication. This makes WSNs vulnerable to network eavesdropping and message modification as well as attacks seeking to disrupt network operations.

Glossy has not been designed as a secure protocol. It is therefore worth investigating the potential threats and vulnerabilities of Glossy. The core features of Glossy are the generation of constructive interference [1] and the capture effect [3]. Constructive interference occurs when a receiver is able to detect and successfully decode a packet even when packets are generated by multiple transmitters at the same time. A pre-condition is that the transmitters send identical packets. The capture effect is a phenomenon that enables the reception of a packet with relatively high signal strength despite other packets being transmitted almost simultaneously [3]. However, its efficiency decreases when the number of concurrent transmissions increases [4].

As Glossy is one of the first protocols to rely on constructive interference, we propose novel attacks on constructive interference and investigate their effectiveness. Towards this end, we present three novel attacks. The attacks try to break constructive interference by (i) delaying the transmission of packets, (ii) sending packets earlier and (iii) modifying packets so the receiver does no longer receive identical packets which is a precondition for constructive interference.

To evaluate the effectiveness of the attacks, we perform experiments in FlockLab [5], a 30-node testbed that was also used for the original Glossy evaluation. Our results show that the first two attacks are not very effective. The capture effect and low variation of the clock skew under these attacks cause nodes to stay sufficiently synchronized to Glossy phases and enable them to turn on their radios when at least one packet transmission is in progress. Hence, nodes are able to receive packets even though an attack is ongoing. Modifying the packet is more effective, in particular when the attacker tampers the relay counter used for time synchronization.

After evaluating the effectiveness of the attacks, we discuss ways of securing Glossy against these and other attacks as Glossy has no built-in security mechanisms. It is important to protect Glossy packets against unauthorized modifications by employing message security services, in addition to intrusion detection systems that guard against security attacks aimed to disrupt networks.

The main contributions of this paper are:
                        
                           •
                           We present novel attacks that aim to break constructive interference, the underlying mechanism of the Glossy protocol.

We evaluate the effectiveness of the attacks in a testbed. Our results show that tampering the relay counter to break time synchronization is the most effective attack while Glossy internals make it surprisingly robust against the other attacks. We also demonstrate that tampering the relay counter is more effective than physical layer denial-of-service attacks such as jamming.

We discuss potential security solutions to protect Glossy-based networks.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, we provide background information about IEEE 802.15.4, capture effect, constructive interference, and Glossy in Section 2. In Section 3, we describe three methods for attacking Glossy. The experiments and their results are presented in Section 4. In Section 5, we discuss security services for Glossy-based networks. Finally, we review related work in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

IEEE 802.15.4 radios operating in the 2.4GHz band make use of the Direct-Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS) modulation technique with Offset-Quadrature Phase-Shift Keying. Each byte of the data is split into 4-bit segments and mapped to one of 16 symbols in which each symbol is composed of a sequence of 32 chips. The chips are transmitted at 2 MChips/s corresponding to a maximum data rate of 250kb/s.

The format of a physical layer (PHY) frame of IEEE 802.15.4 is shown in Fig. 1
                        . The preamble is defined to be 4 bytes of 0×00 and the Start of Frame Delimiter (SFD) is one byte set to 0×A7. The frame length is a 7-bit field limiting the length of the maximum PHY payload to 127 bytes.

The capture effect 
                        [3] is the phenomenon associated with packet reception in which the radio is able to receive a packet from one sender despite simultaneous transmissions from other transmitters. Suppose, two packets A and B from two transmitters in which the strength of packet A is higher than that of packet B at the receiver. Assume that packet A arrives at the receiver earlier than packet B as shown in Fig. 2
                        (a). The reception of packet A is interfered due to the overlap of packet B. As the radio is busy with the reception of packet A, packet B could be considered as noise. If the signal to noise ratio (SNR) of packet A is higher than that of packet B with a certain threshold, the radio is nevertheless able to receive packet A successfully. Son et al. [6] found that this threshold is hardware dependent.

Assume now that packet B arrives earlier than packet A (Fig. 2(b)), packet A has a higher signal strength and the difference in signal strength between packet A and packet B is within the threshold. In such a situation packet B is lost. The correct reception of the packet A depends on the detection of the packet’s preamble and the SFD by the radio. Landsiedel et al. state that in such a situation packet A can be decoded by the radio if it arrives no later than 160μs after packet B [7].


                        Constructive interference in wireless packet reception happens when two or more packets from concurrent transmitters interfere at a receiver in a way that the receiver can decode the packet correctly. This requires that all the packets are identical and transmitted at the same time. Ferrari et al. [1] have shown that CC2420 radios can decode the packet in interest when the temporal displacement among identical concurrently transmitted packets is smaller than 0.5μs. For higher displacement, the probability of correct packet detection decreases significantly. Therefore, generating constructive interference requires tight time synchronization among the radio transmitters.

Glossy is a flooding architecture for WSNs that uses concurrent transmissions of packets with identical content to benefit from constructive interference. The node that starts a flood is called initiator and the other nodes are called receivers. Upon reception of a packet from the initiator, all receivers relay the packet at the same time. All nodes that receive the relayed packet also do the same and this process continues for a number of predefined rounds. In this way, the whole network is flooded within a few milliseconds. For Glossy to generate constructive interference, it is essential to have a deterministic relaying time to align transmissions. Therefore, the implementation of Glossy uses counteraction techniques for the variations of software execution time and hardware variations such as varying offsets between the MCU clock and the radio clock.

Glossy also provides built-in time synchronization with less than a microsecond accuracy and without incurring any additional cost. Each packet in Glossy has a 1-byte field called relay counter. Initially, this counter is zero and it is incremented at each node before relaying the packet. When receiving a packet, a node can determine the number of hops a packet has made. The slot length is defined as the duration between the start of two consecutive transmissions of the same packet. The slot length is a network-wide constant since the packet length is not changed during flooding and locally estimated by the nodes. Therefore, nodes can use the relay counter to compute the reference time, the time when the flooding is started by the initiator. With the knowledge about the initiator’s clock value and the hop count, other nodes are able to achieve absolute time synchronization.

In the Glossy implementation, a received packet is sent to the MCU from the radio and stored in a buffer at the MCU in order to increment the relay counter of the packet. Thereafter, the packet is sent back immediately to the radio for forwarding.

WSNs are wireless networks of distributed resource-constrained nodes usually deployed in a way that it is practically hard to physically guard each device or to protect them with hardware-based tamper-resistant technologies such as with the use of smart cards or Trusted Platform Modules (TPM) [8]. It is therefore possible to capture and clone a node or add faked nodes in the vicinity of a WSN. A malicious node in a Glossy network can severely effect the operation of Glossy as Glossy has no built-in security.

Unlike other networking protocols, Glossy depends on constructive interference. While this makes Glossy efficient we exploit Glossy’s dependency on constructive interference to devise three novel attacks that aim at breaking constructive interference; we later experimentally study the effectiveness of these three attacks in a WSNs testbed.

In order to break constructive interference we devise the Delaying Packet Relay attack (DPR) that causes a temporal displacement among signals above 0.5μs (Section 2.2). To implement this attack, we use no operation instructions (NOPs) to delay transmission requests to the radio. In the MSP430 MCU, NOPs are emulated from other instructions and their execution time can be calculated by using the Digitally Controlled Oscillator frequency of the MCU. Therefore, it is straightforward to compute the number of NOPs required for a delay above 0.5μs.

As shown in Fig. 3
                         we use three different offsets. In the first experiment, we delay the attacker’s packets for a time corresponding to the transmission time of two bytes. This causes the preamble of the attacker’s packets to overlap with the preamble of normal Glossy packets destructively. In the second experiment, the attacker’s packets are delayed for a time corresponding to the transmission time of four bytes. This causes the SFD of normal Glossy packets to overlap with the preamble of the attacker’s packets. In the third experiment, we delay the attacker’s packets for a time corresponding to the transmission time of more than six bytes. This causes the data segment of normal Glossy packets to overlap with the preamble of the attacker’s packet.

Relaying packets earlier than the planned time of the transmissions is also a possible way to increase the temporal displacement and break constructive interference. In the implementation of Glossy, a certain number of NOPs are used to compensate interrupt serving delay and hardware variations. We decrease the number of these NOPs to relay the packet earlier than the planned time. In order to minimize the latency, Glossy’s implementation limits these NOPs to a small number. Therefore, an attacker is able to relay packets only several microseconds earlier. This is, however, enough to break constructive interference.

In addition to increasing temporal displacement, modifying packets before relaying them can also be used to make packets interfere destructively since constructive interference requires identical packet content. As mentioned in Section 2.3, Glossy uses a 1-byte field as the (relay counter). Since the relay counter is directly related to time synchronization, an attacker can desynchronize nodes with the initiator by putting bogus relay counter values in the packet header. This could result in packet loss since the nodes become unsynchronized with the initiator and turn on their radio at the wrong time.

@&#EXPERIMENTS@&#

In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed attacks, we conduct experiments in the FlockLab test-bed [5] using Tmote Sky sensor nodes.

We select one of the 30 nodes as the initiator and one or more nodes as the attackers that try to break constructive interference by using the attacks presented in the previous section (DPR, RPE and MP). If not explicitly mentioned, we show results for experiments with one attacker. Fig. 4
                         shows the topology of FlockLab.

The initiator periodically starts a Glossy phase flooding the network. At the receivers, the Glossy scheduler periodically turns on the radio to receive flooded packets. After the end of a Glossy phase, nodes estimate the clock skew between their clock and the initiator’s clock by using the old and the recently estimated reference times. The next Glossy phase is then scheduled based on the clock skew and the recently estimated reference time. In this way, receivers are always time synchronized with the initiator which ensures the participation of the receivers in the flooding. At each node, we log relevant statistics such as packet reception, CRC failure count, bad-length and bad-header count.

We run all experiments for 600s. The attacker participates cooperatively in the Glossy flooding during the initial 300s and then starts the attack.

We select large payloads in order to analyze the worst case scenario, i.e., a large number of bytes overlap with the attacker’s packet. To this end, we use 104 bytes including a 4-byte sequence number as the Glossy payload. Initial experiments have shown that the impact of the packet size on the results is almost negligible. To avoid external interference we select channel 26 since this channel does not overlap with WiFi [9].

When we run Glossy without an attacker and node 1 as the initiator, the average packet reception is 99.99% with a standard deviation of 0.02.

We select node 28 as the attacker node and node 1 as the initiator node. The rational behind this choice is that node 28 can reach many nodes when it transmits with the maximum output power.

To evaluate the severity of the DPR attack, we calculate the average packet reception during the attack for different offsets. The nodes are able to achieve an average packet reception of 99.75%, 99.75% and 99.66% with a standard deviation of 0.86, 0.75 and 1.09 for 2-byte, 4-byte and 16-byte offsets respectively. These results indicate that the effect of DPR on Glossy’s packet reception is almost negligible.

The resistance of Glossy against the DPR attack can be explained with the capture effect and multiple retransmissions. The attacker is not always able to interfere packets destructively when the capture effect makes the receiver lock onto the packet from a legitimate node. Glossy’s multiple retransmissions of the same packet enables nodes to receive the packet at least once even though the attacker’s packets interfere destructively at other times.


                           Fig. 9 shows CRC failure, bad-length and bad-header counts for node 18 regarding 2-byte, 4-byte and 16-byte offsets. The figure depicts a rapid increment of CRC errors after the attack has been started when the 16-byte offset is used compared to 2-byte and 4-byte offset. Some nodes experience a large number of CRC errors over time compared to others. These results show that the attacker’s packets destructively interfere with packet reception at node 18 but that the nodes still stay synchronized.

In addition to the relay counter, Glossy also uses the packet reception time (the time when the SFD interrupt is raised by the MCU) for estimating the reference time of the initiator. As the DPR attack changes the packet reception time, we plot the variance of the clock skew of the nodes against the percentage of the nodes as a whole for the attack with 16-byte offset. According to Fig. 5
                           , about more than half of the nodes of the network experience a high variance in clock skew.

We remove NOPs that are used to compensate the interrupt serving delay and hardware variations to send packets earlier. As a result, the transmission request is sent 3.10μs earlier to the radio. As mentioned in Section 3.2, this time duration is theoretically enough to break constructive interference.

However, the nodes are able to achieve an average of 99.87% packet reception with a standard deviation of 0.55. Except for node 23, there are no noticeable increases of CRC errors. As with DPR, we plot the variance of the clock skew of the nodes against percentage of the nodes as a whole for the attack. Fig. 6
                           
                            shows that all nodes experience almost the same variance of the clock skew during the attack as before. Compared to DPR with 16-byte offset, RPE with 3.10μs causes less variance in the clock skew for all nodes during the attack.


                           Fig. 8
                           
                            shows the reception rate for all nodes during the MP attack. Except for the attacker and five nodes (2, 4, 8, 15 and 33), all other nodes experience considerable packet loss. Notably, the attacker (node 28) is also able to achieve comparatively high packet reception while the attack is being performed. Tables 1 and 2
                           
                            show hop count information from both initiator and attacker nodes. Based on the hop count, the topology of FlockLab and packet reception we note that nodes closer to the initiator, as expected, achieve a higher packet reception.

As with DPR and RPE, we plot the variance of the clock skew of the nodes against the percentage of the nodes as a whole for the attack to describe the packet loss. Fig. 7 shows that more than 30% of the nodes experience a significantly high variance in the estimated clock skew. The magnitude of variance of the clock skew for MP is significantly higher than DPR and RPE (Figs. 5 and 6).

Glossy relays received packets without a validation of the relay counter. This results in propagating fake relay counter values to neighboring nodes. Since the reference time estimation is mainly based on the relay counter, the estimated reference time on the nodes that receive packets with fake relay counter values becomes incorrect. Therefore, nodes loose time synchronization with the initiator which causes packet loss. When many such unsynchronized nodes serve as relay points to other nodes, it is possible that a part of the network is isolated due to packet loss.

During the attack, some nodes experience a high variance in PRR. According to Table 2 most of the nodes with a low PRR are in direct vicinity (one hop away) of the attacker. As these nodes do not contribute to the Glossy flooding during the attack, other nodes have to rely on packets from synchronized nodes. Since packet receptions under constructive interference are not correlated [10], packet reception on the nodes that are in the edge of the vicinity of synchronized nodes varies which causes a high variance in PRR.

We also conduct experiments where the attacker modifies other parts of the packets. We let the attacker modify a 50-byte portion of the 104 byte payload instead of the relay counter. This 50-byte portion of data is not used internally by Glossy or our test application. The nodes are able to achieve an average packet reception of 99.97% with a standard deviation of 0.08. The high packet reception shows that modifying other parts of the packet does not affect Glossy’s operation as much as modifying the relay counter. Due to the capture effect, nodes often receive unmodified packets from other neighbours rather than modified ones from the attacker. As the relay counter remains untouched, Glossy’s reference time estimation stays unaffected resulting in correct time synchronization with the initiator.

In order to study the network-wide effects of DPR when the attacker is closer to the initiator, we select node 4 as the attacker and node 1 as the initiator. The nodes are able to achieve an average packet reception rate of 99.94% with a standard deviation of 0.14. This result indicates that the effect of a single DPR attacker that is close to the initiator is also negligible.

Our previous results show that DPR with a 16-byte offset is more effective than DPR with 2-byte, 4-byte and RPE. Since we have shown that the MP attack effects more than half of the network’s nodes with only a single attacker, we conduct experiments with multiple attacker nodes for DPR with a 16-byte offset. Table 3
                         shows the average packet reception rate (PRR) and standard deviations for DPR attacks with multiple attackers. The results show that as expected employing multiple attackers increases the effectiveness of DPR with a 16-byte offset.

Since the MP attack is the most severe attack, we compare the severity of it with other conventional physical layer denial-of-service attacks. To this end, we use the Drizzle attack [11], and a jamming attack that continuously transmits a randomly modulated carrier signal [12]. In the Drizzle attack, an attacker transmits bogus packet headers in order to force receivers into an unavailing packet decoding process. This attack is executed with high frequency avoiding the need to be synchronized with duty cycled receivers. We select the randomly modulated carrier signal over the unmodulated carrier signal as jamming attack since its power spectrum evenly spreads over the entire channel bandwidth whereas the power spectrum of the unmodulated carrier signal peaks at the center frequency of the channel. We use a special test mode of the CC2420 radio of Tmote Sky sensor nodes in order to generate the randomly modulated carrier signal.

As in the previous experiments, we select node 28 as the attacker and conduct experiments on the testbed for the same time duration. We start the attack after the experiment has been ongoing for 300s.


                        Fig. 10
                         depicts the comparison of PRR of the nodes for the three attacks. The figure shows that the MP attack affects significantly more nodes than the other two attacks. Both Drizzle and the modulated carrier jamming attack significantly affect packet reception on the same, small set of neighboring nodes (nodes 22, 16 and 6). Unlike in the MP attack, both Drizzle and the jamming attack do not propagate bogus packets over multiple hops and therefore affect less nodes.

We have seen that Glossy is subjected to different attacks. Most severe of them is tampering with the relay counter that is primarily used for time synchronization. A fake relay counter value de-synchronizes the network timing. In glossy-enabled networks, it is necessary to keep the temporal displacement below 0.5μs to generate the constructive interference.

Currently, Glossy has no built-in security mechanisms to protect Glossy floods against unauthorized modification. In real deployments it is important that networks are protected against known attacks.

The CIA triad model is a widely accepted information security model which describes three properties that a secure system should adhere to [13]. Confidentiality describes that no unauthorized parties should be able to view or make sense of the information. Integrity describes that information resources should not be altered without being detected. Availability describes that an information system should be available to serve its purpose when needed.

In the case of Glossy the most important service is availability which is necessary for the operation of Glossy. The compromise of the integrity service, i.e., to tamper with the relay counter, also results in the compromise of the availability service. Protecting the integrity of Glossy packets in general and the relay counter in particular is necessary for the smooth operation of Glossy.

As we have shown in Section 4.4, conventional physical layer denial-of-service attacks such as jamming can also be launched against Glossy; however, these attacks are energy-consuming [14], and at the same time are comparatively easy to detect. On the other hand, launching de-synchronization attacks against Glossy or LWB by occasionally tampering the Glossy packet is hard to detect.

The first defense mechanism to guard against security attacks, aimed to disrupt networks, is to prevent them by implying proper security mechanisms. In addition to the prevention mechanisms, intrusion detection systems are also important to detect and terminate successful attacks.

Among the CIA security services, integrity protection of the Glossy flooding packet especially the relay counter is most important. Source integrity, also called authentication, is important to grant access to a node to become part of Glossy flooding. Later, for each flood data integrity of the relay counter should be ensured, which protects the modification of the relay counter beyond the legal allowed increment of one.

Considering the strict timing requirement in Glossy it is hard to build security into Glossy. In addition to other parameters, Glossy relies on the deterministic software delays to keep the temporal displacement below 0.5μs. Also for additional security processing, Glossy should be able to measure the delays deterministically. For cryptographic processing it is challenging to measure these delays with such strict timing requirements. However, such a built-in security is a clean solution for Glossy and a potential future addition in Glossy. As a staring point, such novel solutions can exploit the mechanisms introduced in Glossy to determine the software delay 
                        [1]. The Glossy property that each node relays packets immediately after receiving and these concurrent transmission must be aligned is challenging to achieve when executing cryptographic operations during the Glossy flooding.

IEEE 802.15.4 security [15] can also be used to protect the Glossy flooding packet using hardware encryption; however, this too requires deterministic delays. Both security solutions discussed above require a shared secret among the nodes, and compromise of a single node will compromise the whole network.

It is generally hard to embed cryptographic security in routing protocols; usually security is provided at the layers below the routing layer. For example, in IEEE 802.15.4-based networks the routing information as well as the application data can be protected at the link layer. On the other hand, intrusion detection systems (IDSs) are used to detect attacks aimed to disrupt network operation. While most conventional WSN network architectures deploy routing protocols [16], Glossy is unique in that it does not require any explicit routing protocol since it solely relies on flooding. Differently from other routing protocols [16], Glossy and hence LWB are inherently robust against some of the conventional routing attacks such as selective-forwarding attacks [17], sinkhole attacks [17], and wormhole attacks [17]. This is due to the fact that every node immediately relays the packet it receives and the packet quickly propagates through the network.

IDSs can run on top of Glossy and perform overall monitoring without disturbing the normal operation of Glossy. However, for an IDS for Glossy-based networks an interface is required between Glossy and detection modules to exchange security parameters. For example, Glossy can update an IDS module about the relay counter values it receives. In return, an IDS can monitor the activities of individual nodes by cooperatively sharing the information in a centralized IDS module. Once malicious nodes are detected, they can be replaced, for example, by adding them in a blacklist maintained by a centralized IDS module. Later, these blacklisted nodes can be physically tracked and removed. While the application needs to be aware of such replacements, Glossy itself is stateless which simplifies node replacement since Glossy does need to keep any state about parents, link qualities etc.

@&#RELATED WORK@&#

We split the related work section into two parts. First we present a review of Glossy-based and similar protocols and then we discuss Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks for wireless sensor networks as they are the attacks that are most similar to those we present in this paper in that they also aim at disrupting availability.

Several other protocols have used constructive interference for building communication primitives based on Glossy. Doddavenkatappa et al. propose Splash, a fast data disseminating protocol that is based on Glossy [18]. Splash integrates Glossy to extend a pipeline transmission scheme into a tree-based pipelining scheme for disseminating large data objects. Landsiedel et al. propose Chaos, an all-to-all data sharing and in-network processing primitive for low-power wireless networks [7]. Chaos makes use of both the capture effect and constructive interference at different stages of the protocol operation. As these works are based on Glossy, they also inherit Glossy’s security vulnerabilities. Instead of constructive interference, Flash Flooding relies solely on the capture effect to ensure that each node receives the flooded packets from at least one of its neighbors [4]. Studies have also shown that the reliability of packet reception in glossy-based protocol decreases when the number of concurrent transmitters increases [18,19]. While these studies try to improve the packet reception during normal protocol operation, we propose and evaluate attacks that aim at breaking constructive interference.

Wood et al. describe different types of DoS attacks in wireless sensor networks [20]. Among them, our attacking methods are related to collision (DPR and RPE attacks) and misdirection (MP attack) attacks. The attacks that disrupt the service by intentionally colliding packets are categorized into collision attacks while attacks that inject false information to disrupt the service are categorized into misdirection attacks. He et al. propose Droplet and Drizzle, new DoS attacks that use payload-less PHY layer frame headers to prevent the reception of legitimate PHY layer frames [11]. The receivers synchronize into attacker’s payload-less PHY layer frames which will be eventually dropped due to CRC errors. Drizzle is the high-frequency variant of Droplet that we have used in our experiments.

@&#CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK@&#

In this paper we have presented novel attacks that aim to break constructive interference in Glossy, a recent extremely efficient protocol for distributed wireless sensor networks. Our experimental evaluation shows that modifying the packet content is more effective than temporal displacement when relaying packets. We have discussed security solutions that protect Glossy and other networks relying on similar mechanisms against these attacks. Future work will then focus on preventing and detecting these attacks.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We would like to thank Federico Ferrari and Marco Zimmerling for clarifications regarding Glossy internals. This work was supported by SSF and the EC project CALIPSO with contract number FP7-ICT-2011.1.3-288879.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

