@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Attention and intended action in multitasking: An understanding of cognitive workload

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Attention is an important factor concerning cueing of an intended action.


                        
                        
                           
                           Stimulus driven situation of attention capture has facilitative effect.


                        
                        
                           
                           Performance decrement is not associated with an increased cognitive workload.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results have practical significance concerning human errors in multitasking.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Attention

Display

Prospective memory error

Multitasking

Cognitive workload analysis

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The study investigates the effect of attention on prospective memory performance in programmer multitasking (N
                     =60) incorporating a taxonomical understanding of prospective memory errors. It also presents an analysis of cognitive workload (CWL). The results demonstrate that people are more vulnerable to prospective memory performance failure when there is a situation that one is required to devote more attention in monitoring to identify a cue for an intended action. Omission error is the most prominent among all types of prospective memory error. Analysis reveals that when there is a stimulus driven situation of attention capture, a performance decrement observed in terms of prospective memory is not necessarily concerned with an increase in CWL.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Multitasking refers to a situation where an individual is involved in simultaneous performance of two or more tasks that he/she has to devote attention to in an effort to accomplish desired task–goals. Multitasking is increasingly becoming a part of daily job performance in the modern work environment. For instance, in software programming individuals are often involved in handling multiple tasks by opening multiple windows on the screen.

Cognitive workload (CWL) refers to the information processing demands imposed by the performance of a task [1]. A particular issue about CWL stems from the increase of potential errors in handling multiple tasks if the CWL is not at the optimal level of an individual. The demand–capacity relationship forms the state of overload, underload, and optimal state. In a complex environment, safe and efficient operation of the interactive system requires that the information-processing demands imposed on the individual do not exceed their capabilities [2]. Thus, high CWL (i.e., deviation from the optimal level) restricts the user in the interaction with the system leading to degradation in performance [3].

Multitasking can be approached from a perspective of theoretical emphasis of human cognition or human factors perspective with an emphasis on applied research. The current work is presented with a strong orientation towards the latter benefiting from the former. The orientation is explained by the fact that the study is situational, forming a multitasking environment. A critical synthesis is observed since the main interest is to focus on an understanding of human error in a multitasking environment of programming. The necessity of having an effective presentation of visual information is crucial in such contexts of human–computer interaction (HCI). The more intriguing issue is that of remembering to carry out an intended action relying on the visual cues. This aspect of human cognition pertains to the topic of prospective memory. However, in the literature of display research, the topic of prospective memory has not been identified as an important aspect of user cognition. In general, a prospective memory task refers to remembering to perform a delayed intention. It is concerned with memory for activities that one intends to perform at an appropriate occasion in the future [4]. The present research incorporates the issues of attention and analysis of CWL in a real-life scenario of prospective memory task. In other words, the present research intends to investigate the role of attention in prospective memory performance in the context of programmer multitasking with an emphasis on CWL analysis. The practical implications of this research broadly pertain to the issues of interactive systems.

Handling of information from multiple sources is cognitively more demanding than focusing on a single task. It is because human cognition has processing limitations which is clearly present when there are processing requirements in handling multiple tasks. For example, in carrying out programming (i.e., writing codes) and at the same time handling multiple windows, one needs to interleave tasks to cope with the multi-task demands. This manifests that when one is involved in multitasking how he/she manages multiple (task) goals of independent tasks and/or subtasks of a larger task is critical. Thus, the situation requires keeping one’s current goals activated and also to remember future actions. This constitutes the components of task prioritization and task scheduling. The task prioritization process allocates an individual’s limited recourses in order to fulfill task demands. The task scheduling is about performing, delaying, or completing a task. Under such situations of managing processing resources in order to accomplish successful performance one has to keep his/her goals in mind, remember to perform acts at appropriate moments, and avoid falling into habitual acts. Thus, there is a matter of intentional control since retrieval of an intended action occurs at a time when the individual is busy with other demanding tasks. There is so much to gain in terms of better understanding of multitasking from the work that emphasizes on the ability of people to maintain and realize intentions [5,6]. Moreover, in understanding human error, intention is the reference point with which ongoing action or actual outcomes are compared [7] and it is at the core of a prospective memory task. Human errors associated with failing to execute a delayed intention are common. Concerning such prospective memory errors, Dismukes et al. [8] noted that suspending or deferring an action may remove it from the normal environmental cues (e.g., displays, callouts, procedural flows) that serve to trigger retrieval from memory and it is easy to forget to complete deferred actions.

As mentioned above, a prospective memory task is concerned with remembering to perform a delayed intention [9,10]. Reason [11] noted that an intention exists as a collection of critically active cognitive schemata. Their activation is refreshed by periodic reviews of the intention. Reason assumes that in the absence of this review procedure, the activation of these schemata will decay spontaneously. Forgetting planned actions can also be caused by interference from earlier or later planning. Reason [12] stressed the vulnerability of individuals to prospective memory errors as among the most common form of human fallibility in everyday life. One of the risks of prospective memory errors in a demanding environment is that of performing a habitual action instead of the intended task [13,14].

As a matter of fact, human actions constitute a major source of vulnerability to the integrity of any interactive system. The situation becomes more complex if the situation is that of multitasking. In contrast to accomplishing tasks sequentially, in multitasking there is an issue pertaining to the involvement of different tasks interfering with one another [15,16]. Because the mental resources are limited, the tasks interfere with each other thus erroneous human actions are of great concern. Human error has been an important topic among the practitioners and the researchers in the work environment in an effort to optimize human and system performance. Many have attempted to provide a technical definition of their own concerning the concept. The net result of the efforts has been a clear demonstration of the difficulty to provide a precise definition of human error. Reason [12] made significant contributions on this topic. According to Reason, human error is a generic term to encompass all occasions in which a planned sequence of mental or physical activity fails to achieve its intended outcome. Broadly, error can be understood as either the cause of something, the event, or the consequence of an action [17]. Furthermore, different professional points of view have different emphasis. For instance, Marsden and Hollnagel [18] noted that: (a) engineering perspective considers human as a crucial system component, thus failures can be described in the similar way as for any other constituent equipment, (b) professionals with a psychological orientation often emphasize that human behavior is essentially purposive and that it can only be fully understood with reference to subjective goals and significance of intentions, (c) on the other hand, sociologists have traditionally ascribed the primary forms of erroneous actions to features of the prevailing socio-technical system.

In consolidation of the above points, it is understandable that human error involves a deviation from the specifiable functional criteria of an action. It is thus an occasion in which an individual’s action is characterized by the presence of a corresponding ideal state of the action itself for which fulfillment of the operative criteria is required. Without the specified performance criteria the state of action becomes nothing more than a value judgment [19]. That is, there is a specified performance standard or certain criteria against which the (deviant) action can be measured or compared. Therefore, at the instance of an error the individual has failed to fulfill the execution of the action as desired. This implies that an error can only be said to exist if a clear performance standard can define the ideal state of the action as the criteria for acceptance of a response [20].

Attentional processes and the issue of visual cue are crucial in the present context of multitasking. Definitions of attention share a component of selectivity – that a primary function of attention is to select information for further processing [21]. Thus, selectivity of processing is central to the topic of attention. According to James [22], the essence of attention is focusing of one’s awareness essentially with the withdrawal from several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought in order to deal effectively with others.

Attention and multitasking are closely linked since the ability to multitask effectively concerns one’s ability to focus and allocate attentional resources [23]. The complication however is the prospective memory processes involved. In a demanding situation while one is busy with an engaging task, prospective memory suffers [24]. It must be emphasized that in a retrospective memory task one is directed to be in a retrieval mode. In contrast, a prospective memory task requires one to self-initiate and execute the intended action at the appropriate moment without a request for retrieval. Thus, in a prospective memory task, attention needs to be switched from the current task, activating the execution of the intended action in the midst of various tasks. This concerns the mechanisms of the target that could easily be noticed. If the cue has high likelihood of being noticed, higher is the possibility that an individual’s attention would be captured (thus, more likely to retrieve and execute the intended action). McDaniel and Einstein [14, p. 13] noted, “By definition, prospective memory tasks are those in which remembering to recall is the primary challenge.” It is common for prospective memory task cues to be unnoticed; because there is no task relevant instruction given to the individual at the time of retrieval (unlike retrospective memory tasks in which the instruction is given at the time of retrieval) [25]. This leads to the question of how an intended action is activated at the appropriate window of opportunity. In this regard, monitoring (for the appropriate moment) is an important aspect of how the cognitive system enables us to remember and execute the intended action [9,26]. This is particularly crucial when individuals are engrossed in a current task, such as programming in a multitasking environment. Some activities are more engaging due to their nature, pacing, and interest value [14, p. 62]. This suggests that prospective memory task requires attention of the individuals in monitoring what is happening in the environment. Otherwise the performance could suffer in such a situation. This is because the processes involved in becoming oriented to the prospective memory target, retrieving the intended action, scheduling execution of the various tasks could be compromised due to the currently engaging task. Kvavilashvili [27] presented evidence that more-engaging ongoing tasks lead to decreased thoughts about the prospective memory task. Attention permits us to notice things around us thereby allowing us to prioritize our visual processing and intended action [28, p. 25].

Given the limitation of human cognitive system, an important concern is about the facilitating factors related to the effectiveness in multitasking. Pertaining to the current context of programmer multitasking, it is important to investigate the issue of attention with a suitable experimental design which would provide rich empirical data. This effort serves scientific curiosity directing towards: (a) an investigation of the critical role of attention in prospective memory performance, and (b) shedding light on the nature of CWL experienced by the programmers. Also, a taxonomical understanding of prospective memory errors is pursued in the current study.

The nature of the target (that acts as a cue) in a prospective memory task is inherently critical for determining the kinds of processes that support retrieval and execution of the intended action. This is because a target that catches the attention of an individual not only produces switching from the current activity, but also signals execution of the intended action [29]. Therefore, an important characterization of attention is the requirement of devoting attention to monitoring to identify a cue namely, contracted attention (CA) and protracted attention (PA). A situation is characterized by PA if an individual needs to devote more attention in monitoring as compared to another situation [24]. In the present study, when a word is displayed by fading, an individual needs to devote more attention in monitoring as compared to the display by non-fading of a word (characterized by PA and CA respectively).

In multitasking, while busy with a current task other events outside the (current) attentional window cease to capture attention [30] thus the cue needs to be salient. However, the question arises whether prospective memory performance decrement is necessarily associated with an increase in CWL. If such is the situation that CA is thought to capture attention in a stimulus-driven manner and attention shift is stimulus driven, CWL should be unaffected irrespective of performance variation [31]. This suggests that even if PA produces a performance decrement as compared to CA, there will be a null effect on CWL. This line of thought is an impetus for the CWL analysis in the present study. With respect to prospective memory errors the current experiment intends to examine the proportion of – invalid response error (failure to a produce desired response within the stipulated time), multi-response error (in which multiple responses are made), and omission error (failure to act) comprising overall prospective memory performance failure. Of these error modes, cases of omission error are expected to be highest. This is conceivable since the situation is such that one has to monitor the word display in the corner window while programming. In the demanding environment such as the present study of programmer multitasking, there is a concern of higher vulnerability to inadvertent omission if the cues that normally trigger execution of an action are not prominent [32].

In the light of the aforementioned issues of attention and CWL concerning prospective memory, the present paper reports the experimental investigation of the following hypotheses:
                        
                           1.
                           PA has higher cases of omission error than CA.

Prospective memory performance decrement is independent of CWL variation.

@&#METHODS@&#

Participants were involved in a demanding situation of multitasking where he/she had to do programming and at the same time performing ‘mouse clicking’ in which prospective memory task was embedded. Essentially, when a word appeared in a corner window, participants were required to respond by making a mouse click.

A total of 60 computer science and engineering students (aged 21–30years, M
                        =23.18years) pursuing Master of Technology at an institute of technology for higher education voluntarily participated in the experiment. Each participant was tested individually and randomly assigned to the experimental groups.

The study was a between group design with attention having two levels (CA vs. PA). The manipulation of the CA and PA was achieved by varying how stimuli were displayed. PA condition involved fading display of words in the corner window whereby participants were required to devote more attention in monitoring as compared to CA condition which had non-fading display of words in the same corner window.

There was a fixed time interval of 5min between the disappearance of a word and appearance of the following word. Participants were randomly assigned to the exposure of either CA or PA. Half of the participants were assigned to CA and the other half were assigned to PA.

The computer had Dev-C++ version 4.9.9.2 (open source integrated development environment distributed under the GNU general public license for programming in C/C++) installed. The computer was equipped with Logitech optical mouse and Logitech keyboard. Two wide screen, 19″ color monitors (View sonic, LCD, VA 1912 wb) were connected with the computer through a VGA (Video Graphics Array) switch (ML202 VGA). A Java-based software developed to display words was used in this study. The software recorded the click responses and obtained personal data. It also had the features to set time and nature of word display, determine the associated file locations and storage path.

A ‘consent form’ which provided brief details of the study was used to get written consent from the participants. They also provided required information on ‘vital information sheet’ regarding personal and professional details along with information about self-rating (pre- and post- experiment) on their expertise in C++ programming. A sample programming problem was given in the ‘practice trial’ and five programming problems were given for the ‘experimental task’.

The words used for the ‘practice trial’, ‘experimental task’, and ‘word identification’ were 49, 10, 55, 43, 69, and 52 for the categories of ‘disease’, ‘color’, ‘state’, ‘vegetable’, ‘gardener’s tool’, and ‘fish’ respectively from category norms developed by Overschelde et al. [33]. The words for the ‘experimental task’ according to their sequence of display were: (a) Hepatitis, Tan, and Indiana (for first half); (b) Corn, Hose, and Catfish (for second half). The targets for the prospective memory task were ‘Indiana’ and ‘Catfish’ in the third position of the display sequence irrespective of the attention condition.

After the ‘experimental task’, the participants were given the task of ‘word identification’. The displayed words of ‘experimental task’ were randomly shuffled with word identification list so that the participants would not be able to identify the displayed words if they were simply clicking without reading (or paying attention) to the words. A sheet was provided to each participant to write the ‘subjective report’.

The computer version of NASA-TLX (version 2.0) (http://humansystems.arc.nasa.gov/groups/TLX/computer.php) was used to measure CWL.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

For the mouse clicking task, each word would appear on the screen (small window) and disappear after 7 s (5 s fading time and 2 s on time). There was a fixed time interval of 5min between the disappearance of a word and appearance of the following word. Thus, the display of the first word will also be delayed by 5min from the moment of starting the experimental task.

As mentioned earlier, prior to the practice trials, participants filled out a consent form. They also provided required information on ‘vital information sheet’. A sample programming problem was given in the ‘practice trial’. Participants were informed to keep their electronic devices such as, laptop, watch, and cell-phones in a safe place and not to bring any of them at programming workstation of the experiment in advance.

Each ‘experimental task’ lasted for 35min, 42 s. Once the experimental task started, it was left to participants to handle the tasks at hand (the experimenter maintained a distance of about 1.5m from the participants’ work area). Tasks were presented on a wide screen, 19″ color monitor (View sonic VA 1912 wb) and responses were recorded by the computer. The experimenter also recorded additional information manually observing the activities of the participants on another View sonic 19″ color monitor (View sonic VA 1912 wb) which displayed the screen of the programmer’s computer through a VGA (Video Graphics Array) switch (ML202 VGA). The main purpose of this arrangement was for recording significant information in unobtrusive manner and the participants were not aware of the second monitor.

The exposure time of the words display was set according to the reaction time of the words given in the category norms mentioned above (the average being 4.43 s). By taking the successive whole number, it was set as 5 s. and the on time was set to 2 s, this made a displayed word disappear after 7 s. During the practice trial the participants were shown the basic functions of Dev C++ and their queries were addressed.

When all the arrangements were ready and the initial procedure was complete, participants were given instructions concerning the experiment. They were told that the experimenter was interested in their programming performance and their ability to perform multiple tasks at the same time. They were informed that there would be five C++ programming problems for which they had to perform coding. They were encouraged to complete all the programs. They were allowed to perform the programming task in any sequence and had the freedom to attempt an incomplete task later. The participants were however not allowed to open any additional program or minimize or close the existing windows on the screen, and any attempt to access internet was prohibited and disabled. Writing materials were not available to the participants during programming. The experimenter disabled any other software which could interrupt the experiment and the clock on the toolbar was kept hidden in advance.

The experimenter instructed the participants that they had to write program while concurrently performing another task of ‘mouse clicking’. They were told to click ‘OK’ (left click of the mouse) whenever a word was displayed on the small window that remained open on the right corner of the screen. They were instructed to read the word and make the click response before its disappearance from the screen. Participants were further told that the experimenter had an additional interest in the task of ‘executing delayed intention’ i.e., they were asked to click ‘Cancel’ if the word was ‘Indiana’ or ‘Catfish’. The experimenter instructed the participants to read each displayed word carefully, identify it and then select their response by clicking the appropriate button. To emphasize this, they were told that questions would be asked about the words later. They were told to pay equal attention to the multiple tasks at hand (they should not prioritize between programming and mouse clicking task, tasks were equally important). Also, they were strictly instructed to click only once. They were told to stop performing any task when a pop-up of ‘stop message’ appeared on the screen (accompanied by a sound). To make sure that participants had understood the instructions, they were asked to repeat the instructions in their own words to the experimenter. The ‘practice trial’ followed when it was clear to the experimenter that the participants had fully understood the instructions. After the ‘practice trial’, they had the opportunity to ask questions about any concerns related to the tasks before proceeding to the ‘experimental tasks’. Once the participants did not have any further queries, they moved on to the next step i.e., typing the personal details followed by ‘experimental task’. The ‘experimental task’ proceeded by displaying first word when ‘Start’ button was clicked. Furthermore, the participants were reminded to be careful and click the appropriate button. This is because habit intrusion is an important issue of prospective memory failure in such demanding environments that involve an atypical action [13,24]. The emphasis of the instruction was to see if habit intrusion poses a concern under the circumstances that the matter of clicking appropriate button was made more explicit.

After the task was over, the participants were given a sheet having a list of words. The list contained the words displayed during the ‘experimental task’ but randomized the positions along with other words that were never displayed during the experiment. This was mainly to check that participants did not simply make the click responses but paid attention to the words.

At the end of the experiment the participants were debriefed and requested to talk about their experiences regarding the tasks they had performed. Participants were encouraged to talk about any part of the experiment, their views and feelings about the tasks, and any experience that they would like to share with the experimenter. They used ‘Subjective Report’ sheets for this purpose.

@&#RESULTS@&#

To examine prospective memory performance, a taxonomical approach was followed to better understand various types of errors. The habit intrusion error, omission error, invalid response error, multi-response error, and overall prospective memory performance failure were measured. Habit intrusion errors were measured as the number of responses participants inappropriately clicked ‘OK’ button instead of clicking ‘Cancel’ when a target occurred. Omission errors were measured as the number of cases the participants failed to make a click response i.e., the number of times that the participants did not make click response for a target. Invalid response error include late responses (i.e., disappearance of the target already occurred as a response was made) and haphazard responses (i.e., arbitrary click responses). Multi-click errors were measured as instances of more than one click responses for a target (a situation could be of more than one response for a target but not the repetition of the same response). The measure for overall prospective memory performance failure was the number of times participants failed to make a correct click response (irrespective of incorrect click response or failing to click at all) when the target occurred. Therefore, overall prospective memory performance failure was comprised of all types of prospective memory errors. Habit intrusion errors, omission responses, and invalid response errors (other errors like late responses and haphazard responses) including multi-response error formed part of the overall prospective memory performance failure. In terms of categorizing erroneous responses for a target, the following strategy was followed: (a) when there was a late response but the clicked button was OK, it was treated as an invalid response error but not a case of habit intrusion error, (b) when there were more than one click response but the first click was OK, it was treated as a case of habit intrusion error (since the second click was expected to be upon realization of the error in an attempt to rectify it), (b) when there was a click response followed by another click response when the word had disappeared, it was treated as multi-response error, (c) when there was a situation of more than one click response after disappearance of a target, it was treated as invalid response error.

Initial analysis to compare CA (M = .37) and PA (M
                        =1.07) on number of cases of omission error revealed a significant difference (see Fig. 1
                        ), t(58)=−3.72, p < .0005, two tailed.

Analysis of various errors contributing to overall prospective memory performance failure revealed that omission error comprised of 70.49%, target multi-response error comprised of 16.39%, invalid response error comprised of 11.48%, and habit intrusion error (even though intended to be eliminated) comprised of 1.64%. Fig. 2
                         shows these results in which omissions error has largest proportion whereas habit intrusion error is negligible. Table 1
                         shows the descriptive statistics.

A within group ANOVA was performed on the number of cases for invalid response error, multi-response error, and omission error (other errors not examined in previous experiments). These three categories of error have been included on purpose (habit intrusion error which was construed to be eliminated by giving special instructions to the participants comprised of negligible proportion). The analysis revealed a significant difference among the three categories (invalid response error, M = .12; multi-response error, M = .17; and omission error, M = .72) (see Fig. 3
                        ), F(2, 118) = 17.30, p <.0005, 
                           
                              
                                 
                                    η
                                 
                                 
                                    p
                                 
                                 
                                    2
                                 
                              
                              =
                              .
                              23
                           
                        . A planned comparison revealed that there were significantly more cases of omission error than invalid response error and multi-response error whereas the last two did not differ from one another.

Further overall prospective memory performance failure was analyzed by performing a t-test. The analysis revealed a significant difference between CA (M = .70) and PA (M
                        =1.33) (see Fig. 4
                        ), t(58)=−3.25, p = .002, two tailed. Table 2
                         presents the descriptive statistics.

The performance on programming was measured in terms of the number of programs successfully completed. A t-test revealed that there was no significant difference between CA (M
                        =1.40) and PA (M
                        =1.50), t(58) = −.44, p = .661, two tailed.

Using NASA-TLX, the participants first evaluated the weighting of each of the six dimensions through pair-wise comparisons (score ranging 0–5). Next, they provided rating for each dimension (score ranging 0–100). The rating scale ranged from ‘low’ to ‘high’ for all factors except for the ‘performance’ factor which is rated from ‘poor’ to ‘good’. The CWL score was calculated by the weighted average of the ratings ranging from 0 to 100 i.e., summing all of the weighted CWL ratings score and dividing by 15.

A t-test was performed to analyze the CWL. There was no significant difference between CA (M
                        =48.86) and PA (M
                        =55.36), t(58)=−1.42, p = .161, two tailed. Furthermore, prospective memory performance failure had no significant correlation with CWL, r(60) = .06, p = .650, 2-tailed.

NASA-TLX has three dimensions related to the demands imposed on the subject (mental, physical, and temporal demand) and another three dimensions related to the interaction of the performer with the task (effort, frustration, and performance). A multiple regression analysis was performed to examine the influence of these dimension (subscale) groupings on overall CWL. Using the enter method, F(2, 57) = 85.32, p < .0005. Adjusted R
                        2 =.74. Demands imposed, β = .52, p < .0005. Performer’s interaction, β = .50, p < .0005. Descriptive statistics for the dimension grouping are presented in the upper portion of Table 3
                        . Table 4
                         shows the coefficients of regression.

To examine the proportion of variance accounted for by each individual dimension of NASA-TLX multiple regression analysis was performed. The dimensions were further screened to examine the most efficient ones with respect to their influence on CWL. Thus, stepwise analyses of the dimensions showed that temporal demand is the most important factor which explained 37% of the CWL variation. F(6, 53) = 35.77, p < .0005, adjusted R
                        2 = .798. Performance, β = .355, p < .0005. Temporal demand, β = .31, p < .0005. Effort, β = .21, p = .005. Mental demand, β = .24, p < .001. Frustration, β = .19, p = .005. Physical demand, β = .13, p = .046. Descriptive statistics for individual dimensions are presented in the lower portion of Table 3. Table 5
                         shows the coefficients of regression.

For the mouse clicking task, a t-test on the non-click responses (the number of times that the participants failed to make click response when a word was displayed) revealed a significant difference between CA (M
                        =1.10) and PA (M
                        =2.97), t(58)=−4.41, p < .0005, two tailed (see Fig. 5
                        ).

The self-ratings of the participants (on a 7 point Likert scale) of expertise in C++ programming (pre- and post-experiment) were examined. A t-test revealed a significant difference between pre-experiment self-rating (M
                        =4.63) and post-experiment self-rating (M
                        =4.38), t(59) = 2.21, p = .031, two tailed. The negative correlation between post-experiment self-rating and CWL was not significant rs
                        (60) = −.16, p = .232, 2-tailed.

After the experimental task, the participants went through a ‘word identification’ task and debriefing. They were given a list of words and asked to identify the words which got displayed in the corner window. Further, participants were asked to write down the ‘targets’ only if he/she was very sure of them. All the participants successfully identified the targets and there was not even a single case of failing to identify a target (indicating that the performance issue is not of retrospective memory problem).

Unless otherwise indicated, the rejection level for inferring statistical significance was set at .05 in the analyses.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The results of the experiment demonstrated that people are more vulnerable to omission error under PA as compared to CA. Also, omission error (irrespective of attention condition) emerged as the most prominent among all types of prospective memory errors. The results highlight the importance of attention in monitoring a target. There is a higher level of vulnerability to errors when a target requires an individual to devote more attention. On the whole, PA has significantly higher prospective memory failure than CA. The findings of the study substantiates that attention plays an important role in multitasking and prospective memory performance [24]. Thus, the mechanism by which retrieval is initiated involving cueing is crucial for successful prospective memory performance.

Attention is one of the most basic constructs linked to multitasking. In multitasking, efficient task handling is influenced by the amount attentional resources available i.e., greater the amount of attention people have, it is easier for an individual to focus and/or refocus attention as per the task requirements [23]. Literature concerning attention and multitasking cover a wide and complex range of human behavior. Theoretical frameworks of attention emphasize on limited cognitive resources of human information processing. This has implication in multitasking since the limited resources are allocated among competing tasks or information channels. Attention takes many forms thus specifying in detail the function of a particular aspect of attention requires an understanding of exactly what is involved in an act. Johnson and Proctor [34, p. 29] noted that specifying the role of attention in performance calls for a description of information processing: for instance, attention may act as a sort of amplifier making processing of stimulus information in an attended region more efficient (i.e., enhancing stimulus processing) and (b) it might also be that paying attention to certain aspect of a scene also causes one to remember other information associated with the perceived information. However, in terms of performing a prospective memory task, understanding the process by which information in the environment and mechanisms of materialization or non-materialization of a particular response is intriguing. The central executive needs to be available in order to comply with a prospective memory instruction [35]. Thus, when people are involved in multiple tasks, their working memory is crucial in coordinating and maintaining task relevant information helping them to switch from one task to the other (e.g., by storing information related to a task that they are not currently working on and controlling attention) [36]. Given that performance of the current task is going well and one is able to manage concurrent tasks – what happens to prospective memory task in the midst of such a situation is a complex matter of human vulnerability to errors. As emphasized throughout the present research, when a person is in the midst of the multiple tasks and occupied with a current task, prospective memory processes suffer unless the cue is easily noticeable and the appropriate action is identified. This implies that the situation requires top-down control of attention when a target is not salient, so that attention is allocated to the relevant stimuli in order to achieve desired performance [37]. When engrossed in programming, an individuals’ failure to realize a delayed intention is compounded by the nature of a target. This is because individuals rely on targets (serving as cues) that should indicate that the intended task be carried out.

Further understanding of the role of attention in prospective memory performance emerges from the empirical data on various types of prospective memory errors. As expected, the findings of the taxonomical analysis of prospective memory errors demonstrate that PA has higher cases of omission error than CA. When engrossed in programming, one faces the difficulty in monitoring the other window. This creates a situation of inattention at the cost of missing the targets for a prospective memory task. As expected, results also provide supporting evidence that omissions error has largest proportion as compared to other types of errors. The matter of attention pertains to the understanding that if a cue is less likely to capture attention, the more monitoring of its occurrence is required on the part of the individual. In multitasking, intentions are exposed to the risk of being overlaid by the cognitive processes emerging from various (concurrent) task demands. This aspect is critical since a prospective memory task essentially involves a delay between the formation of an intention to act and the execution of the intended action. This implies that when working memory is occupied by other forms of processing, prospective memory failures would be more likely (i.e., limitation on working memory will constrain prospective memory performance). Since human working memory system has a limited capacity, a concurrent task that occupies central executive is known to affect prospective remembering [35]. This is plausible since the role of working memory in handling ongoing activities is crucial for prospective memory task. The central executive is typically regarded as an attentional system (e.g., [38,39]) and the coordination of processing and storage of task relevant information in working memory would affect prospective memory performance [40]. Successful performance could depend upon some form of rehearsal or availability of relevant salient cues for retrieval and execution of the intention [41]. Therefore, performance costs associated with task switching seem to represent a common executive attentional bottleneck [42]. Under normal circumstances, an individual who is performing a single task has the advantage of focusing on the task at hand without an obvious constraint on attentional processes. However, an individual who is multitasking is operating under a condition that there is a limit to the attentional resources and understanding of how individual factors account for the performance differences is crucial.

There was a case of one habit intrusion error which is almost negligible contribution to overall prospective memory performance failure. Even though a particular instruction not to click OK inappropriately did not eliminate habit intrusion error altogether, the results indicate that instruction matters.

With respect to CWL the study intended to determine whether prospective memory performance decrement is necessarily associated with an increase in CWL. Interestingly, the results indicate the evidence of a null effect of attention on CWL. The present research has demonstrated that when there is a stimulus driven situation of attention capture, a performance decrement observed in terms of prospective memory is not necessarily concerned with CWL. This implies that performance decrement of a prospective memory task is not necessarily due to a variation in CWL. Results have shown that there is no significant relationship between prospective memory failure and CWL. Also post-experiment self-rating has no significant negative correlation with CWL. This further supports the dissociation of prospective memory failure and CWL. This is despite an observation of a significantly higher pre-experiment self-rating than post-experiment self-rating on expertise in C++ programming.

In terms of the various dimensions of NASA-TLX, results have shown critical understanding. In case of dimension (subscale) grouping, there is a greater contribution of demands imposed (mental, physical, and temporal demand) as compared to performer’s interaction (effort, frustration, and performance) on the CWL variation. Temporal demand has emerged to be the most important factor when the dimensions were further screened. On the whole, it is important to consider that physical demand is not a prominent factor in the present contexts of programmer multitasking. It may be noted that temporal demand and mental demand have high contribution in such a way that even if physical demand is the most insignificant dimension of the six dimensions the subscale grouping of demands imposed has greater contribution on the CWL variation than performer’s interaction.

On the whole, there is an undifferentiated programming performance under CA and PA. This is not a surprise since the programming task in the present context of multitasking has been devised in such a way that programming task is more engaging than the mouse clicking task. Further, there is a significant difference between pre-experiment self-rating and post-experiment self-rating. This indicates individuals’ higher estimation of their own expertise on C++ prior to facing the programming tasks in the experiment and a low satisfaction level in terms of successfully realizing their expectations.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The current study aimed to investigate the role of attention concerning prospective memory performance and CWL in programmer multitasking. Attention is an important factor concerning cueing an intended action. This study intended to determine whether prospective memory performance decrement is necessarily associated with an increase in CWL. The results of the study affirm that when there is a stimulus driven situation of attention capture a performance decrement observed in terms of prospective memory not necessarily concerned with an increase in CWL. Strategically, specific instruction has the benefit of reducing the occurrence of habit intrusion error. It is suggested that future studies could focus on issues pertaining to the manipulation of the way performance criteria and related information of the tasks are provided at the time of encoding in such a multitasking context.

In addition to the matter of remedial measures to prevent prospective memory errors, there are important avenues of future endeavor focusing on CWL. An instantaneous CWL measure such as Index of Cognitive Activity (ICA) [43] would probably reveal that overall CWL variation does not necessarily depend upon the currently involved task because the resource of demand may originate from another task competing for attention (hence the possibility for instantaneous increase and decrease of CWL).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

