@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The n-alcohols liquid doping effect on the twisted nematic liquid crystals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We present a simple and efficient way to improve the performance of the twisted nematic liquid crystal (LC) system.


                        
                        
                           
                           The LCs modified by liquid dopant exhibit the functions of lower driving voltage and shorter response time.


                        
                        
                           
                           We replace the solid dopant by the liquid dopant for avoiding the drawbacks of precipitation and aggregation.


                        
                        
                           
                           The result of time-evolved transmittance shows the voltage can be held after the doping of n-hexanol liquid.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Liquid crystals

Liquid dopant

Doping effect

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  We present a simple and efficient way to improve the performance of the twisted nematic liquid crystal (LC) system by doping a small amount of n-alcohols. The LCs modified by n-hexanol demonstrates the optimum electro-optical properties of lower driving voltage and shorter response time. Our measurements indicate that the liquid dopant n-alcohols can be used to modify LCs for lowering zenithal anchoring energy relative to undoped LCs. Without the drawbacks of precipitation and aggregation that the nanoparticles could have, the method of doping n-alcohol liquids provides a more stable and reliable choice to apply in the various LC display systems.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The nematic liquid crystals (LCs) are the most common type of anisotropic fluid with the electrically controllable property. Based on the specific feature, nematic LCs have been developed to a mature technology providing a wide range of applications including various electro-optical devices such as LC displays (LCDs) [1–4], switchable grating [5], and phase modulator [6]. Nowadays, LCDs have become a kind of common display device with different size and it is full of our life. Although the LCDs are a mature technology, it is always an important issue to shorten the response time and decrease the driving voltage for achieving the results of fast switching and energy-saving. Besides, the orientation of LC molecules is crucial for optimizing the operation of LCD. The methods to tune the LC pretilt angles such as doping polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) nanoparticles in the planar-aligned LC cells [7] or by changing the chemical structure of the alignment film [8] have been researched. In recent years, nanoparticles have been used as dopants in LC systems to improve the electro-optical properties of LCs caused by the reduction of ion effect and the elastic coefficient [9–14]. For instance, the conductive carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were found that it could be used to decrease the driving voltage of twisted nematic (TN) LCs by lowering the ion effect. But, because of the conductive property of CNTs, the CNTs doped LCs are not able to maintain enough voltage-holding ratio (VHR) across the LC cells [15]. In LCDs, the low VHR condition may lead to a poor contrast and the phenomenon of image sticking, which degrades the performance of LCDs [16]. And it has been demonstrated that the insulating nanoparticles such as diamond powders, ZnO, TiO2, and Si3N4 used as dopant can efficiently decrease the driving voltage and still maintain a high VHR level [17,18]. However, the doped insulating nanoparticles in LCs might precipitate or aggregate after a long time use without suitable treatments such as surface modifications and lost the function of ion absorption. To solve the problem, we developed an alternative way to avoid the drawbacks of using nanoparticles and can successfully improve the electro-optical properties of the LCs.

In this paper, functional liquids, different kinds of n-alcohols were used to dope into the LC host for modification as liquid dopants. The LCs modified by the n-alcohols demonstrates fantastic electro-optical properties in the ways of decreasing driving voltage and shortening response time. Besides, from the results of time-evolved transmittance, it shows that doped LCs could still maintain a high voltage holding level. Moreover, according to the calculation results from the measurements of LC parameters, our data conclude that the doped n-alcohols can be treated as liquid dopants to efficiently lower the zenithal anchoring energy, the strength to enforce the LC molecules lay down and align in the surface, between the alignment layer and LCs. Essentially, the n-alcohol liquids doping method provides a more reliable choice than the use of nanoparticles doping. The liquid dopant n-alcohols are possibly used in different LC systems that open a simple and efficient way to enhance the performance of LC electro-optical devices for the display applications.

In our experiment, a nematic LC mixture of the ZCE-5099LA (Chisso) and the n-alcohols such as n-ethanol, n-butanol, n-hexanol and n-octanol were employed. The 4.2μm thickness ITO (indium tin oxide) glass cells with mutually perpendicular rubbed polyimide (PI) as alignment layers were prepared. The PI we used is AL-12G which is supplied from Daily Polymer Corp. For curing the PI, we pre-baked them in the oven at 80°C about 10min and then at 220°C in 1h for entirely curing the PI. About the rubbing condition of alignment layers, the rubbing strength RS is calculated by the formula [19]: RS
                     =
                     NM (2πrn/ν
                     −
                     1). With the parameters (N
                     =1, M
                     ∼1mm, r
                     =42mm, n
                     =28.3Hz and ν
                     =20.0mms−1), the rubbing strength RS is about 400mm in our experiment. To realize the effect of n-alcohols doping in the nematic LCs, a small amount of n-alcohols were added into LC ZCE-5099LA. Then these materials were uniformly mixed by gently stirring in glass bottles for 1h. In our experiments, we deal with these alcohols in a very careful way. These materials were uniformly mixed by gently stirring in glass bottles for 1h. We stir these materials in a very slow speed and the glass bottles were sealed for avoiding alcohols leaking. And we found the n-alcohols have good miscibility and stability with the LC mixture, no layers separation condition was observed after few days. Subsequently, the LC ZCE-5099LA mixed with different concentrations of n-alcohols (modified LCs) were injected into the cells by capillary action.

After these materials were injected into cells, these cells were sealed with UV gel immediately. To further understand the electro-optical properties of modified LCs, the transmittances of the cells under various applied voltage were measured. The voltage–transmittance curves were measured by an electro-optical measuring system consisting of a He–Ne (632.8nm) laser, a pair of polarizers, sample cell mounted in rotatable holder and the photodetector, as shown in Fig. 1
                     . At the beginning, the polarizers were tuned to be perpendicular with each other to make sure the transmittance minimum. Then the sample cell with modified LCs was placed between the crossed polarizers and tuned to make the transmittance reach maximum by setting the rubbing directing to be parallel or perpendicular with the polarization of polarizers. The sample cell was driven by an AC field (1kHz, square wave) supplied by the function generator SRS DS360 which was controlled by a computer with LabView programming. Then the transmittances under applied voltage were recorded through the photodetector. The voltage required for reaching 90% and 10% transmittance relative to the initial light intensity was defined as driving voltage V
                     90 and V
                     10, respectively. The contrast ratio (CR) was obtained by calculating the maximum light transmission over the minimum transmission in the electric field off and on (5V) states, respectively. And so on, the polarized optical microscope (POM) observations of sample cells in bright and dark states were conducted using Olympus BX51. The response time was calculated by the sum of rise time τ
                     on and decay time τ
                     off. The switching times of the τ
                     on and τ
                     off were recorded for varying the transmittances 100–10% and 0–90% in the electric field (5V) on and off, respectively. In addition, to confirm the ion problem for the LCs doped with n-alcohols, the time-evolved transmittances were measured in 3 DC volts.

For determining the anchoring energy Wθ
                      of the LCs doped with n-alcohols, the modified LCs were injected into the 15μm thickness ITO glass cells with anti-parallel alignment layers to measure the values of saturation voltages Vs
                     , dielectric anisotropy Δε, and elastic constants K. To obtain the saturation voltages Vs
                     , the sample cell with anti-parallel alignment layers was placed between the crossed polarizers with its rubbing direction 45° from one of the polarizers. And then the sample cell was driven by an AC field (1kHz, square wave) supplied by the function generator SRS DS360 which was controlled by a computer with LabView programming. The saturation voltages Vs
                      are measured as the transmittance reaches to the 10% of the maximum intensity. And the dielectric anisotropy Δε and elastic constants K were found out by the measurements through Instec ALCT instrument. The saturation voltages Vs
                      were examined by the measurement of the phase retardation.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS@&#

The results of voltage–transmittance curves of the pure LC ZCE-5099LA and those doped with different n-alcohols at 5wt% in concentration are shown in Fig. 2
                     (a). It can be seen that the pure LC ZCE-5099LA needs higher driving voltage to switch from bright to dark state. Relatively, for the modified LCs doped with 5wt% n-alcohols, the driving voltages required for switching are all below to that of the undoped LC. Among these dopant liquids, the n-hexanol provides the most remarkable effect for decreasing the driving voltage of the LC ZCE-5099LA. These results demonstrate that the n-alcohols, especially the n-hexanol, may influence the basic electro-optical parameters of the LC ZCE-5099LA.

For further understanding the properties of the n-alcohols doped LC, these modified LCs are injected into the cell with anti-parallel alignment layers. Then the dielectric anisotropy Δε and elastic constants K were obtained by the measurements through the use of Instec ALCT instrument. The saturation voltages Vs
                      were found by the measurement of the phase retardation. Combined with the dielectric anisotropy Δε, elastic constants K and saturation voltages Vs
                     , the zenithal anchoring energy Wθ
                      can be calculated from Eq. (1) as the saturation voltage is large [20]:
                        
                           (1)
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       W
                                    
                                    
                                       θ
                                    
                                 
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             V
                                          
                                          
                                             s
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   ε
                                                
                                                
                                                   0
                                                
                                             
                                             Δ
                                             ε
                                             K
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       d
                                    
                                 
                                 .
                              
                           
                        
                     where d is the cell gap of the LC cells and ε
                     0 is the vacuum permittivity, and these parameters of the doped LCs were listed in Table 1
                     .

From Table 1, the results show that the dielectric anisotropy Δε, elastic constants K and saturation voltages Vs
                      would be influenced by the doping of 5wt% of n-alcohols. We found the obvious reduction of elastic coefficient also can be achieved by doping n-alcohols (liquid dopant). In addition, the zenithal anchoring energy Wθ
                      is obviously decreased relative to the pure LC. Fig. 2(b) shows the relationship between driving voltage V
                     90, V
                     10, and the anchoring energy Wθ
                      of the LC ZCE-5099LA modified by n-alcohols at 5wt%. It can be seen that the driving voltage V
                     90 and V
                     10 would decrease as the anchoring energy Wθ
                      reduced. Especially, the utility of n-hexanol can efficiently reduce the zenithal anchoring energy about half relative to the condition of pure LC ZCE-5099LA. In our experiments, we indeed noticed that the anchoring energy Wθ
                      reduced gradually when the carbon chain length increased from n-ethanol to n-hexanol. We expect the results can be observed as we use n-octanol as dopant. However, the n-octanol is not a good solute for the LC we used. They can’t be mixed uniformly in the concentration of 5wt%. Therefore, the average results showed it could not be a good liquid dopant to reduce the anchoring energy Wθ
                     . It is believed that the reduction of the zenithal anchoring energy induced by the decrease of elastic coefficient is the main reason, like doped with nanoparticles, which induces the decrement of driving voltage [20,21].

Resulting from the largest decrease of driving voltage caused by doping n-hexanol, the effect of various concentration of n-hexanol doping in the LC is further investigated. The LC ZCE-5099LA with 0, 1, 3, 5, and 7wt% of n-hexanol were injected into the cells. The voltage–transmittance curves of the LC ZCE-5099LA doped with n-hexanol at 0, 1, 3, 5, and 7wt% in concentration are shown in Fig. 3
                     (a).

The experiment results of driving voltage V
                     90, V
                     10, and contrast ratio (CR) are shown in Table 2
                     . It can be observed that the driving voltage decreases more as the concentration of n-hexanol increases. Relative to the pure LC, the LC with 5wt% of n-hexanol demonstrates the best results with the driving voltage V
                     90 & V
                     10 decreased from 1.85V to 1.35V and 2.90V to 2.30V (about 27% and 21% decrements), respectively. The contrast ratio is enhanced from 197 to 240. But as the doped concentration of n-hexanol reaches 7wt%, different trend of data i.e. the higher driving voltage and lower contrast ratio are obtained. To explain the phenomenon, the zenithal anchoring energies of different concentrations of n-hexnaol doping into LC ZCE-5099LA were obtained by the Eq. (1) through the measurements described previously (shown in Table 2). And Fig. 3(b) shows the relationship between driving voltage V
                     90, V
                     10, and the anchoring energy Wθ
                      of the LC ZCE-5099LA modified by n-hexanol at 0, 1, 3, 5, and 7wt%. It can be seen that the anchoring energy Wθ
                      reduces as the concentration of n-hexanol increases. The anchoring energy Wθ
                      attains minimum as the 7wt% of n-hexanol is doped into LCs. For the concentration of n-hexanol doping below 7wt%, we find that the driving voltages V
                     90 and V
                     10 keep decreasing while the anchoring energy Wθ
                      is reduced. Based on the success of 5wt% of n-hexanol doped into the LC, we also expect that LCs doped with higher concentration of 7wt% n-hexanol should obtain better performance. However, the data show that the adding of higher concentration of n-hexanol in the LCs did not cause better results. Indeed, the anchoring energy and order parameter were further reduced as the 7wt% of n-hexanol was added into LCs relative to 5wt% of n-hexanol doping. However, the over amount of 7wt% of n-hexanol cannot be entirely dissolved in the LCs which makes the doped LCs become unstable. Therefore, we get higher driving voltages in average.

The rise time τ
                     on and decay time τ
                     off of the LC doped with n-hexanol at the various concentrations were measured by using 5V as bias voltage and shown in Table 2.

It can be seen that as the concentration of n-hexanol increases, the rise time would decrease and the decay time would increase. This property is consistent with the result of decrement of the anchoring energy. For the optimum case of 5wt% of n-hexanol doped into LCs, the rise time τ
                     on is shortened from 2.80 to 2.25ms (about 20% decrement) relative to the undoped condition. The response time for the modified LCs is slightly shorter than the undoped case. It may be concerned that the order parameter would be decreased due to the reduction of anchoring energy, however, we can see that the contrast ratio (CR) shown in Table 2 were not influenced by the liquid doping work until 7wt% n-hexanol was used. Therefore, we consider the n-hexanol liquid dopant has the best modification result for the LC ZCE-5099LA at 5wt%. Fig. 4
                      shows the POM images of the dark states and bright states of the cell with pure LCs and modified LCs by 5wt% n-hexanol.

It can be seen that the resulting contrast ratios of the cell with pure LCs and 5wt% modified LCs were not obviously influenced by this doping work. In our experiments, we found the viscosity would reduce as the alcohols were mixed with LC. In addition, the results are consistent with the influence of decrement of anchoring energy. From these experiment results, it implies that the n-hexanol can be treated as a kind of liquid dopant to effectively reduce the anchoring energy between the alignment layer and LC molecules, and thus induces smaller driving voltages, shorter rise times and longer decay times in LCs [20–22].

For understanding whether the doping of n-alcohols would induce the drawback of ion effect, the time-evolved transmittances were measured in this work. Fig. 5
                      shows the results of pure ZCE-5099LA and modified LC doped with 5wt% n-hexanol in 3 DC volts.

As the time went by, the transmittance of modified LC would decrease just about 6% after 3min. This result implies that the doping of 5wt% n-hexanol would not result in the ion issue which induces the obvious decrement of VHR. We thought the reason leading to the decrement of VHR about 5% in the first minimum could be due to the alignment effect of the dipole moment which exists in the n-hexanol material, and the current leakage phenomenon is a possible cause to induce 5% decrement in VHR in the first minimum based on the experimental results demonstrated by Ohba et al. [23]. Therefore, to avoid the current leakage problem, the liquid dopant with lower dipole moment might be a good choice for achieving the effect of high VHR and low operating voltages simultaneously.

To examine the generality of the liquid dopant effects, the n-hexanol was also doped into another LC material E7 with the concentration of 0, 1, 3, and 5wt%. The voltage–transmittance measurement results of the doped LC E7 are shown in Fig. 6
                     . The results exhibit the same phenomenon that the driving voltage can be decreased by doping of n-hexanol in the LC E7. As the concentration of n-hexanol doping increases, more decrement in the driving voltage is observed. The appearance of the peak comes from the fact that the E7 is not perfectly suitable for the 4.2μm TN LC cell. But it can be seen that the n-hexanol also works as a liquid dopant in the LC E7. Therefore, through the experiment, we considered that the n-hexanols have the generality for improving the electro-optical properties of the TN LC system.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In summary, we present a simple and efficient way to improve the performance of the TN LC system by modifying the LC with a small amount of n-alcohols as liquid dopants to reduce the zenithal anchoring energy between the alignment layer and LCs. The LCs modified by the n-alcohol liquid dopants demonstrate lower driving voltage and shorter rise time. In the case of LC doped with 5wt% n-hexanol, the driving voltage decreases about 27% and 21% in V
                     90 and V
                     10, and the rise time τ
                     on can be shortened about 20% relative to the undoped LC host. Besides, the contrast ratios of the modified LCs are also better than the undoped case. The modified LCs exhibit high stability in electro-optical properties as the doped concentration of n-hexanol is lower than 5wt%, which indicates that the orientation of LC molecules would not be influenced by the liquid doping method. The result of time-evolved transmittance further shows that the ability of voltage holding is still maintained in a high level after the doping of 5wt% n-hexanol liquid. Besides, the generality of the n-alcohol liquid dopant effects is demonstrated through the experiments with two kinds of LC host materials. To sum up, without the drawbacks that doping solid nanoparticles could have, the simple n-alcohol liquid doping method provides a more promising opportunity for applications in various LC display systems.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

One of us (C-Y.C.) acknowledges the financial support from National Taiwan University, the Ministry of Science and Technology, the Ministry of Education of Taiwan, and the technical assistance from the National Nano Device Laboratory of Taiwan.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

