@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effect of PEDOT:PSS vs. MoO3 as the hole injection layer on performance of C545T-based green electroluminescent light-emitting diodes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We compared the effect of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer (HIL) on the electroluminescence (EL) performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           We discussed the effect of different host materials.


                        
                        
                           
                           OLEDs with NPB as the host show higher power efficiency when MoO3 was used as the hole injection layer.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Organic light emissive diodes

Hole injection layer

Balance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In order to understand the effect of hole injection on the performance of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) with electron- and hole-type hosts used in the emissive layer, we fabricated OLEDs based on a green fluorescent 10-(2-benzothiazolyl)-2,3,6,7-tetrahydro-1,1,7,7-tetramethyl-1H,5H,11H-(1)benzopyropyrano(6,7-8-I,j)quinolizin-11-one (C545T) with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and MoO3 as the hole injection layer, respectively. Here, N,N′-di(naphthalene-1-yl)-N,N′-diphenyl-benzidine (NPB) and tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminum (Alq3) are, respectively, used as the host in the emissive layer for comparison. It is clearly found that different hole injection layers play different roles in the adjustment of the electron/hole injection and the transport balance, thus the different hosts are needed in the emissive layer for high electroluminescence efficiency OLEDs. This means that the selection of appropriate hole injection layers for OLEDs according to the different hosts in the emissive layer is especially important in the fabrication of high efficiency single emissive layer OLEDs.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) as a promising technology for lighting and display applications have been attracting great attention in the past several decades. With the development of materials and structural research, the efficiency and operational lifetime of OLEDs have been improved enormously [1–3]. The OLED device structures have been developed by introducing more functional layers than those done earlier [4–9]. These functional layers facilitate charge injection, transport and blocking in the devices, thus improving the balance of charge carrier injection and transport in the emitting layer for efficient recombination [10,11]. In addition, these functional layers in multilayer OLEDs can also suppress the exciton quenching [12]. As we know, the hole injection layer inserted between the anode and the emissive layer plays important roles in the operating characteristics and stability of OLEDs. Therefore, different hole injection layer materials have been developed. Amongst, certain metal oxides as effective hole injection layers in OLEDs have been widely reported [13–15]. MoO3-based hole injection materials attract more and more attention due to less contamination, easy fabrication by thermal deposition and energy level matching with organic molecules. It is clearly seen that MoO3 is a potential candidate to achieve good hole injection in OLEDs [14–16]. It has recently been shown by the photoelectron spectroscopy studies that the work-function of MoO3 is as large as 6.9eV [17]. Numerous experiments have proven that the utilization of MoO3 as an anode modifier or dopant for the hole injection layer significantly reduces the operational voltage and greatly improves the efficiency and lifetime of OLEDs [13,18–22]. As an interface modification layer on ITO, MoO3 can promote the interface dipole by charge transfer, thus greatly reduce the barrier for hole injection [17,18]. Additionally, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the hole injection layer on ITO has also been widely investigated and the device efficiency is also greatly improved, which is attributed to the reduction of the hole injection barrier [23]. However, so far there are limited studies on the systemic and detailed comparison between the effects of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer on the performance of OLEDs, especially on those with different hosts in the emissive layer.

In this paper, we compared the effect of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer (HIL) on the electroluminescence (EL) performance in 10-(2-benzothiazolyl)-2,3,6,7-tetrahydro-1,1,7,7-tetramethyl-1H,5H,11H-(1)benzopyropyrano(6,7-8-I,j)quinolizin-11-one (C545T)-based green fluorescent OLEDs with tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminum (Alq3) and N,N′-di(naphthalene-1-yl)-N,N′-diphenyl-benzidine (NPB) as the host in the emissive layer, respectively. Here, C545T is a green fluorescent dye, Alq3 is a good electron transport molecule and NPB is a high mobility hole transport molecule. They are widely used in the fabrication of OLEDs. It was found that MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS showed different effects on the charge carrier injection and transport balance in devices, resulting in different EL efficiencies. It is clearly seen that, for OLEDs with NPB as the host, higher power efficiency was observed in the device with MoO3 as the hole injection layer, due to the reduction of operational voltage. However, for OLEDs with Alq3 as the host, higher current efficiency was found in the device with PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer. Comparatively, the OLEDs with Alq3 as the host exhibit not only higher current efficiency, but also higher power efficiency when PEDOT:PSS was used as the hole injection layer. This indicates the different behaviors of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer can influence charge carrier injection and transport balance in OLEDs based on different hosts.

The structures of OLEDs used in this study were as follows:
                        
                           Device A: ITO/MoO3 (10nm)/Alq3: (C545T)(35nm)/Alq3(35nm)/LiF (1nm)/Al (120nm).

Device B: ITO/PEDOT:PSS(30nm)/Alq3: (C545T)(35nm)/Alq3(35nm)/LiF (1nm)/Al (120nm).

Device C: ITO/MoO3 (10nm)/NPB: (C545T)(35nm)/Alq3(35nm)/LiF (1nm)/Al (120nm).

Device D: ITO/PEDOT:PSS(30nm)/NPB:(C545T)(35nm)/Alq3(35nm)/LiF (1nm)/Al (120nm).

The commercial ITO-coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of around 10Ω/□ were used as the anode, which were successively rinsed with detergent, de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol in an ultrasonic bath for 10min, respectively. The cleaned and dried ITO glass substrates were treated with oxygen plasma for 3min. The PEDOT:PSS (AI 4083 purchased from Germany Bayer) was spin-coated at 3000rpm for 60s, and then was slowly dried in oven at 120°C for 30min. The OLEDs were prepared by thermal evaporation in a high-vacuum system with the pressure less than 5×10−4
                     Pa. MoO3, NPB, Alq3:C545T, and Alq3, 1nm LiF and 150nm Al were evaporated onto ITO in turn. The concentration of C545T in Alq3 (NPB) was controlled at 1wt%. The evaporation rates were monitored by frequency counter, and calibrated by Dektak 6M Profiler (Veeco). The overlap area between ITO and Al electrodes was 16mm2 as the emissive size of devices. The devices have the same 35nm Alq3, 1nm LiF and 150nm Al. Fig. 1
                      shows the energy level diagrams of the fabricated devices and the molecular structures of C545T, Alq3 and NPB used in these devices. The current–voltage-brightness characteristics were measured by using a Keithley source measurement unit (Keithley 2400 and Keithley 2000) with a calibrated silicon photodiode. All devices were measured without encapsulation at room temperature.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The electroluminescent (EL) performances of OLEDs with MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layers for the cases of Alq3 and NPB, respectively, as the host in the emissive layer were first investigated. The current density–luminance–voltage (J–L–V), current efficiency–luminance (CE–L) and power efficiency–luminance (PE–L) characteristics are shown in Fig. 2
                     (a)–(c), respectively. It is clearly seen from Table 1
                      and Fig. 2(a) that the turn-on voltage of 2.3V (defined as the voltage required for the luminance of 1cd/m2) for device C is lower than the turn-on voltage of 3.5V of device D, thus higher PE for device C, seen from Fig. 2(c). Due to the high luminance at low operational voltage for device C, the power efficiency of device C reaches 5.8lm/W at a current density of 6.6mA/cm2, summarized in Table 1. It is well known that PEDOT:PSS and MoO3 have higher work function of 5.3eV and 6.9eV, [17] respectively, which can well match the energy level of NPB (5.4eV). But comparatively it should be easier for MoO3 to inject holes into the emissive layer in NPB host-based OLEDs, thus showing lower voltage and larger injection current in device C. The better injection current property of MoO3 can also be proven in the hole-only devices with the structure of ITO/MoO3/NPB/Au or PEDOT:PSS/NPB/Au. The J–V characteristics of the two devices are shown in Fig. 3
                     . It is clear that the hole-current density of the hole-only device with MoO3 is greater than that with PEDOT:PSS. Actually, the larger hole injection of MoO3 with respect to PEDOT:PSS can also be well demonstrated by the energy levels. As is shown in Fig. 3, MoO3 has higher work function. When MoO3 is contact with NPB, effective charge transfer from NPB to MoO3 is produced, thus forming a strong interface dipole [17,18]. As a result, the holes are significantly injected, which is different from the case for PEDOT:PSS, where no strong interface dipole can be formed. However, the current efficiency of device C is lower than that of device D, especially at lower luminescence, as shown in Fig. 2(b). It can be seen that device C shows higher current density. This means that, for devices with NPB as the host, device C shows larger hole injection due to the efficient hole injection property of MoO3, which results in the poor balance of electrons and holes in the emissive layer. However, for devices with Alq3 as the host, it is completely different from those with NPB as the host, as both device A and device B show further lower current density, as can be seen from Fig. 2(a). This should also be related to the much slower hole transport in Alq3 than in NPB, in addition to the increase of the hole injection barrier in devices with Alq3 as the host compared with those with NPB as the host (Fig. 1). In this case, the current in devices with Alq3 as the host is mainly decided by the transport in the emissive layer, thus, as can be seen, the injected current is also independent of the applied hole injection layer materials.

Furthermore, we compared the effects of different hosts on the device efficiency with the same hole injection layer. For the devices A and C, i.e. devices MoO3-based hole injection layer, it can be seen that the turn-on voltage of 2.3V for device C is lower than the turn-on voltage of 2.7V for device A, as the energy level of MoO3 better matches that of NPB than Alq3 and the hole mobility in NPB is higher than that in Alq3. As shown in Fig. 2(a), device A has low current density and brightness. This should derive from the difficult hole injection and low hole mobility of Alq3, which leads to the hole accumulation in the narrow recombination region near to the anode side, thus quenching excitons and reducing efficiency of device A. The accumulation is more severe at high voltage in device A. In order to prove the effect of hole mobility of Alq3 on the performance of devices, the single layer OLEDs with different thicknesses of MoO3 and emissive layers were fabricated. The thickness of MoO3 nearly has no effect on the current density and brightness. However, the current density of devices decreases as the emission layer turns into thicker, but the brightness is unchanged, even increased, as seen from Fig. 4
                     . This means that electron–hole recombination occurs more in the emissive layer as the thickness of the emissive layer increases, thus leading to the increase of brightness. Therefore it is concluded that using Alq3 as the host and MoO3 as the injection layer results in low current efficiency and power efficiency due to the exciton quenching. However, using PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer not only leads to higher current efficiency, but also results in higher power efficiency (from the comparison of device A to device B and comparison of device C to device D). This means that using PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer further adjusts the balance of electrons and holes in the emissive layer. This result should be attributed to the lower hole injection of PEDOT:PSS than MoO3, avoiding the hole aggregation in emissive layer.

For devices B and D with the same PEDOT:PSS-based hole injection layer, it is clearly seen that using NPB as the host can lead to higher current and power efficiency at low luminance, and lower current and power efficiency at higher luminance for device D, compared with using Alq3 as the host in device B. The different EL properties in devices with different hosts mean the different behaviors of PEDOT:PSS in controlling the balance of electron and hole injection. For the device with NPB as the host (i.e. device D), which shows both higher current and power efficiencies at low luminance, as compared with the device with Alq3 as the host (i.e. device B), we consider that this should be related to the low operation voltage and the balance of electrons and holes in the emissive layer at low luminance in the device with NPB as the host. For the device with Alq3 as the host, the higher hole injection barrier leads to higher operational voltage, thus low power efficiency. And the injected holes are few in the emissive layer at low luminance, so electrons and holes are not balanced, resulting in low current and power efficiencies in the device with Alq3 as the host than the device with NPB as the host at low luminance.


                     Fig. 5
                      shows the EL spectra of devices A, B, C and D driven at 5V. It is clearly seen that the C545T green light emission (peaking at 521nm) can be observed in all devices. The broad EL spectrum of device C at the long wavelength region means that the exciton recombination zone is at the interface of NPB:C545T/Alq3, which contains the spectrum of Alq3. This is consistent with the rapid hole injection and transport by MoO3 and NPB in device C. In device A, the broad emission at the long wavelength region is then contributed to the emission of Alq3 in the emission layer due to the accumulation of holes caused by high hole injection barrier and low hole mobility of Alq3, thus resulting in partial recombination of holes and electrons in Alq3. The fact that the EL spectrum of device B only shows the emission of C545 indicates that the exciton recombination zone is localized in the emissive layer, resulting in the effective recombination of electrons and holes in the emissive layer, thus higher EL efficiency in device B. The wide emission at the short wavelength region in devices C and D is attributed to the emission of NPB host in the emissive layer due to the incomplete energy transfer from NPB to C545T.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In summary, we clearly demonstrated the effect of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer on the performance of C545T-based OLEDs with Alq3 and NPB as the host in the emissive layer, respectively. The fact that the low-conductivity hole injection layer, such as PEDOT:PSS, leads to a better efficiency was proved to be due to the host with the better electronic transport property in the emissive layer, whereas a higher efficiency found in devices with high-conductivity injection layer, such as MoO3, was attributed to the host with the better hole transport property in the emissive layer. Our experimental results clearly demonstrate that the different hole injection layers have different roles in the adjustment of electron and hole injection and transport balance. Therefore EL efficiency of OLEDs differs as the host used in the emissive layer is varied. These results should greatly benefit the design of high performance OLEDs.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research work was financially supported by a grant from the Nanjing University of Telecommunication and Posts (NY212010), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21161160442), and Natural Science Fund of Jiangsu Province (BK2012834)

@&#REFERENCES@&#

