@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of display method, text display rate and observation angle on comprehension performance and subjective preferences for reading Chinese on an LED display

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We investigated the optimum dynamic text display methods for delivering Chinese messages on an LED display.


                        
                        
                           
                           The optimal display rate is 160cpm whereas speeds at 320cpm or above are not recommended.


                        
                        
                           
                           Leading display method should be used when the display rate at 320cpm or above is necessary.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

LED display

Chinese comprehension performance

Subjective preference

Text display rate

Observation angle

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study examined the effects of display method, text display rate, and observation angle on comprehension performance and subjective preferences for Chinese characters presented on an LED display. The factors and levels studied were as follows: four text display methods (rapid serial visual presentation ‘RSVP’, leading, paged view scrolling, and continuous scrolling), three text display rates (160 characters per min ‘cpm’, 240cpm, and 320cpm), and seven observation angles (−75°, −60°, −30°, 0°, 30°, 60°, and 75°). The results indicated that a display rate of 160cpm was in general superior to 240 and 320cpm for comprehension scores and subjective evaluations. The effects of display method and observation angle were found to be non significant. However, there was a significant interaction between display method and display rate. The results of this study were used to make ergonomics recommendations applicable to LED displays for determining optimum dynamic text display methods for Chinese characters.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Electronic information display systems are commonly used in public places such as airports, railway stations, and catering outlets. Such systems provide a useful means of delivering timely messages to passengers, customers and workers. Light-Emitting Diode (LED) display systems, in particular, permit changes to be easily made for different display sizes, and present the superlative source of information and video image display with a wide viewing angle and a bright and clear image [1] to allow large numbers of people to read messages simultaneously in various environments and circumstances. The important parameters for the manufacture of LED products and the properties (such as the brightness and luminance of LEDs) have been widely studied for several decades, [e.g., 2–5] and they are still being actively studied in recent years [e.g., 6–8]. However, reading performance on LED displays, especially for reading Chinese characters, has been rarely assessed. The increasing use of LED displays in different market niches and applications has led to increased interest by human factors researchers in exploring effective methods of displaying dynamic information on LED displays. Although some research has been conducted on variable information displays for short English messages in traffic control systems, no studies have examined optimal presentation methods for disseminating large amount of information. Previous work that has been reported on dynamic text displays has only focused on small screens on devices such as wristwatch, cellular phones, pagers and desktop phones [e.g., 9–11] and on website design for CRT (Cathode-Ray-Tubes) or LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) screens [e.g.,12–15]. The effects of design factors on the reading and comprehension of Chinese characters on LED displays tended to be neglected in human factors and ergonomics. Therefore, there is an urgent need to examine the possibility of improving comprehension performance and subjective evaluations through appropriate use of display factors on LED displays, in particular for reading Chinese characters.

In attempts to overcome the problem of limited screen size of LED display units, several different methods of presenting dynamic material on displays have been used. The effect of these different LED display methods on Chinese reading and comprehension is important for systems design but are as yet, unknown. The three common categories of display methods for presenting dynamic text on a screen are RSVP (rapid serial visual presentation), leading, and scrolling. The RSVP method serially displays words at a fixed point on the screen, usually at a predetermined rate, in rapid succession. Some advantages of RSVP displays have been reported by human factors researchers. The method directs reader attention to the next text unit because each text unit is presented in the same fixed screen area thus eliminating the need to decide where and when the eyes should be moved next [16,17]. In theory, RSVP has the potential to eliminate the saccades necessary for normal reading [18]. The leading display (originally termed the Times Square display after the display at Times Square in New York City) employs the technique of moving strings of words from right to left. This method can avoid breaking up words and sentences on a screen of limited size and thus improve the smoothness of presentation and enhance understanding of the text presented. In scrolling display, blocks of text move up or down in either a continuous, a line-by-line or page-by-page manner. For scrolling methods, the paged view and continuous scrolling view are two common ways of displaying a large amount of text on screen [19]. For the same display rate, continuous scrolling requires subjects to read through the displayed text during its motion, while paged view scrolling allows subjects to read the information during the static period between scrolling motions. In the current study, the four display methods of RSVP, leading, paged view scrolling and continuous scrolling were tested for use with an LED display. Because of the availability of a static period for reading, it was expected that paged view scrolling may result in higher subjective and objective performance measures than the continuous scrolling method. Muter and Kang [20] suggested that the leading method was as good an English text presentation technique as RSVP in term of comprehension score, and was preferred by readers. However, among the three display methods: RSVP, leading, and scrolling, Chen and Chien [21] suggested that RSVP appeared to be the most practical alternative for small screens and led to the highest reading comprehension for Chinese readers. It was thus anticipated here that both RSVP and leading display methods may result in higher comprehension performance and subjective ratings than the two scrolling methods.

For a dynamic display, the speed of text movement is an important determinant for reading and understanding the information presented. There has been some research on the effect of text display speed for the RSVP and leading display methods on computer screens. In research on scrolling display method on computer screens, the speed of scrolling was controlled by the users and so the optimal scrolling speed for LED displays is still unknown. Previous work on the speed of dynamic text display has produced varied results for reading tasks with different display methods. So far, there have been no studies on the effects of the display methods of RSVP, leading, paged view scrolling, and continuous scrolling at different display rates on comprehension of LED displayed messages. The authors here considered that there might be an interaction effect between the display rate and display method and the effect on comprehension performance, therefore, it was necessary to perform a systematic study on these two factors. Sun et al. [22] found that the average fixation time for horizontal reading of Chinese static texts was 0.26s, i.e. a reading speed of 230 characters per minute (cpm). Since dynamic text presentation automatically directs reader attention to the next text unit which will be in the same screen area, unnecessary eye movements are eliminated therefore it is not unreasonable to expect that speeds around or below 230cpm should provide sufficient reading time and therefore result in reasonable comprehension performance and good subjective ratings.

LED displays are usually used for presenting messages for a large group of viewers, who normally read the information from different viewing distances and angles. Therefore, apart from the effects of the display method, task factors like observation angle may also have a marked effect on the comprehension performance of viewers. Observation angle is defined as the angle between the observer’s line of sight and the normal line bisecting a display surface. Oetjen and Ziefle [23] showed that anisotropy (having properties that vary according to the direction of measurement) was a critical factor limiting visual performance on a TFT (Thin-Film-Transistor) screen. It was found that for a TFT screen performance was worst when small targets had to be detected when at an off-axis viewing angle of 50° but, that, performance did not deteriorate markedly at the same viewing angle for a CRT screen. A viewing angle of 0° was also found to produce less eye strain and was most preferred by subjects, but the viewing angle was found to have no significant effect on fatigue. Filippidis et al. [24] investigated the relationship between observation angle, angular separation of a sign, and maximum viewing distance from which the text on a signage was legible. The angular separation of a sign is defined as the angle between the two ends of the sign subtended at the distant observer’s eyes. It varies with the size of the sign, the distance of the observer, and the observation angle. As the observation angle increases, the angular separation of the sign and hence the text on it decreases. Filippidis et al. found that the maximum observation angle beyond which the messages on the sign became unreadable was 85°. It is thought that there may also be a maximum observation angle beyond which it will no longer be possible for users to resolve and comprehend the messages on an LED display board. Although an LED display, unlike a TFT screen, does not have an anisotropy effect, the larger the observation angle, the smaller the angular separation of the characters, thus the more difficult it is to read messages on the display board. It is therefore to be expected that subjects observing a display from the extreme sides will perform worse than those viewing from directly in front of the display board and that reading at larger observation angles will result in lower ratings for the subjective evaluation of attributes.

Although some research has been conducted on understanding how the task factors mentioned above affect comprehension performance with English written language, no studies have examined the effects of these factors on Chinese reading and comprehension for LED displays. English and Chinese writing systems are very different. The English writing system consists of 26 upper- and 26 lower-case letters, where a letter can be simplified and still be reasonably discriminable from other letters. Whereas, Chinese characters use more varied dots and lines, and many of them have very much more complex shapes than English letters. Lines in Chinese characters can be vertical, diagonal, and horizontal, and they can be straight, gently curved, or with a hook. Because of the very large number of Chinese characters used it is necessary to have complex shapes if they are to be discriminated from each other [25–27]. It seems highly likely that such complexity in character shapes will influence the effects of display method, information display rate, and observation angle on the comprehension and subjective evaluation of reading Chinese messages from a display.

In this study, an experiment was conducted to obtain performance measures and subjective evaluations for different display methods and text display rates from subjects viewing LED displays at different observation angles. Since the effects of display factors on reading Chinese have also been widely studied since the last decade [e.g., 15,28–30] and have been continuously receiving a lot of attention by the community, the results of this study would be able to demonstrate the effects of different design factors on Chinese comprehension performance and provide a basis for recommendations for optimizing dynamic text interfaces. The findings were also expected to provide some useful guidance to human factors engineers in understanding the effects of display and task factors on the readability of electronic text so as to facilitate the design of better information interfaces for Chinese on LED displays.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

Thirty-one male and thirteen female undergraduates of City University of Hong Kong participated in this experiment with course credit. Their ages were between 20 and 24 (mean 21.4, SD 1.2) years. Before the experiment, subjects were screened with color vision and binocular far acuity tests. They also all reported having no difficulty in reading Traditional Chinese characters.

Thirty-six unrelated Chinese passages on the topics of health, medical care, hygiene, environment, leisure, and transportation were used. All passages had no technical terms or unusual words. They were similar to passages that appear on message boards in public transport systems, customs areas, schools, hospitals, etc. The mean passage length, including punctuation marks, was 87 characters with a range from 76 to 94 characters. For each passage, three multiple-choice questions were prepared to test the completion of the reading process of the subjects and to assess their ability to understand the text. In constructing the multiple-choice questions, care was taken to ensure that subjects could not readily answer the questions without prior reading of the passage. The level of difficulty of the tasks was checked in a pilot study with the use of a focus group of 10 subjects of similar education background to the participants to ensure that the questions were neither too easy nor too difficult.

Pseudo-Isochromatic Plates were used for testing color perception and to screen out subjects suffering from color deficiency. Stereo Optical’s OPTEC 2000 Orthorator was used to ensure that the subjects had binocular far acuity of at least eight (20/25 Snellen notation). A CENTER 337 lightmeter was used to measure the ambient illumination. The CIE color values (x, y, L cd/m2) for the LED lights were measured by using a Minolta Chroma meter CS-100A. A full colors LED display (512mm×256mm) with 128 dots×64 dots controlled by a personal computer (Pentium VI–2.8GHz) was used for stimulus presentation. The dot diameter was 3.75mm with a 4mm centre-to-centre dot separation. The LED display could show up to four rows of eight Chinese characters per line. Each character was of 64mm×64mm size (16×16 dots). Ming type characters were shown in one row at a time in green (0.376, 0.500, 42.3cd/m2) on a black (0.409, 0.469, 16.1cd/m2) background (Fig. 1
                        ). The contrast ratio of text to background was 2.627. The ambient illumination was about 300lx. No glare or reflection appeared on the display screen. In order to minimize any discomfort due to neck inclination, the display was mounted at a height of 2m and subjects read at a viewing distance of 3m from the display center. With these setting, subjects’ head elevations ranged between 4.86° and 12.49°, which was well within the 30° limit for minimization of discomfort due to neck inclination [31]. Each character on the display board subtended a visual angle of 1° 13′ arc×1° 13′ arc at the subjects’ eyes.

This study aimed at evaluating the effects of display method, text display rate and observation angle on Chinese comprehension and subjective evaluation of an LED display. The factors and levels studied were as follows: four text display methods (rapid serial visual presentation ‘RSVP’, leading, paged view scrolling, and continuous scrolling), three text display rates (160, 240, and 320cpm), and seven observation angles (−75°, −60°, −30°, 0°, 30°, 60°, and 75°). In a pilot run for this study, it was found that Chinese characters could not be easily read at angles beyond 75°, so the extreme observation angles tested were set at +75° and −75° in the experiment. Fig. 2
                         shows the exact locations of the subjects during the experiment and the angular separations of the LED display board at the seven observation angles. The display method and text display rate were within-subjects factors while the observation angle was a between-subjects factor. The 12 (4 display methods×3 display rates) test conditions were presented in random sequence for each subject.

In each test condition, three passages were provided for reading and the comprehension scores and subjective ratings were collected. Three multiple choice questions were given to subjects after reading each passage. One point was given for each correct answer. Subjects’ scores for each condition ranged from 0 to a maximum of 9 (3 questions×3 passages). Previous research on subjective preferences for reading interfaces has evaluated reading comfort, reading ease and overall preference [32]; eye strain and musculoskeletal strain [33], and mental demand [34]. For this study, a nine-point scale was developed (Fig. 3
                        ) to evaluate the subjective preferences for different display factors, a questionnaire covering the following eight attributes: reading difficulty, mental demand, eye strain, neck strain, back strain, effectiveness, satisfaction, and overall preference. The scale was constructed such that the lower the evaluation ratings, the higher the preferences.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Prior to the start of the experiment, subjects were informed of the aim of the study and the task variables to be examined. They were asked to read and try their best to understand the passages presented on the LED display. Prior to testing, a sample passage was presented on the LED display and a question sheet containing three questions together with a questionnaire was demonstrated to familiarize the subjects with the LED display and the test procedure. After reading the first test passage on the display, subjects were instructed to answer three multiple-choice questions. For each question, they were required to select one answer from a choice of four possible distracter items. The passage presentation and answering procedure were repeated for the other two passages in the same display condition. Immediately after the test condition, an evaluation rating on that particular condition was given by subjects. The procedure was repeated until all the twelve display conditions were tested. In order to avoid mental or visual fatigue, a five-minute break was given after completion of six test conditions. Subjects took around 1.5h to complete the experiment.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A total of 4752 (44 subjects×12 conditions×3 passages×3 questions) responses were collected. The percentage correctness for each comprehension task was used to denote the comprehension performance of each subject. The overall mean and standard deviation of the comprehension scores of all subjects were 72.64% and 17.73%, respectively. The descriptive statistics of the mean comprehension scores (%) for different levels of task factors are shown in Table 1
                        . An initial analysis of comprehension score conducted with repeated measures analyses of variance (ANOVA) considering the three main factors of display method, text display rate, and observation angle showed an insignificant observation angle effect [F
                        (6,37)
                        =0.236, p
                        =0.962], it was thus removed for further analysis. The results of ANOVA considering only the two main factors of display method and text display rate (Table 2
                        ) showed a significant text display rate effect [F
                        (2,86)
                        =23.904, p
                        <0.001] and a significant interaction effect of display method x text display rate [F
                        (6,258)
                        =3.139, p
                        <0.005], but the effect of display method was not significant [F
                        (3,129)
                        =2.151, p
                        =0.097]. Fig. 4
                         shows the mean comprehension scores (%) obtained under three different text display rates (cpm) conditions. Post hoc Bonferroni multiple comparisons tests showed that subjects obtained higher comprehension scores for the 160cpm (77.7%) condition than for the 240cpm (72.1%) and 320cpm (68.1%) conditions (p’s
                        <0.001). Comprehension scores at 240cpm were also higher than 320cpm (p
                        <0.05).

As shown in Table 2 the interaction of display method×display rate significantly affected comprehension performance. The two-way interaction plot of display method and display rate is given in Fig. 5
                        . Post hoc Bonferroni multiple comparisons tests showed that for both RSVP and leading methods, the low display rate of 160cpm resulted in higher comprehension score (%) than display rates of 240 and 320cpm (p’s
                        <0.005). For the RSVP display method, the worst comprehension performance was at 320cpm (p’s<
                        0.001). For the paged view scrolling method, subjects performed significantly better at both 160 and 240cpm than at 320cpm, but no marked difference in comprehension performance was found among the three display rates for continuous scrolling. At the display rate of 160cpm, subjects performed significantly better with the RSVP display method than with the paged view scrolling and continuous scrolling methods (p’s
                        <0.001). Subjects were also found to have better comprehension scores on the leading display than on the continuous scrolling display (p
                        <0.001). When the highest display rate of 320cpm was used, the comprehension performance for the leading display was found to be significantly better than for the other three display methods (p’s
                        <0.05).

A nine-point scale questionnaire (lower ratings indicated better evaluations) was used in this experiment to study subjects’ evaluations for a reading condition on the attributes of reading difficulty, mental demand, eye strain, neck strain, back strain, effectiveness, satisfaction and overall preference. The mean ratings on the eight attributes ranged from 4.26 to 5.35. The means and standard deviations of evaluation ratings for different levels of task factors are shown in Table 3
                        .

Further analysis of subjective ratings for the evaluation attributes was conducted with Friedman test. The results showed that there were no significant differences in subjective evaluations among different display methods although paged view scrolling was rated slightly better in all eight attributes than the other three display methods. The results for the eight attributes for the text display rate factor are summarized in Table 4
                        . The significant p values obtained for all the eight attributes suggested that the evaluation ratings of underlying populations differed significantly. Wilcoxon tests were used to follow up this finding. For all eight attributes, the display rate of 160cpm was rated as significantly superior to 240cpm and 320cpm (p’s
                        <0.005). The display rate of 240cpm was rated as significantly superior to 320cpm for six attributes (p’s
                        <0.005): reading difficulty, mental demand, eye strain, effectiveness, satisfaction and overall preference.

For the seven observation angles, the subjective evaluations of the observers were analyzed by Kruskal Wallis test, a nonparametric alternative to one-way analysis of variance. The results showed that there were no significant differences among the eight attributes.

Bivariate Spearman rank correlation analysis (Table 5
                        ) was performed to evaluate the inter-relationships amongst the eight subjective evaluation attributes and the results. All eight attributes were positively correlated with each other, indicating that when a condition was rated with lower reading difficulty and mental demand, the levels of eye strain, neck strain and back strain were lower and the effectiveness, satisfaction and overall preferences were higher. Same test (Table 5) was conducted to test for the interrelationships amongst comprehension score and the eight attributes on the questionnaire. The results show that there were significant correlations between the objective performance measures and subjective user evaluations. Comprehension score correlated negatively with the eight attributes indicating the higher the subjective evaluation ratings, the better the comprehension performance.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of display method, text display rate and observation angle on comprehension score and subjective evaluation for reading Chinese on an LED display. The results revealed that there were no significant differences in comprehension scores and subjective ratings amongst the four display methods. Text display rate was a significant factor for both objective and subjective measures and the interaction between display method and text display rate significantly affected reading comprehension. It was found that, in this Chinese passage comprehension experiment, subject comprehension performance was better at lower speeds than at 320cpm in the RSVP and leading methods and that the worst performance for the RSVP method was observed for the 320cpm condition. Wang and Kan [35] studied Chinese reading on computer screens and they suggested that when RSVP display method was used, subjects read and understood the content during its static period. The RSVP display at lower display rates allowed longer static time for each window, thereby giving more time for comprehension of display content. It appears that the longer static period was beneficial for user comprehension.

The leading method was found to be the optimal display method at the fastest display rate used here. Two explanations are offered. First, in comparison to the information static period of RSVP display, the sustained movement of the string of words and the disappearance of one word at a time in the leading display tended to give a better guidance for the reader to follow the sentence at faster speed when compared with the other display methods. Another explanation is that the leading method allowed the passage to flow smoothly. The leading method displayed a part of the message whole, eight characters at a time, in the display window, whereas when the RSVP and scrolling methods were employed, sentences were sometimes broken up. Thus, with the RSVP and scrolling methods some important phrases in a message such as names, dates or even figures, may be split into two or more windows, causing some difficulty for the readers. This problem did not occur with the leading display method, with the result that the subjects were able to read at a faster speed with the leading display.

With respect to the paged view scrolling method, it was found that comprehension scores were significantly higher at the lower display rates (160 and 240cpm). In this study, the text messages were presented in a one-line display with eight Chinese characters at a time. In a method similar to that used for the RSVP display, subjects could read the content in the scrolling display with pause (paged view scrolling display) during its static period. However, the static period of each window of paged view scrolling display (e.g. 2s for 160cpm) was even shorter than for the RSVP method (e.g. 3s for 160cpm) under the same display rate, due to the fact that some time was needed to scroll the string of words off the screen and make room for the next string, leading to a shorter static period between scrolls. The continuous movement of the whole string of words in the scrolling display required subjects to process all the displayed word during a shorter static period compared with RSVP under the same display rate. As a result, it seems that, subjects tended to perform better at lower speed settings for the scrolling display with a pause.

The speed of the dynamic text movement was also considered to be an important determinant for reading and understanding the information presented. It was therefore expected that the text display rate would be a significant main effect. The results showed that the comprehension scores obtained in the conditions with the display rate of 160cpm were the highest among the three display rates, followed by 240cpm and 320cpm. In this study, the average comprehension scores over all four different display methods were generally the highest at the display rate of 160cpm and the lowest at 320cpm. Sun et al. [22] found that the average fixation time for horizontal reading of Chinese was 0.26s (230cpm) for static reading. For the experiment reported here, when the text was presented at 160cpm and 240cpm, the times allowed for each subject to process each character were 0.375s and 0.25s respectively. In comparison to static information reading, dynamic text presentation will automatically direct the reader’s attention to the next text unit and thereby reduce eye movements. It was expected here that allowing sufficient time for the subjects to process each character should produce better understanding of the messages and thus better comprehension performance. The 160cpm display presentation rate was also rated by the subjects to be significantly superior to the 240cpm and 320cpm rates on the subjective measures for all eight attributes, and the 240cpm rate was rated to be superior to 320cpm. In other words, lower display rates of 160 and 240cpm were rated to involve less reading difficulty, mental demand, eye strains and musculoskeletal strain, and to have higher effectiveness, satisfaction and overall preference than 320cpm. These results suggest that for the range of rates used here for Chinese dynamic text display, the recommended optimal display rate is 160cpm in order to produce higher comprehension performance and higher subjective ratings. Although studies on LCD displays and some small screen devices have been reported suggesting that lower speed produces better comprehension performance [e.g., 9,15,35], too low a display rate does not provide an effective means of delivering dynamics information to a large numbers of people in a fast moving society, for example, passengers reading some quick news on the LED display on a train.

There were no significant differences in comprehension performance between the seven observation angles, a result that led to rejection of the expectation that the larger the observation angle, the poorer the comprehension performance. Also, the results did not show any significant effect for observation angle on subjective ratings, thus not supporting the expectation that reading at larger observation angles would result in lower subjective ratings. For all viewing positions between the two extreme angles of −75° and 75°, there were no differences in ease or difficulty of reading, mental demand, or strain effects. The two extreme angles were chosen based on the results of a pilot study. The non-significant differences in comprehension scores and evaluation ratings for the seven observation angles suggested that as long as subjects were able to read the words displayed on the screen, their comprehension performances did not differ much. This result may be explained by the fact that the angular size of each Chinese character on the display for the observers at the two extreme positions was about 19arcmin, and this was well above the limitation suggested by the BSR/HFES 100 draft standard that character size should be of 16–18arcmin [36]. Thus, observers were still able to resolve the Chinese characters even at the two extreme observation angles. At 80 and 85deg positions, the angular sizes of characters were 12 and 6arcmin, respectively. In this study the central viewing angle was not superior to other off-axis viewing angles. Oetjen and Ziefle [23] found that visual performance for target detection did not deteriorate markedly when viewing a CRT screen from an off-axis viewing angle when there was no anisotropy effect. The result here concurred with what they found for a CRT screen in that comprehension performance similarly did not differ across the range of off-axis observation angles tested for an LED display.

In this study, angles beyond 75° were not considered, however, future study could be done to examine the limiting angles beyond which the transmittal of information becomes ineffective. Only college students were examined in this study, it would be interesting to test with a boarder age range. This study was conducted in a quiet and brightness-controlled environment, where no glare or reflection appeared on the display screen, which might differ from reality setting.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this research, the effects of three task factors: display method, text display rate, and observation angle on Chinese comprehension and subjective evaluations were examined with university students as subjects. Evaluations and comprehension performance were found to vary with the different combinations of factors tested. A display rate of 160cpm was found to be superior to 240cpm and 320cpm in terms of higher comprehension scores and better subjective evaluations. The interaction between display method and text display rate had a significant effect on reading comprehension. Observation angle did not significantly affect comprehension or subjective evaluations. The results of this study should be useful in establishing ergonomics recommendations applicable to LED displays for determining optimum dynamic text display methods and the following recommendations are made for delivering Chinese messages to the public:
                        
                           (1)
                           In general, the optimal display rate is 160cpm. Speeds at 320cpm or above are not recommended.

If a display rate at 320cpm or above is necessary, it is recommended that the leading display method should be used.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from City University of Hong Kong (Project No. 7001367).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

