@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#High optical density and low dielectric constant black matrix containing graphene oxide and carbon black on color filters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The introduction of insulating graphene oxide in carbon black-containing black matrix.


                        
                        
                           
                           Effect of BYK2150 dispersant on dispersion of carbon-based materials.


                        
                        
                           
                           Targeting low dielectric constant of the black matrix film, while maintaining high optical density.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Carbon black

Graphene oxide

Black matrix

Color filter

Optical density

Dielectric constant

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  To obtain a black matrix (BM) with high optical density (OD) and low dielectric constant, graphene oxide (GO) was prepared from synthetic graphite oxide and then incorporated into the conventional carbon black (CB) pigment to fabricate black matrix films. The introduction of insulating GO effectively lowered the dielectric constant of carbon black-based BM, but maintained the high optical density. The dielectric constant of the BM film significantly decreased from 26 (carbon black-based BM) to 4.5 (GO/CB-based BM). This work demonstrates the successful chemical modification and good dispersion of carbon-based materials (i.e. GO and CB) and their physical effects on the BM films.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Graphene oxide (GO), with its carbon backbone and chemical tenability, has gained much attention for its potential in current electronic applications. Chemical modification of GO, which is generated from graphite oxide (GtO), has become a promising route to large-scale production of graphene materials [1–3]. GO contains a range of reactive oxygen functional groups, which render it insulating; but incremental removal of oxygen can transform it into a semiconductor and ultimately into a graphene semi-metal [4,5]. GO is being promoted as a useful compound for incorporation into polymers, ceramics, and metals to make novel forms of thin film electronic materials [6].

Black matrix (BM) film is a functional composite film, different from an engineering or high performance composite film that is commonly used to increase the contrast ratio of flat panel displays due to visible light shielding [7]. TFT-LCD is the most popular display among the various types of flat panel displays. A TFT-LCD is made of a TFT-array panel substrate and a color filter, which is critical for full color viewing (Fig. 1
                     ). A color filter consists of a clear substrate, black matrix, color filter layer (RGB colors), overcoat layer and ITO film. The clear substrate is generally made of thin glass or plastic and is deposited by the black matrix material. The black matrix is used to improve the contrast ratio of TFT-LCD due to the light-shading function to drive the electrodes in the thin-film transistors and to prevent inappropriate mixing of colorants in the color filters. The black matrix material can be organic or inorganic, with chromium the most popular inorganic choice. However, chromium has several disadvantages such as high cost, poor adhesion, high reflectance, as well as complex manufacturing process (sputtering) and potential environment problems. Under the current trend in the electronics industry, organic resin black matrices containing carbon black are being widely adopted in the color filters of flat panel displays as replacement for the conventional chromium-based film matrices. These resin black matrices are cheaper to produce than the conventional thin metal film matrices, especially for the larger glass substrates that are used in current generation fabrications. Generally, the black matrix needs to satisfy the requirements of a stable millbase and resist patternable coating, high optical density and controlled electrical properties [8].

Carbon black (CB) is an excellent black pigment which provides high optical density for black matrix development [9]. The turbostractic planes of its primary particles contain electrons that can absorb all wavelengths of light, ranging from ultraviolet to infrared. A BM film is usually required to have a very high optical density in the visible spectrum. The optical density of the film is proportional to the film thickness and to the loading of CB in the film. In order to achieve desired target level of opacity, the film must be prepared with a very high CB loading. However, increasing the carbon content negatively affects the electrical properties of the BM film. CB is also a semiconductor [10]. As the CB content increases in a polymer composite, the composite changes from being an electrically resistive to an electrically conductive composite. This transition occurs at critical loading, also known as the percolation threshold. This threshold is influenced primarily by the structure of the CB particles and their loading amount. The electrical properties of the black matrix film show a similar transition, and the film becomes more conductive as its carbon content is increased. Consequently, the optical density and electrical performance of the BM film need to be balanced. The BM film must have good insulating and high optical density properties for TFT-LCD application. There are many efforts to improve the optical and physical properties of CB black matrix films such as mixed metal oxide, surface treated CB and doping of carbon nanotubes [9,11,12]. However, the incorporation of graphene oxide together with CB in the BM has been a novel approach for color filter in liquid crystal display.

In this study, we introduce novel organic black matrices containing insulating GO and CB, providing unique optical and tunable dielectric properties.

Graphite powder (<150μm) and carbon black (Markos 5333) were obtained from Aldrich. For millbase preparation, a typical industrial solvent was used, which was PGMEA (propylene glycol methyl ether acetate). The dispersant we employed, BYK2150 was claimed by the producer (BYK chemie) to be a block copolymer with basic pigment affinic groups with an amine value 57mgKOHg−1. The organic black matrix for the color filter included carbon black, acryl binder, multifunctional monomer and photo-initiator. Commercial acryl binder for negative photoresist, which consists of dicyclopentanyl methacrylate, benzyl methacrylate, methacrylic acid and other monomers, was obtained from Jooeun Co., Ltd (Korea, JEBM 427, Mn 1500, acid value 120).

Graphite oxide (GtO) was synthesized from commercial graphite according to Ref. [13]. The published process does not involve a large exotherm and produces no toxic gas. Moreover, the improved method yields a higher fraction of well-oxidized hydrophilic carbons. Graphite powder (10g) was added to a mixture of concentrated H2SO4/H3PO4 (1080/120mL) and KMnO4 (54g), which led to produce a slight exotherm. The reaction mixture was then heated to 50°C and stirred for 12h. The mixture was cooled to RT and poured onto ice (∼1200mL) with 30% H2O2 (9mL). For work-up, the whole mixture was added to excess water, filter, washed with 400mL of 30% HCl, and then repeatedly washed with water until the pH of the filtrate became neutral. The solid obtained on the filter was dried by freeze drying for 24h. The dried graphite oxide was vacuum-dried at 60°C prior to use.

CB millbase was prepared by the ultrasonication process. A mixture consisting of 16wt.% CB, BYK2150 dispersant, and PGMEA solvent was added into a vial. The vial was sonicated for 30min. The optimum amount of BYK2150 was determined by viscosity measurement and size distribution of CB.

Synthetic graphite oxide was first ultrasonicated in polar solvent such as ethanol in the presence of BYK2150 dispersant. In this step, graphite oxide is mostly exfoliated into individual, single-layer graphene oxide, which can be effectively re-dispersed in the PGMEA solvent to form the GO millbase. The optimum amount of BYK2150 was also determined by viscosity measurement and size distribution of GO.

The optimum millbases of CB and GO were mixed together in a specific ratio to form a GO/CB hybrid-type millbase, which was used for BM formulation. For typical BM formulation, in a 200mL round bottomed flask, we added 2-hydroxy-2-methyl–1-phenyl–1-propanone (0.9g), and PGMEA (83.8g), and the mixture was stirred with a Teflon magnetic stirring bar at room temperature. After complete dissolution, we added pentaerythritol tetraacrylate (2g) and acryl binder (4g), and stirred for 2h. Then, we added GO/CB millbase and stirred for 4h. The specified size of glass substrates (Corning Co.) for organic BM films on the color filter is 50.8×50.8mm2 with a thickness of 0.6mm. The BM coating process conditions are as follows: spin coating at 600rpm for 10s and baking on a hot plate at 90°C for 90s. And UV exposure experiments using a patterned photo-mask were performed under the irradiation energy of 80mJ at 20°C. These experiments were followed by post-baking at 220°C for 30min. The optical density of the patterned samples was measured using an X-Rite 361T transmission densitometer, and the dielectric constants of the films were obtained from measured capacitances. UV (i-line) exposure equipment (Thermo-oriel Model 66902) was used for irradiation. Nikon Optiphot optical microscopy was used to measure the pattern properties.

Crystal structures of graphite and graphite oxides were determined by using D8Discover with powder diffractometer with Cu (λ
                           =1.5406Å) radiation.

Steady shear measurements were performed with a rheometer (Bohlin Rotational Rheometer, Malvern Instruments, UK) under controlled shear rate with a plate and plate geometry. Experiments were performed at the shear rate range between 5 and 100s−1.

The particle size was checked using a dynamic light scattering method (ELS-8000, Photal Otsuka Electronics Co. Ltd, Osaka, Japan). An argon ion laser was operated at 488nm as the light source.

For the surface resistivity measurement, BM films on glass substrates were characterized using Keithley Model 6517 Electrometer/High Resistance Meter in conjunction with the ETS 803B resistivity probe. Dielectric constant can be calculated from measured capacitance using impedance analyzer HP4194A with the frequency range from 1kHz to 1MHz. To measure capacitance, BM films were spin coated on Cu substrates with top Cu-electrode coverage.

Typical surface morphologies of organic BM films on substrates were imaged with a JEOL JSM-7000F FE-SEM, using and accelerating voltage of 5.0kV at a working distance of 6mm.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In Fig. 2
                        , the XRD data of the graphite oxide and graphite powder confirmed the successful synthesis of graphite oxide (GtO). A sharp peak at 26.5° is regarded as the characteristic peak of graphite powder. Only a very small peak is shown at around 10° for GtO. The characteristic peak at 26.5° disappears probably due to complete oxidation, which produces oxygen-containing groups, such as carboxyl, hydroxyl, and epoxide groups on the basal plane of graphene [1]. The corresponding interlayer distances to these peaks were calculated with Bragg’s law; d-spacings are 0.34nm and 0.88nm for graphite powder and GtO, respectively. The increased spacing is attributed to the bonding of oxygen-containing functional groups, which is advantageous for full exfoliation of GtO. The effect of oxygen-containing groups on the structure of GtO was also analyzed (see Supporting Information).

In this study, different loading levels of BYK2150 dispersant were evaluated for the carbon black dispersion in PGMEA. Fig. 3
                         shows the effect of amount of BYK2150 dispersant on the CB millbase viscosity (a) as a function of shear rate and (b) at constant shear rate of 20s−1. As shown in the figure, the viscosity decreases sharply until 70wt.% BYK2150 addition. BYK2150 consisting of basic amino groups is easily adsorbed onto slightly acidic sites of the CB surface [14]. The dispersant amount from 20 to 70wt.% significantly decreases the CB millbase viscosity, and at 70wt.% BYK2150, the viscosity reaches the minimum. The decrease in viscosity may result from the increase in the rate of dispersant adsorption on the particle surface. The inserted picture in Fig. 3a shows the large variation of CB millbase viscosity in the range of weight ratio of 50–70wt.% dispersant. It can be seen that the CB millbase corresponding to 50wt.% BYK2150 shows relatively low and stable viscosity, which implies a good dispersion state.

To determine the optimum amount of the dispersant in a CB millbase formulation, the particle size of CB in the millbase was measured using dynamic light scattering. Fig. 4
                         shows the effect of BYK2150 concentration on the average particle size of CB particles and polydispersity index (PI). The average CB size sharply decreased as the dispersant amount reached 30wt.% and saturated at 50wt.% BYK2150 concentration with the lowest average size of CB. Good PI was also achieved at the saturated point, and therefore it can be suggested that the 50wt.% BYK2150 dispersant gives the best dispersion of CB millbase. The rheology data according to the concentration of BYK2150 also suggested that 50wt.% dispersant is the optimum amount in a CB millbase formulation.


                        Fig. 5
                         reveals the effect of amount of BYK2150 dispersant on the GO millbase viscosity (a) as a function of shear rate and (b) at constant shear rate of 20s−1. The viscosity of graphene oxide millbase decreased with increasing the dispersant content up to 40wt.% and over this optimum point, the viscosity only increased slightly. Therefore, BYK2150 was quite effective in dispersing GO particles in the millbase by employing 40wt.% BYK2150 concentration. However, as increasing the amount of the dispersant over 40wt.%, small particles come in contact and re-aggregate. Fig. 6
                         shows the effect of BYK2150 concentration on the average particle size of GO and polydispersity index (PI). The optimum BYK2150 concentration was 40wt.%, and over this dispersant dosage level, the average particle size of graphene oxide increases with higher PI probably due to the “bridging effect” caused by the dispersant. The result was in relatively good agreement with the viscosity data.

In preparation of BM films, the optimum millbase GO/CB (1/1) was mixed with acryl binder in solid content ratio 1:1. And the BM films were measured for dielectric properties as well as optical density in order to compare to the films of bare particles. For a liquid crystal display, optical density (OD) is one of the most important optical properties of the BM film in the optical design of the color filter. BM films with high OD values exhibit high light-shielding effect, high contrast and high resolution. The OD of films with bare CB and GO/CB is shown in Table 1
                           . We can see that the OD of the GO/CB film is higher than the bare CB film; the higher value of OD in GO-containing film may be due to the good dispersion of the GO/CB pigments, which implies better and more homogenous packing resulting in higher reliability and more uniform film properties.

Additionally, reflectivity also affects the light-shielding capability. The reflectivity of a TFT-LCD module is mainly determined by the black matrix material on the color filter. Chromium, chrome oxide or black resins have been widely used as the black matrix material for STN-LCD and TFT-LCD because of their light-shielding ability and low reflection, which are required for good legibility [8]. Fig. 7
                            shows the relationship between reflection ratio and spectra of CB-containing and GO/CB-containing organic black matrixes in the visible light wavelength region. From the measured results in Fig. 7, the reflection ratios in the wavelength region of 380–700nm of CB film and GO/CB mixed film are 4.2% and 3.3%, respectively (Table 1), revealing an improvement in the reflection ratio for the GO-containing BM film compared to that of a film containing only CB. The reduction in the reflection ratio for the GO-containing BM film may be due to the doping effect of GO particles, which is also an alternative technique for enhancing the light-shielding capability of the black matrix [9].


                           Fig. 8
                            shows the dielectric constants of BM films containing bare CB, GO and GO/CB. From the figure, the dielectric constant of the conductive CB film can be clearly distinguished from that of the GO-insulator film; this shows that higher conductivity due to the conduction path in the polymer matrix usually results in a higher dielectric constant [15]. Considering the target of low dielectric constant of the BM (K
                           <6), the conduction path in the matrix must be cut or passivated. In our study, the dielectric constant of the GO/CB film significantly decreased due to the uniform dispersion of insulating GO in the film, leading to the passivation of the conduction path of CB. With respect to the electrical properties of GO, it has very high resistivity due to its disorderly structure, as shown in Fig. 9
                           . In GO, the majority of carbon atoms bonded with oxygen is sp3 hybridized and they disrupt the extended sp2 conjugated network of the original graphene sheet. In other words, the incorporation of the insulating GO together with CB in the BM enabled the electrical properties of BM to be tuned toward high resistivity.


                           Fig. 10
                            shows the FE-SEM images of BM films of (a) CB, (b) GO, (c) GO/CB @10k and (d) GO/CB @50k. As shown in Fig. 10a, the CB particles are distributed in the binder resin uniformly, and the average size of the CB particles was found to be less than 100nm, meanwhile GO in the BM film were dispersed as flakes of size around 1μm. The morphology of the BM film from the CB/GO was shown in FE-SEM images of different magnifications in Fig. 10c and d. It can be seen that relatively uniform CB particles are co-dispersed with the flake-shape GO in the matrix film. The intercalation of GO might cut the conductive path network of CB particles in the polymer matrix, resulting in a lower dielectric constant.

In this study, BM patterns were produced from the GO/CB millbase in the presence of acryl binder, multi-functional monomer and photo-initiator. The UV-curable, alkali-soluble resin (i.e. acryl binder) becomes the key material affecting the resolution of BM. In addition, the photo-sensitivity and the thermal and storage stability of GO/CB BM would affect the final resolution of BM.

To produce BM with low energy consumption, we prepared two types of GO/CB BMs different only in acryl binder/monomer ratio (formulation 1: 70/30 and formulation 2: 60/40) under the given developing conditions (exposure quantity 80mJ, temperature 20°C). Under the same amount of UV exposure, both formulations gave good critical dimensions (CD: the width of pattern), as shown in Fig. 11
                              . However, formulation 2 with the higher ratio of functional monomer showed target value of CDs at lower developing times, which are required for real color filter manufacturing. Monomers are ethylenically unsaturated compounds that undergo free-radical initiated polymerization to produce highly cross-linked networks that entangle binders. Therefore, increasing the ratio of monomer content enhances the photo-crosslink density during UV exposure to form a fine pattern. Fig. 12
                               shows patterns with different resolutions and developing times: the patterns have clear and straight boundaries. This implies that the photoresist using GO/CB millbase is an appropriate alternative for preparing a pattern with high optical density and low dielectric constant.


                              Fig. 13
                               shows the optical micrographs of BM patterns before (left) and after (right) annealing at 240°C for 30min. The patterns are still clear and straight after high temperature annealing. Doping GO in the CB millbase can provide high OD and desired dielectric properties while maintaining the thermal stability of the final BM pattern. In addition, we observed stable dispersion of the GO/CB millbase. Fig. 14
                               shows the BM patterns using GO/CB millbase storage (3months) with different developing times (80s (top) and 90s (bottom)). From the figure, it can be seen that good appearance of the pattern is obtained with fine resolution. It indicates that the prepared GO/CB millbase has long-term stability, the key factor for good shelf life of the color filter.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Oxygen-containing insulating graphene oxide (GO) affects the dielectric properties as well as the optical properties in a CB-based black matrix film. In terms of pigment dispersibility in the solvent (i.e. PGMEA), the BYK2150 dispersant played an important role in the preparation of well-dispersed GO/CB hybrid type millbase, which resulted in a homogenous GO/CB BM film. The conductive path of CB in the polymer matrix was passivated by insulating GO, which led to the low dielectric constant and high resistivity of the black matrix film while maintaining optical density. This work demonstrates that the proper modification of the surface chemistry of carbon-based materials (i.e. carbon black and graphene oxide) is an alternative and a powerful tool for preparing novel black matrix films that meet the demanding requirements of the color filter for next generation liquid crystal displays.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was supported by Postdoctoral Research Program of Sungkyunkwan University (2012).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2013.03.003.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary Figure 2
                           
                              The Raman spectra of graphite (top) and graphite oxide (bottom)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Supplementary Figure 3
                           
                              FE-SEM images of graphite oxide with different magnifications; (a) 3,000, (b) 30,000 and (c) EDS analysis of GtO with elemental percentages.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Supplementary Figure 4
                           
                              TGA analyses under air and nitrogen conditions for (a) pristine graphite (PG) and (b) graphite oxide (GtO).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 1
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

