@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Human factors in computer simulations of urban environment. Differences between architects and non-architects’ assessments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We identify the human factors of computer visualisation of urban environment.


                        
                        
                           
                           Digital images were classified into 3 categories based on their degree of realism.


                        
                        
                           
                           104 architects and 113 non-architects assessed 48 digital visualisations.


                        
                        
                           
                           The success of a digital image is associated to the innovation and well-being.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results show that more realistic images are given better assessments.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Digital visualisation of environment

Human factors

Subjective evaluation

Presentation of information

Semantic Differential method

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Computer visualisations are widely used to evaluate future urban environments in international competitions. Rapid technological progress in graphics computer software has enabled architects and landscape planners to produce sophisticated images that are not only capable of transmitting the characteristics of the future environment, they also manage to evoke in observers the sort of feelings and emotions which can only be aroused by experiencing the space. This present paper attempts to identify the affective responses that influence the evaluation of urban environment proposal, analysing the model of architects and non-architects’s preferences. A sample of 104 architects and 113 non-architects expressed their opinions on 48 urban computer simulations. The results show that for both groups the success of a digital visualisation is associated to the feelings of innovation and wellbeing. However, their assessments differ significantly because each group associates these feelings with different aspects. In general, architects are more critical in their assessments.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Computer visualisations are a powerful tool for communicating and evaluating urban design proposals. These tools offer many advantages for architects and landscape planners as they enable evaluation of the future environment at the preliminary planning and design stage. Thus assessment of the primary audience (policy makers, future users, architects, etc.) can be included in the design before it is defined more precisely, or before the project is executed. Environments can therefore be designed more proactively, permitting each interested party to participate in the design process.

Currently, rapid technological progress in digital architecture software has enabled highly sophisticated computer visualisations. These high impact images not only transmit the formal and functional characteristics of the future proposal, they also manage to evoke in observers the sort of feelings and emotions that can only be aroused by experiencing the space. In fact, international urban planning competitions often feature computer images that attempt to seduce evaluators to ensure that their proposals are chosen, focusing on that emotional part. These images are not intended to be a faithful representation of future reality and include certain design elements in the rendering that are able to provoke certain universal sensations in the observer, generating a more or less favourable predisposition towards the architectural space that the image represents. But, what affective response do these digital images generate in observers?. Bearing in mind that in such planning competitions, evaluators may be architects or non-architects, are there significant differences between the evaluations from the two groups?.

As early as 1956, Brunswik [1] suggested that the relational process between the stimulus and the opinion or judgment emitted by the subject was an indirect one. Applied to the sphere of urban design, this approach assumes that subjects respond to the particular characteristics of the image, integrate these reactions into affective impressions and transfer those affective impressions to an aesthetic evaluation of the digital image as a whole. The determination of affective impressions of the built environment has been the object of numerous studies [2]. However, in most of these works the symbolic meanings are defined a priori by researchers or experts. The most commonly followed theoretical framework is the one defined by Mehrabian and Russell [3]. These authors describe affective response as having three basic underlying dimensions: pleasure, arousal and dominance. The risk in using dimensions that have been defined elsewhere, at other moments of time and with other stimuli is that the concepts may not be appropriate for representing the conceptual structure of the observer being studied. Thus, to appropriately evaluate a situation, the assessment variables must be adapted to the observer’s mental scheme. This conceptual structure must be designed before any relationship can be established between each perceived symbolic or physical attribute and the global evaluation of the product.

Furthermore, another aspect to consider in the evaluation process is the observer’s profile. Juries in architectural competitions comprise architects and non-architects. The differences between these two groups have been analysed many times [4–12] and the conclusion is that they perceive the urban environment differently. Thus in the case of architectural competitions Nasar and Kang [4] identified significant differences of perception between architects and laypersons. These authors made a post-jury evaluation collecting the public’s responses to five competition entries and they observed completely different evaluations. The jury’s first choice was among the least liked by the public. Hershberger [5] observed that the two collectives perceive the physical characteristics of buildings differently, attributing the differences basically to the architects’ training and experience. Groat [6] determined the categories that architects and economists use to interpret buildings; economists tend to classify buildings according to type, whereas architects use design quality, form, style and historical significance. Architects can also distinguish clearly between modern and post-modern designs, whereas economists cannot. Gans [7] observed that architects preferred “high” style and rejected the “popular” style preferred by the public. Devlin and Nasar [8] subsequently confirmed that finding, observing that non-architects evaluated the “popular” style as being consistent, pleasurable and clean, whereas architects attributed these values to the “high” style. Nasar [9] studied architects and non-architects’ evaluations of six different styles of single family homes, based on the sensations of “desirable”, “cosy” and “status”. The results showed that not only did architects not coincide with the emotional evaluations of non-architects, but that they were also ignorant of the public’s preferences. Devlin [10] compared users, observers and architects’ perceptions of two office blocks in Chicago. The non-architects tended to give descriptive evaluations based on affection, whereas the architects provided conceptual, more abstract evaluations. Gifford et al. [11] analysed the relationship between the physical characteristics of office buildings, the perceptions “attractive” and “pleasurable,” and the subject’s overall assessment, using the conceptual framework of Brunswik’s [1] lens model. The results showed that architects and non-architects based their emotional assessments on totally different features of the buildings. Fawcett et al. [12] also detected differences in the preferences of architects and users of suburban office buildings. The two groups attributed differing degrees of importance to design attributes.

In the field of perception of the environment through virtual reality, two lines of work can be differentiated. One line analyses the validity of virtual representation as a tool for representing the environment and the other uses virtual representations as an ideal tool for producing stimuli with full control over conditions. Westerdahl et al. [13] studied spatial comprehension in different individuals using the virtual simulation of a building and concluded that the virtual reality model was useful for helping users decide over a future project. Conniff et al. [14] compared passive observations of walkthroughs of a desktop computer modelled environment with user-controlled navigation of the same model and concluded that passive observation may be better when the purpose of the evaluation is to compare design alternatives in architectural competitions. Lange [15] studied realism in virtual landscapes and its effectiveness in the process of evaluating environment, differentiating between expert, non-expert, local and non-local observers. Liu and Bai [16] used architectural renderings in an urban project to study visual impact analysis and assessment, differentiating between professional designers and non-experienced city inhabitants. Bishop and Rohrmann [17] compared the computer model and the real project in an urban park environment. They found that although responses to the two stimuli were not identical, computer simulations can provide valid outcomes for the main aspects of environmental perception. In a previous study, the same authors [18] analysed the degree of reliability of digital simulations of urban environments, with the aim of validating them as a tool for representing the environment. Their results show that simulations are generally acceptable, but their validity varies in relation to acoustics and light in the study area. Thus in these works and many others [19–22], virtual representation is a tool that provides a high degree of realism. This advantage, together with flexibility and ability to control the conditions of the product to be evaluated has led to another line of works where the object is to analyse the architectural space and where virtual images are used as an ideal tool for producing stimuli. In this line of study, Franz et al. [23] used the technique to study the relationship between the experience of indoor spaces and their physical properties.

As a consequence of the importance of virtual images as a fundamental tool for validating future spaces, some theoretical studies have attempted to define frameworks or systems that serve to confirm whether the image is faithful to the space it represents. Appleyard [24], argued for the following criteria to evaluate the quality of a simulation and guarantee equivalence in the observer’s response: Realism, Accuracy, Comprehensibility, Evaluability and Engagement. Subsequently, Sheppard [25,26] developed and perfected those criteria, proposing five criteria to improve understanding and the credibility of simulations: Accuracy, Representativeness, Visual clarity, Interest and Legitimacy. Later on Radford et al. [27] added the concept of Abstraction, as a criterion to validate digital images in large scale urban environments, referring to the degree of detail the image contains. At experimental level, numerous studies have examined differences in the perception of space, in relation to their degree of realism. Hayek [28] tested the effectiveness of abstract and realistic visualisation types in participatory planning processes, concluding that both are efficient for the different phases of the evaluation process. In another study [21] about observations of simulations of the same landscape with different degrees of realism-abstraction the response when judging the beauty of a landscape is very different in the different types of images. This aspect of representation should therefore be taken into account when using virtual simulations to validate future landscapes. Bates-Brkljac [29] showed that computer-generated images communicate the project better than a hand-drawn perspective, and also found perception differences between architects and non-architects.

However, although these works analyse the validity of spaces created by virtual representations, they do not provide an in-depth analysis of the structure of observers’ affective responses and how that relates to their overall assessment. Analysing this affective structure requires techniques which enable measurement of human perceptions of products and the words people use to communicate their perceptions.

Semantic differential is the most powerful quantitative technique currently available for measuring the affective meaning of concepts [30]. This technique, developed by Osgood et al. [31], analyses semantic structures and the affective meaning of things. It is a standard procedure that assumes an underlying structure in the semantic evaluation of products which it analyses using factor analysis. The technique analyses the correlation matrixes for the scores for terms over a set of products. If it can be demonstrated that a limited number of dimensions or factors is sufficient to differentiate between the meanings of the entire set of concepts, then these dimensions define a semantic basis for expressing any product. This semantic basis is known as semantic space and each concept is a semantic axis. This technique has been used in recent years for measuring user perception of a product in the context of Kansei Engineering [32–35], an ergonomic consumer-oriented technology for new product development [36]. Kansei Engineering is a technology that unites kansei (feelings and emotions in Japanese) with the engineering discipline. This methodology attempts to identify and quantify users’ perceptions of a product in their own language and to find quantitative relationships between these subjective responses and design features [36,37]. Thus, Kansei Engineering establishes a suitable framework for working with symbolic attributes and users’ perceptions, expressed in their own language. This methodology considers that an individual’s judgment is not only influenced by the stimuli (a combination of objective and subjective parameters) but also by the scheme of concepts of a specific group of users (semantic space). Therefore Kansei Engineering can be applied after obtaining users’ “semantic space” or “conceptual structure” and this is where Semantic Differential applies. Although most applications of this methodology come from the industrial sphere, there are some examples in the field of architecture and urban development. Kansei Engineering has been applied to house design [34,38–40], façade design [41], urban design [35,42,43] and even to identify perception differences between architects and non-architects [44,45].

This study aims to answer the following questions: in the assessments of computer visualisations that represent urban design proposals (a) is it possible to identify the sort of affective responses they provoke in evaluators? If so, and bearing in mind that the evaluators may be architects or non-architects (b) are there any differences in their assessments? (c) can the affective response be linked to the overall assessment? Will the relationship be similar for architects and non-architects? And finally, bearing in mind the very different techniques used to represent urban environments (d) is it possible to describe the responses evoked by different types of computer visualisations? To answer these questions we use Semantic Differential in the context of Kansei Engineering.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

The methodological development focused on a field study which collected interviewees’ evaluations of the stimuli.

217 subjects participated in the study (Table 1
                        ). The sample size was chosen with the criterion of having a minimum of 6 recordings/observations for each variable to be included in the factor analysis [46].

The set of stimuli used to develop the field study consisted of a total of 52 digital perspectives of urban spaces representative of the proposals presented in recent international urban design competitions. Given the wide variety of techniques, styles and trends used in these competitions, a priori grouping of the images seems appropriate to study observers’ different responses. Many studies have classified images according to their degree of realism, the works by Daniel and Meitner [21], Appleton and Lovett [47], Lange [15], Hayek [28] differentiate images into abstract and realist or use other terms like conceptual and experiential [48]. Very few studies, however, classify images according to the technique or style used to create them. Bates-Brkljac [29] distinguishes between 3D computer model, watercolor artistic impression, computer generated photomontage and perspective hand drawings. Van Lammermen et al. [49] distinguish three different visualisation types for future land use. Our classification is also based on the degree of realism and abstraction of the image, but observation of the images presented in recent urban competitions has led us to establish two types of non-realistic image according to the degree of sophistication. Thus we worked with these three types of image:
                           
                              (a)
                              Basic non-photorealistic: very basic modelling, rendering with little definition of materials and illumination. Subsequently, the image is turned into an appropriate photomontage between the resulting model, the photograph of what already exists and additional elements (nature, people, furniture, etc.) to suggest the intentions of the projected space. There is no attempt to provide an exact representation of future reality, only the conceptual intentions of the project. Fig. 1
                                  (a) shows an example of this type of stimulus.

Artistic non-photorealistic: images that, in the search for an ideal universe in which to represent the proposed project, exceed the limits of photorealism. Advanced mastery of infographic techniques, both modelling and subsequent photomontage post-production and appropriate artistic sensitivity achieve images with high visual impact that are genuine works of art in themselves. Fig. 1(b) shows an example of this type of stimulus.

Photorealistic: images that tend towards a “real” representation of urban space. Very accurate modelling of the projected space with a careful choice of materials and illumination and elaborate insertion into the real environment. Fig. 1(c) shows an example.

The extraction of affective responses involves establishing relationships between many variables and a broad range of responses are needed. It is therefore advisable for users to give their opinions on a sample of computer visualisations with a variety of characteristics. This variety of characteristics or design elements may cause the appearance of confounding factors, not fully controlled for, thereby creating bias in the results. The solution Kish [50] describes was adopted to reduce bias by introducing the set of characteristics or elements in a random fashion.

The questionnaire contained the following information:
                           
                              (a)
                              Objective information on the individual: age, sex, education.

Subjective information formed by 48 expressions to describe the affective response of architects and non-architects in the field of architecture, urban planning and digital image. The first step to obtain this set of expressions involves collecting as many adjectives as possible (kansei words) to describe the product domain [51]. To obtain the most comprehensive choice of words possible, all available sources must be used. In our case, the highest number of expressions in this field was found on web pages showing digital perspectives and photographs of projects, journals, professional magazines and interviews with architects and planners, digital image designers and non-experts. The process finishes when no new words appear. These kansei words formed the initial semantic universe. In our study 130 expressions were compiled. However, this set of words is too extensive to be included in a questionnaire. It would take users a long time to respond and they could lose interest. Various techniques can be used to reduce the set of words [52]. This study used an affinity diagram to group semantic descriptions according to their affinity [53,54]. The grouping was made by 2 architects, 2 digital image designers and 2 non-expert layperson users as follows: (a) the kansei words were transferred to post-it notes, so that each note contained only one expression, (b) the notes were grouped by similarity or affinity (Fig. 2
                                 ). The grouping took into account certain criteria that guarantee a representation of the initial semantic variability. These criteria were: remove adjectives requiring additional context to be understood, remove adjectives and expressions related to specialised terms, remove terms that are clear synonyms and antonyms of other terms in the list and remove nongradable adjectives. The grouping process ended when all the ideas or words were grouped and (c) each group was given a title or heading that represents all the kansei words in the group. The set of expressions thus obtained formed the reduced semantic universe (Table 2
                                 ). In our study, this semantic space was reduced to 48 expressions. The final number of expressions depends on the field of study [55]. In this case, the result was similar to the number of groupings obtained in other works in a similar context [34,35].

The global evaluation of the image from the expression “Globally, I think it is a good image of the urban design proposal.”. A 5-point Likert scale was used to evaluate each image ranging from: totally disagree, disagree, neutral, agree, totally agree.

Interviewees were shown the questionnaire through a digital platform. They had to complete the questionnaire quickly as the aim of the work was to reflect their first impressions. Statistical analysis of the opinions (Table 3
                        ) used SPSS 16.0 statistical software.

Principal components factor analysis was used to identify and extract the semantic axes [56,57]. This reduction technique is mainly used to obtain the Semantic Space [58,59]. Firstly, Bartlett’s sphericity test was applied to verify the null hypothesis that the correlations matrix is an identity matrix. Then it was decided to dimension the Semantic Space based on the factor extraction criterion of eigenvalues greater than one. An axis with an eigenvalue greater than one suggests that it contains a portion of variability greater than that of an original variable. The contributions analysed were obtained after Varimax rotation of axes. Finally, each semantic axis was given a representative label for the set of factor variables, the concepts with the highest contributions being the most representative. Finally, internal consistency of the dimensions was evaluated by Cronbach’s alpha coefficient [60].

The factors that define the perceptual space of the computer visualisation were then represented graphically. Interpretation of this space is very complex when there are more than two dimensions and was facilitated by only representing the two dimensions with the greatest explained variance [61]. This preference mapping enables visualisation of the set of expressions analysed in a common space. If the vectors representing the variables are ignored for a moment, the distances between points can be interpreted in terms of similarity and thus the semantic distances (i.e. the similarities and differences between concepts) can be analysed. If the sample of stimuli analysed is also added to this perceptual space (through their scores for the two components) information is obtained on the assessment of the images based on the set of expressions. This tool is basic for evaluating products from the user’s point of view, by permitting identification of the differences and similarities between them.

An ANOVA was run to analyse for significant differences between architects and non-architects, taking as dependent variables the factors that constitute the semantic space and as factor the variable that represents architectural and urban planning training. The aim of this phase was to confirm, as established in prior studies on the subject, that the two groups have significantly different perceptions and so must be analysed independently.

The ranking of axes or perceptions which influence the global assessment of the digital perspective for each group was determined by applying regression analysis. This analysis enabled identification of significant factors in the assessment of computer visualisations by architects and non-architects.

Finally, the perceptions of architects and non-architects were analysed for each image category (photorealistic, basic non-photorealistic, artistic non-photorealistic) to enable identification of images showing greater discrepancies between the two groups’ assessments. The analyses were as follows:
                                 
                                    (a)
                                    
                                       Comparative analysis. Semantic profile. The semantic profile is a diagram that represents the scores obtained on each semantic axis and the overall evaluation. This graph enabled us to visualise architects and non-architects’ perceptions of the three categories of images analysed and compare their impressions.


                                       Semantic distance. Semantic distances show the degree of consistency in product perception for two different groups, the greater the distance, the worse the consistency. If we consider the two dimensions represented in the perceptual space, the semantic distance between architects and non-architects in their assessment of digital images (di
                                       ) can be measured through the expression [62]:

@&#RESULTS@&#

The factor analysis grouped the reduced semantic space formed by the 48 expressions in the questionnaire into 8 factors or axes. These factors explain 62% of the variance (Table 4
                           ). The contribution of the original variables to the factors was analysed to determine the concept associated with each of them, thereby obtaining the following 8 factors:

1st axis. This axis represents the dimension of Tranquillity and Harmony in comparison to the perception of Stress and Chaos. It presents a strong positive correlation with adjectives such as “tranquillity”, “harmony”, “clarity”, “simple”, “light”, “well-being” and a negative correlation with adjectives such as “chaos”, “stress”, “saturated” and “aggressive”. It explains 15.6% of the variance in the original variables.

2nd axis. The second axis is the factor of Innovation. It represents the level of differentiating impact of the image with adjectives such as “innovative”, “futuristic”, “singular”, “dynamic”, “artistic”, “fashionable”, “curiosity” and “seductive”. It explains 12.57% of the variance.

3rd axis. The third axis represents the sensations of Happiness and Warmth. Expressions such as “warmth”, “not cold”, “not lonely “not uneasy”, “happiness” and “colourful” are very significant on this axis. It explains 10.62% of the sample variance.

4th axis. This axis represents the sensations of Nostalgia, Romanticism and Sensitivity evoked by the image. It includes expressions such as “nostalgia”, “romantic”, “sensitive” and “spiritual” and explains 7.33% of the sample variability.

5th axis: This axis includes the perception of Functionality. It is the assessment of how far the space shown is suitable for its function or use. The kansei words that contribute most to this factor are “popular”, “functional”, “proximity” and “familiar”. This factor explains 5.17% of the variance.

6th axis: This axis represents Monumentality and Luxury with “huge”, “luxury” and “exotic” as main concepts. It explains 4.39% of the sample variance.

7th axis: This axis represents the dimension Childish, Not Formal and explains 3.52% of the variance. The descriptors that contribute the most are “childish” and “not formal/not serious”.

8th axis: This axis can be understood as the perception of Timelessness transmitted by the image as only one expression, “timeless”, shows a high contribution. It explains 2.69% of the sample variability.

Consistency of perceptual space was verified with Cronbach’s Alpha. The values for this reliability coefficient for the first 6 dimensions ranged from 0.69 to 0.92, showing that these scales have considerable reliability [60]. However, the last two factors, factor 7 “Childish, not formal” and factor 8 “Timeless” were eliminated due to low Cronbach’s Alpha values.

The structure built by first and second principal component loadings was represented graphically (Fig. 3
                           ). This structure provides information on the semantic differences, that is, the similarities or discrepancies between concepts or expressions. Along the first factor, opposition between tranquillity, harmony, well-being (right) and chaos, stress (left) is apparent. This component therefore separates images that evoke well-being and harmony from those that do not. The second factor contrasts the expressions innovative, futuristic, singular (upper) and boring, childish (lower). This axis separates the innovative images from those that are not innovative. Other structures can be found in addition to these factors, for example, the opposition between “fresh-cold”, “light-saturated”, “artistic-childish”, “huge-simple”, “exotic-popular”, and “aggressive-tranquillity”.

After visual analysis of the semantic space we included the design samples (red, green and blue points) to examine the relationships between the images and the set of concepts or expressions. The graph shows the similarity or discrepancy of the different kinds of images. The position ofthe imageson the graph indicates the following:
                              
                                 (a)
                                 Basic non-photorealistic images (green points Fig. 3) are located in the lower part of the perceptual space. The evaluators perceive that these images, created using not very advanced design techniques, are less innovative than the rest (boring, childish, popular, familiar). However, they manage to evoke harmony, proximity, nearness, tranquillity as most of the points are located in the centre and on right of the graph.

Artistic non-photorealistic images (red points Fig. 3) are located in the upper part of the space. These images have been evaluated as showing greater innovation and more singular and futuristic nature than the other images. Most of these images are also located to the left of the space and so evoke a greater sensation of stress, chaos or saturation.

Photorealistic images (blue points Fig. 3) are located on the centre right part of the perceptual space. They are not associated to innovation but generate well-being as they are well valued on the first axis. There are fewer perceived perception differences among these images.

ANOVA was used to determine the existence of significant differences between architects and non-architects based on the semantic space. Significant differences were found (for a significance level of 0.05) in the perceptions of well-being, innovation, sensitivity and functionality (Table 5
                           ). That is, of the 6 factors making up the semantic space, there are significant perception differences in 4 (factors that explain a great variance). With these results it seems architects and non-architects have different perceptions and therefore need to be analysed independently.

Perception factors were then ordered according to their relation with the final evaluation using regression analysis (Table 6
                           ).

For the collective of architects the model includes 5 significant factors, with a correlation coefficient of 0.776. Factors with the greatest influence on the global evaluation of an image are perceptions of innovation (singular image, avant-garde, futuristic) and tranquillity (clarity, well-being, harmony) with positive correlations over 0.50. These factors are followed by perceptions of happiness (an image that invokes warmth, colourful) and nostalgia (a romantic image, sensitive) with correlations in the interval 0.30–0.50. Finally, perception of functionality and family and popular nature has a correlation of 0.156. Table 6(a) shows the best and worst valued images as a whole for this group.

For non-architects the model reflects 6 relevant factors, with a correlation coefficient of 0.752. The model is very similar to that obtained for architects. Firstly, the perception of innovation or singularity of the image has a correlation over 0.50 and is followed by perceptions of tranquillity and happiness with correlations in the interval 0.30–0.50. Finally, the sensations of monumentality, nostalgia and functionality have correlations under 0.30. Table 6(b) shows, by order of preference, the best and worst images for non-architects.

Graphic comparison of the preference models for both groups (Fig. 4
                           ) shows great similarity between them. Their global assessment of a computer visualisation depends basically on its capacity to evoke innovation, singularity (factor 2) and harmony, clarity and well-being (factor 1). There are some differences between the models but they are of little significance. Thus, for example, the ability of the image to evoke nostalgia or romanticism is more important for the architects, and in contrast to the non-architects, they do not attach importance to the ability of the image to generate luxury, monumentalism or exoticism.

Having identified the relevant factors in the assessment of the images, the assessments of the set of images in the sample were analysed taking into account the classification based on the digital techniques used to create them (basic non-photorealistic, artistic non-photorealistic, photorealistic). Obtaining the “semantic profiles” for each category enabled identification of the perceptual differences and similarities between both groups.
                                 
                                    (a)
                                    Basic non-photorealistic images: these simplified images, with little definition of materials are valued positively by non-architects (Fig. 5
                                       ). For this group, these images evoke functionality, proximity (factor 5) and harmony, well-being, tranquillity (factor 1). Architects, however, negatively assess the basic modelling renders, considering that they do not generate a sensation of innovative character or avant-garde (factor 2). Nor do they transmit the sensation of well-being, tranquillity, clarity, lightness (factor 1) vitality, happiness, colourful (factor 3) or luxury (factor 6).

Artistic non-photorealistic images: images which exceed the limits of photoreality are very positively assessed by both groups (Fig. 6
                                       ). Although these images are not associated to well-being or tranquillity (factor 1), such high assessments for the attributes of innovation (factor 2), monumentality and luxury (factor 6) manage to compensate for the negative assessments in other aspects. The greatest differences between groups can be found in the perception of sensitivity and romanticism (factor 4); whereas for architects these images manage to evoke these nostalgia-related feelings, they are unable to do so for non-architects.

Photorealistic images: Fig. 7
                                        shows a comparison between architects and non-architects of the measures of the factors in the semantic space and the variable that reflects the global assessment. These images are positively valued by both groups despite a negative assessment for their innovative or singular character (factor 2). Thus, these images, which offer a perfect representation of reality and show daily aspects, provoke the sensation of tranquillity, well-being and harmony (factor 1) in non-architects, a perception with a high contribution in the preference model. The group of non-architects also perceives these images as happy (factor 3), sensitive (factor 4) and functional (factor 5). For architects these images are clearly not innovative but this lack is compensated by the positive assessments of their ability to evoke sensitivity, nostalgia, romanticism (factor 4) happiness, vitality (factor 3), aspects which are significant in their preference model.

These “semantic profiles” confirm the fact that the same type of images can evoke different sensations in architects and non-architects. There is greater discrepancy over the basic non-photorealistic images which are very differently assessed by both groups.

The semantic profiles show perception differences in the three categories of images shown. The degree of consistency in the opinions of both groups can be measured through semantic distances. These distances are calculated on the basis of the scores obtained in the two dimensions with the greatest explained variance (factor 1: tranquillity and harmony (x); factor 2: innovation (y)).


                              Table 7
                               shows the calculation of the semantic distances for the10 digitalperspectives with the greatest inconsistencies between architects and non-architects. As can be seen, the images with the greatest semantic distance come from the photorealistic and basic non-photorealistic categories. In order to examine this difference in perception in greater depth the 10 images are located in the perceptual space (Fig. 8
                              ).

In the innovation axis (y), it can be seen that while many of the scores from non-architects are located in the neutral zone, close to zero, the scores from architects are located in the positive and negative part of the axis, especially in the negative zone. Experts therefore appear to discriminate more clearly between what is new, innovative or avant-garde and what is not. In the axis of well-being or harmony (x), many of the scores from non-experts are located in the positive zone of the axis, whereas the scores from experts are in the negative part. That is, some differences between the groups are due to the fact that some images manage to evoke a greater sensation of well-being and tranquillity in architects and non-architects.

@&#DISCUSSIONS@&#

This paper has analysed the affective factors behind evaluators’ evaluation of computer visualisations of urban design proposals, and attempts to differentiate between two types of evaluators: architects and non-architects.

Studies on human response to computer visualisations analyse the spaces created by this tool but do not deeply analyse the structure of the evaluators’ affective responses and how that relates to their overall assessment. Analysing this affective structure requires the definition of valid subjective evaluation scales for each group and evaluation criteria related to the overall assessment of the image. In this work, Semantic Differential is proposed (in the framework of Kansei Engineering) to obtain subjective evaluation scales adapted to the evaluators’ language.

The results show significant implications on three levels, contributing to the theory, methodology and application.

At the theoretical level, it can be concluded that there are important perception differences between architects and non-architects in their assessments of computer visualisations of environments. This result coincides with other works, which have observed differences in both groups’ evaluations [6,8,10,11,63–65]. In this case, these differences are not significant in terms of the assessment model used to evaluate a digital image but they are significant in the set of affective factors an image evokes. Thus for both groups the most significant factor in the global evaluation of an image is for it to be perceived as innovative, but architects and non-architects differ significantly in their conception of “innovative image”. What is innovative for some may not be for others.

From the methodological point of view the most outstanding contribution is the application of Semantic Differential to evaluate computer visualisations of environments and to detect different evaluations made by architects and non-architects. Thus, Semantic Differential is a verbal measurement instrument capable of measuring the subjective component of the affective state which both groups are able to recognise. This methodology has been previously applied in landscape perception and environmental psychology. In 1979 Echelberger [66] established the importance of his contribution to landscape preference assessment. In similar vein, the works by Küller [67,68] focus on determining semantic environmental descriptions (SMB) by limiting the area of study to the impression of an architectural environment. The novelty of our approach is to use this methodology as a first step within the context of Kansei Engineering. In particular, this methodology makes the following contributions: firstly, it offers a systematic method for obtaining subjective evaluation scales using independent valuation scales adapted to the evaluator’s conceptual scheme. This step is fundamental for studying, in a subsequent phase, the relationship between the design elements of computer visualisations and subjective judgements. If these valuation scales are used on the basis of attributes that evaluators cannot appreciate or concepts that use overlapping (not independent) information, it is very difficult to then find statistical evidence for the relation between certain design parameters and that group’s perception. Secondly, Semantic Differential offers valuable information for design. Thus, visualisation of the perceptual space (Figs. 3 and 8) and the semantic profiles (Figs. 5 and 7) provides additional, highly relevant information for studying similarity or discrepancy in individual perceptions. This evaluation is interesting for designers since it enables visual comparison of a computer visualisation with other images; identifying and analysing its main features.

With respect to the contribution to application, the findings of this study provide the following important outcomes.

Firstly, in relation to the results for behaviour in the set of evaluators. The perception of the digital image of an urban environment can be expressed through 6 independent concepts or semantic axis, which explained 55% of the variance in the sampled perception. These axes or factors are by order of explained variance: tranquillity–harmony; innovation; happiness-warmth; nostalgia-romanticism-sensitivity, functionality and monumentality-luxury.

Tranquility-harmony: this axis reflects the sensation of a tranquil environment, with “harmony”, “clarity” and other adjectives that in general transmit a sensation of “well-being”. Other works have obtained this dimension in a similar way, labelling it as “serene” [69], “quietness” [70,71] or “peaceful” [35]. Other factors highlighted in the literature which may be related to this dimension are “coherence” and “complexity”, established by Kaplan [72,73] to predict natural environmental preferences. Coherence” appears linked to the concept of harmony and “complexity” with the concepts of simple or not saturated.

Innovation: this dimension reflects the impressions of “ innovative”, “singular”, “dynamic”, “curiosity” and some others. Similar expressions have been detected in works on the evaluation of residential environments. The perceived attribute “innovation” is significant in the work of Jarvis [74], “originality” in the work of Küller [67,68] and “singular” linked to the concepts of “unique environment” and “special” in Llinares and Page [35]. The concepts “curiosity” and “seductive” that we find in this axis, can also be related to the dimesion labelled as “mystery” in the works by Kaplan [72,73].

Happiness-warmth: this dimension reflects the perception of happy environment or cheerful, which transmits happiness, warm and not cold. This set of concepts appears to be related to the sensation of “pleasure”, one of the most commonly used scales to assess surroundings introduced by Mehrabian and Russell [3,75].

Nostalgia-romanticism-sensitive: This axis reflects the sensation of romantic surroundings, sensitive and nostalgic. This dimension does not appear in previous studies on the evaluation of environments.

Functionality–proximity: this dimension reflects the sensations “functional”, “proximity” and “familiarity”. Works assessing computer visualisation as a medium for communicating urban design have highlighted the concept of functionality, understood as the ability to understand the space or surroundings. Thus in the works by Bishop and Rohrman [17,18] and Wergles and Muhar [76] this dimension appears labelled as “comprehension”. “Legibility” [72,73] is another label used in the literature to reflect this ability to understand the surrounding environment. The dimension of proximity or familiarity also appears as a significant factor in some works on evaluations of urban environments [77].

Monumentality-luxury: this axis refers to the sensation of luxury and monumentality of the environment. This impression is more closely linked to urban environments than natural ones and so it appears as a relevant dimension in works on the evaluation of residential environments [35,74].

Thus it can be seen that these results are in line with the results reported in previous studies on the evaluation of environments, despite the differences in methods, target groups, contexts and stimuli.

Furthermore, graphic representation of the perceptual space of digital images enables analysis of the similarities and differences of perception in the study sample. Important differences have been found in the assessment of a set of evaluators of the three types of images in the sample. Artistic non-photorealistic images are perceived as more innovative, singular and futuristic than the other images. Basic non-photorealistic images are less innovative than the rest. However, they manage to evoke harmony, proximity, nearness, tranquility. Photorealistic are not associated to innovation but generate well-being as they are well valued on the first axis. These photorealistic images are given better assessments by both groups (Fig. 7). This conclusion confirms the results obtained by other authors. Thus, Van Lammermen et al. [49] and Daniel and Meitner [21] found that images with greater realism were valued more than abstract images. The main difference in our work consists in determining the reason for this evaluation. Thus the relationship between semantic axes with the global evaluation of the image suggests that sensations of tranquility, happiness and nostalgia are behind this better assessment. The importance of tranquility (or similar concepts in the literature like peacefulness, serene, calm or quietness) as a main factor in the evaluation of environments has also been reported in other studies [69,78,79].

Secondly, the results for perception differences between architects and non-architects show significant differences in the affective factors they use to describe the computer visualisations. The ANOVA (Table 5) identified significant differences in the perceptions of tranquillity, innovation, nostalgia-romanticism and functionality. However, the preference models (Table 6) for architects and non-architects are very similar. Therefore, how can the preference models for experts and non-experts be so similar while the global evaluations hardly coincide? That is, as Table 6 shows there is hardly any coincidence between the best and worst valued images for both groups and yet the preference models are very similar. We understand that this is due to the fact that the physical requirements (design elements) which provoke perception are different for both groups. Thus, for example, the most significant factor in the global evaluation of an image is for it to be perceived as innovative, but architects and non-architects differ significantly in their conception of “innovative image”. What is innovative for one group may not be for another. That is, architects and non-architects base their emotional assessments on totally different features of the image or project. This result coincides with the conclusions reached by other authors [6,8,10,11,80].

The clearest example can be seen in the semantic profile of the basic non-photorealistic images. These images, with little definition of materials, are positively assessed by non-architects because they evoke proximity, nearness, harmony, well-being and tranquillity. Architects, however, assess them negatively because they do not generate a sensation of innovation or avant-garde nor do they transmit the feeling of well-being, tranquillity, clarity, lightness, vitality, happiness, colour or luxury. Thus, although both groups appreciate a render that evokes innovation and well-being or tranquillity, according to their preference models, there are important differences in the final evaluations because for each group innovation or tranquillity is associated with different aspects as the previous ANOVA results show. So, the same image can evoke different sensations in the two groups.The location of the images from the sample in the perceptual space according to architects and non-architects permits analysis of these perception differences for each of the computer visualisations in the sample, showing the “semantic distances”. These semantic differences show that architects are more critical in their assessments of the images from the point of view of innovation, well-being and harmony. Thus architects appear to discriminate more between what is new, innovative or avant-garde and what is not. This result coincides with other works. Thus, for example, Akalin et al. [65] found differing opinions between architecture and engineering undergraduates on house facades on five housing sites. Architecture students were more critical than engineering students.

As regards the limitations of the study, factor analysis extracts independent axes which explain more variance than the set of responses. The stimuli must have sufficient variability so we had to use a sample of computer visualisations broad enough to guarantee that variability. This fact presents a limitation in that a given perception is produced by the possible combination of design elements in the stimuli. To control for the effect of each design element and prevent confounding factors would require an excessively large sample of images to contemplate all the possibilities for each variable. The solution adopted in this study, described in Kish [50], is to include these variables in a random manner, assuming that chance will generate equivalent distributions of the units in all the variables of interest. Thus although bias is still present, it is reduced. The standard visualisation, however, was classified a priori into three categories because the styles are very different and it is important for this variable to be balanced. The other elements were very numerous and so they were randomly introduced. However, this limitation is not very relevant in this stage of Kansei Engineering where the aim is to obtain a representation of opinions on computer visualisations and it must be as varied as possible. Thus although factor analysis can be used to identify uncorrelated factors, it is unable to separate the potential confounding effects of image, style and content. In a second stage aiming to establish relations between affective responses and other design elements, a sample of computer visualisations will be required that combines all the potential design elements in a balanced way, in order to obtain predictive models. This relation can be determined by applying statistical treatments such as Quantification theory type I [58,81,82], linear regression [34], neural networks [30] or fuzzy logic [83].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The Semantic Differential method can be used to identify the affective factors behind evaluators’ evaluation of an image or product, in this case, computer visualisations representing urban design proposals. This technique (in the context of Kansei Engineering) enables the definition of subjective evaluation scales adapted to the evaluators, because the symbolic attributes are expressed in their own language. In this study the technique has been used to obtain the response of architects and non-architects and to identify the differences in perception between these two groups.

The definition of these perceptions or independent symbolic attributes is the first phase of Kansei Engineering. In a subsequent phase this methodology permits identification of design elements that a digital image needs to provoke an affective response.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

