@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Hybrid crystals based on thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We have grown the hybrid crystals of two thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers (TPCOs).


                        
                        
                           
                           They were biphenyl-capped thiophene (BP1T) and biphenyl-capped terthiophene (BP3T).


                        
                        
                           
                           The hybrid crystals showed the emission colors intermediate between the two TPCOs.


                        
                        
                           
                           The crystallographic structure of the hybrid crystals was similar to that of BP1T.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Thiophene/phenylene co-oligomer

Hybrid crystal

Emission

Carrier mobility

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  We have grown crystals in which two kinds of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers (TPCOs) are hybridized. Biphenyl-capped thiophene (BP1T) and biphenyl-capped terthiophene (BP3T) were chosen from among the TPCOs. The hybrid crystals were grown in both the vapor phase and the liquid phase. These hybrid crystals showed the emission colors intermediate between the two components. Correspondingly maximum peak positions of the emissions from the hybrid crystals were located halfway between those from single-component crystals of BP1T and BP3T. We made hybrid thin films by co-deposition of the two TPCOs in vacuum. The thin films exhibited both emission colors and emission peak positions similar to those of the hybrid crystals. The X-ray diffraction measurements indicate that the crystallographic structure of the hybrid crystals resembles that of the BP1T crystal. Also we made field-effect transistors using the hybrid crystals and measured their hole mobilities. We briefly discuss the implications of the X-ray diffraction and electrical data.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Organic semiconductor crystals are attracting attentions due to their excellent electronic and optical properties. These crystals are applied to charge transport devices and light-emitting devices accordingly. Examples include field-effect transistors (FETs) and light-emitting diodes (LEDs) [1,2]. More recently, light-emitting field-effect transistors (LEFETs) were discovered [3] and developed as novel light-emitting devices [4,5].

Meanwhile, it is often the case with the light-emitting devices that two or more materials are suitably hybridized not only to produce a variety of emission colors but also to improve the emission efficiencies [6–8]. In many cases the hybridization is done as doping a host matrix material with a guest material (dopant) [6–8]. The doping is carried out to improve carrier injections and transports as well [8]. Although the host material can be used as a form of amorphous films, the hybridization may well take place in a crystalline matrix. On a LEFET device, for instance, Nakanotani et al. were successful in both tuning emission colors and improving external quantum efficiency by doping a host distyrylbenzene crystal with tetracene [9]. Wang et al. grew distyrylbenzene crystals doped with tetracene or pentacene [10]. They observed green and red emissions from tetracene- and pentacene-doped crystals, respectively, with high emission efficiencies. They pointed out that structural comparability of the host and guest molecules was an important precondition for realizing the heavy doping and large size crystal [10].

The aforementioned achievements motivated us to grow the hybrid crystals comprising different molecules. In the present studies we chose 2,5-bis(4-biphenylyl)thiophene (BP1T) and 5,5″-bis(4-biphenylyl)-2,2′:5′,2″-terthiophene (BP3T) from among thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers (TPCOs) [11]; see Fig. 1
                      for their structural formulae. These molecules crystallize in related monoclinic systems [12,13]. We found green emissions with peak at ∼515nm or ∼550nm from the hybrid crystals. These peaks were different from those of both single-component crystals of BP1T and BP3T; the BP1T crystals emitted blue light with maximum peak at ∼492nm and the BP3T crystals showed orange emission with maximum peak of ∼614nm.

We used three methods to grow the hybrid crystals of BP1T and BP3T. Two of them were based on a vapor phase method [14] and the remainder rested on a liquid phase method [15].


                     Fig. 2
                      schematically depicts a cross section of a main part of a growth apparatus for the first (vapor phase) method. This consists of an outer glass tube of 25mm in diameter and two band heaters (source and growth heaters) that were placed side-by-side on the right side of that glass tube [14]. A nitrogen gas flows into this glass tube via another glass tube of 4mm in diameter. We put BP3T on the inside of the rightmost glass cylinder that was just below the source heater. After we kept the source heater at 355°C and growth heater at 315°C for 13h, BP3T crystals were grown on the inside wall of another cylinder around the left area of the growth heater. Keeping the BP3T crystals at that cylinder, we next placed BP1T on the rightmost cylinder and sublimed it for 4h with the source heater of 285°C and the growth heater of 255°C. Hybrid crystals were grown in between the BP3T and BP1T crystals (see Fig. 2). We discriminated the hybrid crystals from the single-component crystals of BP1T and BP3T by their emission color under the irradiation of ultraviolet light (365nm). The hybrid crystals glowed green while the BP1T and BP3T crystals glowed sky-blue and orange, respectively.

For the second and third methods, we mixed the powders of BP1T and BP3T together in an agate mortar. The molar ratio of BP1T to BP3T was ∼11:1. In the second method we used the same apparatus as that for the first method and put the mixture powder on the inside of the rightmost cylinder (see Fig. 2). To grow the hybrid crystals, we spent 21h raising the source heater temperature linearly from 100 to 300°C with the growth heater maintained at the steady temperature of 250°C. For further use we laminated vapor-phase-grown crystals on a silicon wafer substrate covered with a silicon dioxide layer (300nm in thickness).

In the third method, we grew the hybrid crystals directly on the substrate in the liquid phase [15]. We put the mixture powder (∼10mg) in 1-methyl naphthalene (∼20ml) with parts of the mixture remaining undissolved. The substrate was closely attached on an aluminum thermal radiator and was immersed into the mixture liquid in a bottle. After heating the mixture liquid at 210°C with an electric heater for 288h, we obtained hexagon crystals on the substrate. Hereafter, we refer to the crystals obtained by the first, second, and third methods as Hybrid Crystals 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

We also fabricated hybrid thin films in vacuum (∼10−3
                     Pa) by the co-deposition of the two TPCOs as follows: (i) the above-mentioned mixture powder of BP1T and BP3T were co-deposited on the substrate from a single source (Hybrid Thin Film 1). (ii) We prepared another hybrid thin film by co-depositing BP1T and BP3T from separate sources (Hybrid Thin Film 2). The mass ratio of BP1T to BP3T was ∼3:1. For comparison, we grew single-component crystals of BP1T and BP3T in the vapor phase and the liquid phase. Single-component thin films of BP1T and BP3T were also deposited on the substrate.

We carried out the polarizing and fluorescent microscope observations, optically-excited emission spectrum measurements, and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements using the same experimental setups described in the literature [15–17]. We observed the emission spectra of the crystals (thin films) from the direction parallel (perpendicular) to the substrate plane [16,17].

Bottom-contact type field-effect transistors (FETs) were fabricated by laminating the hybrid crystals on the substrates with preliminarily-prepared pairs of comb-shaped interdigitated source and drain electrodes. These electrodes were composed of the layered chromium (5nm in thickness) and gold (100nm). The crystals bridged the pair of the electrodes. The output characteristics were measured in vacuum of ∼10–3
                     Pa in the hole-enhancement mode by applying direct-current (DC) voltages [18]. We grounded one of the metal electrodes as the source contact following the standard method [19]. The Si was used for the gate contact.

From the point of view of energy consideration we performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the Gaussian 09 program [20]. For this purpose we arranged two molecules of BP1T and BP3T as hybridized paired molecules in such a way that the said hybridized molecules were not bound by covalent bonds. We optimized the geometries and configuration of the hybridized paired molecules simultaneously and estimated the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energies. To this end we used the B3LYP method with 6–31G(d) basis set, taking account of the basis set superposition error (BSSE). These energies were compared to those of paired BP1T molecules and paired BP3T molecules.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                     Fig. 3
                      shows micrographs of the hybrid crystals produced by each method. Their images disappeared at the extinction positions of the crossed Nicols of the polarizing microscope observations [14,15], indicating that these were single crystals. In Fig. 3 two arrows marked with A and P indicate the polarizing directions of the analyzer and polarizer under the extinction positions. The vapor-phase-grown crystals (Hybrid Crystals 1 and 2) were elongated (Fig. 3a and b) and the liquid-phase-grown crystal (Hybrid Crystal 3) was polygon (hexagon) (Fig. 3c). The crystal length, width, and thickness ranged from 39 to 1034μm, from 24 to 143μm, and from 460nm to 3.4μm, respectively.


                     Fig. 4
                      compares fluorescent micrographs of Hybrid Crystals 1 and 2. Fig. 5
                      compares fluorescent micrographs of Hybrid Crystal 3 with those of the single-component BP1T and BP3T crystals. These photographs indicate subtle color difference between Hybrid Crystals 1 and 2 (see Fig. 4). Hybrid Crystal 3 shows the emission color intermediate between the single-component BP1T and BP3T crystals (Fig. 5). Correspondingly maximum peak positions of the emissions from the hybrid crystals were located halfway between those from single-component TPCOs. Fig. 6
                     a and b shows emission spectra of Hybrid Crystals 1, 2, and 3. These spectra were compared to those of single-component crystals of BP1T and BP3T (dotted and dashed lines in Fig. 6). The spectra were normalized to unity at their maximum intensities. Hybrid Crystals 1, 2, and 3 indicated the maximum peaks located at 555, 518, and 553nm, respectively. These were different from the maximum peaks of BP1T and BP3T. They were located at 492nm (BP1T) and 615nm (BP3T). Note that the spectra of the hybrid crystals are not constructed by simply superposing those of BP1T and BP3T. This is true of the hybrid thin films as well (Fig. 6c), as shown in the literature [21,22]. Hybrid Thin Films 1 and 2 both showed the emission maxima at ∼515 and ∼550nm, whereas those of the BP1T and BP3T thin films were located at ∼460 and ∼565nm, respectively. We carried out peak profile fitting using pseudo-Voigt functions [23]. The resolved peak positions were summarized in Table 1
                     .


                     Fig. 7
                      shows XRD patterns of Hybrid Crystals. In Hybrid Crystal 1, the first-order diffraction line was resolved at 4.15° along with its higher-order diffraction lines up to the ninth order (see Fig. 7a). The peak intensities ranged 65–1050 counts. The result indicates the layered structure of Hybrid Crystal 1. From these data we estimated the plane separation to be 21.83Å. We observed related peaks from Hybrid Crystal 2 (Fig. 7b). In this case, the first-order line was located at 4.08° and higher-order lines up to the fifth order were resolved. The peak intensities were from 148 to 300 counts. The plane separation was 21.85Å. Hybrid Crystal 3 indicated three weak peaks corresponding to those of the first, third, and fifth orders (Fig. 7c). The intensities of these peaks were at most 140 counts. The plane separation was estimated from these three peaks to be 21.84Å. The separations of all Hybrid Crystals 1, 2, and 3 were in good agreement with a half of the lattice constant c of the BP1T crystal (21.88Å) rather than that of BP3T (30.00Å) [12,13]. The numbers c/2 correspond to the molecular lengths of BP1T and BP3T. What is implied from the XRD data is that the BP3T molecules are interspersed as dopants within the crystal matrix of BP1T. This structural feature resembles that implied in the literature [9].


                     Fig. 8
                      shows output characteristics of the FET made of Hybrid Crystal 2. These were measured in the hole-enhancement mode. The device clearly indicated the p-type conductions in spite of the nonlinear increment in the drain currents around the origin. The hole mobilities were 5.8×10−4–0.010cm2/Vs in the saturation region and 3.9×10−4–7.4×10−3
                     cm2/Vs in the linear region. These mobility values were comparable to or slightly higher than those of BP1T crystal devices (∼10−4−10−3
                     cm2/Vs) [24], even though these numbers were less than those of the BP3T crystal FETs (∼0.01–0.1cm2/Vs) [25]. These results are consistent with the structural feature of the hybrid crystals mentioned above.

We estimated the HOMO–LUMO gap of the paired BP1T and BP3T molecules to be 2.85eV. This is smaller than that of the paired BP1T molecules (3.66eV) and larger than that of the paired BP3T molecules (2.81eV). These calculation results suggest that the emission peaks of the hybrid materials (both crystals and thin films) are located midway between those of BP1T and BP3T.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We have fabricated both hybrid crystals and hybrid thin films in which two kinds of TPCOs, BP1T and BP3T, were admixed. The hybrid crystals were grown in the vapor phase and the liquid phase. The hybrid thin films were fabricated by depositing both BP1T and BP3T from the single source or the separate sources. The hybrid materials showed the emission color intermediate between the single-component BP1T and BP3T. Correspondingly, the emission peak positions of these hybrid materials were located in between those of the single-component BP1T and BP3T. The crystallographic structure of the hybrid crystals was similar to that of BP1T. The hole mobilities of the hybrid crystal were comparable to or slightly higher than those of BP1T crystal devices, but lower than those of BP3T devices. These results imply that the BP3T molecules are interspersed as dopants within the crystal matrix of BP1T. The present results demonstrate that the hybrid TPCO crystals produce various emission colors, indicating their applicability to light sources that enable subtle variations in colors.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research B (Grant No. 22350082) and C (Grant No. 23550208) and Challenging Exploratory Research (Grant No. 24655173) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan. This work was supported in part by the Murata Science Foundation.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

