@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Reading performance and visual fatigue when using electronic paper displays in long-duration reading tasks under various lighting conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Electronic paper displays with large screen have faster reading speed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Both sun light and fluorescent light are proper for reading on E-paper display.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ambient illuminances 1000lx and 1500lx have better visual performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ambient illuminances 200lx have more visual fatigue.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Electronic paper display

Visual performance

Visual fatigue

Ambient illuminance

Light source

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In this study, the effects of ambient illuminance and light source on participants’ reading performance and visual fatigue during a long reading task were investigated using three electronic paper displays. Reading on electronic paper displays was also compared with reading on paper. In Experiment 1, 100 participants performed a reading task where the display area for the text was equated for the displays. The results indicated that participants’ visual performance and visual fatigue did not differ significantly among different electronic paper displays, ambient illuminance conditions, or light sources. In Experiment 2, another 60 participants performed the same reading task where the full screen of each electronic paper display was used to present the text. The results showed that reading speed differed significantly across different electronic paper displays and ambient illuminance levels. The reading speed was slower for displays with smaller screens and increased as the ambient illuminance increased. Changes in the critical flicker fusion frequency significantly differed across ambient illuminance levels. Implications of the results for the use of electronic paper displays are discussed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The electronic paper display is now the most popular of the new types of visual displays, owing to the enormous success of Amazon Kindle, which uses a reflective-type display that differs markedly from the conventional transmissive-type liquid–crystal display (LCD). Unlike a transmissive-type LCD, which uses a backlight as its pixel light source, a reflective-type display reflects ambient light as does ordinary paper and can display text and images indefinitely without additional power. The available commercial electronic paper devices include Amazon Kindle, Sony PRS-700, and iRex Reader. Although these electronic paper displays have been in the market for a number of years, ergonomics studies of such devices are limited. Isono et al. [1] conducted an experiment in which 13 college students read with an electronic paper display and with conventional paper for 90min. The results showed no significant differences in the level of visual fatigue between electronic reading and conventional reading. Jeng et al. [2] reported that the legibility of text on electronic paper displays depends on the illuminance intensity but not on the light source, and that conventional paper had a higher visual comfort rating than electronic paper although both supported similar performance in a letter-search task.

Many factors influence visual performance and visual fatigue when using displays, e.g., the display medium, light source, ambient illuminance, polarity, and target-to-background luminance contrast. Ambient illuminance is an important factor in video display terminal (VDT) design. Many recommendations exist regarding the level of ambient illuminance. For cathode ray tube (CRT) workstations, an ambient lighting of 200–500lx is generally suggested. The choice of illuminance level greatly depends on the task [3]. Ostberg [4] reported that a lower ambient illuminance might be more appropriate for CRT work. Xu and Zhu [5] studied the effect of ambient illuminance and found that performance deteriorated as ambient illuminance increased.

Regarding the effect of illuminance on visual performance and fatigue when using an electronic paper display, Lin et al. [6] found that illuminance had no significant effect on accuracy of visual tasks on electronic paper. Lee et al. [7] found that ambient illuminance had no significant effect on accuracy performance but had a significant effect on search speed. Shieh and Lee [8] found that different illuminances (200, 700, and 2000lx) resulted in significantly different preferred viewing distances and screen angles. Higher illuminances (700 and 2000lx) resulted in longer preferred viewing distances and smaller screen angles. They suggested that reflective-type displays may require higher illuminance (700lx or higher). Wang et al. [9] and Wang et al. [10] pointed out that participants’ visual performance with electronic paper displays was significantly different under various ambient illuminances. In general, the abovementioned studies have found that the required ambient illuminance for electronic displays is higher than that for CRT or LCD displays and that the proper range may be about 500–1000lx. The above suggestion was based on short-duration experiments using simple word identification tasks. However, an electronic paper display is typically used for reading text, and the reading time can last for hours. Furthermore, visual fatigue occurs mostly after long periods of reading. Thus, a short-duration word identification task may be inappropriate for evaluating the visual performance and visual fatigue when using an electronic paper display. Moreover, these studies evaluated an old-type Kolin electronic (Ch–LC) display and Sony e-book, which were not mainstream in the market. Consequently, there is a need to explore the visual performance and visual fatigue experienced when using popular electronic paper displays (e.g., Sony Reader, Amazon Kindle, and iRex Reader) in a long-duration reading task and how they compare with those when performing the same task on ordinary paper.

In recent years, a number of studies on electronic paper displays [2,8,7] have reported that the effect of the light source is limited; for example, a sunlight lamp (D65) was similar to a fluorescent lamp (TL84) but better than a tungsten lamp (F). However, these studies also focused on word identification tasks. Whether the results are similar for a long-duration reading task is unclear.

Many studies have compared reading on displays with reading on paper [11,12]. Slower reading speed, lower accuracy, greater fatigue, and less subjective preference were found when reading on displays [13,14]. Regarding the effect of the display medium on higher cognitive ability such as text comprehension, some studies [11] concluded that comprehension was not different for material presented on paper or displays. However, Cushman [15] found that reading speed and comprehension have an inverse relationship; for example, slower readers show better comprehension. Thus, although the display medium appears to have little effect on comprehension of reading material, it may affect reading speed and indirectly influence comprehension. However, most of the above studies focused on CRT or LCD displays and did not compare paper and electronic displays. Consequently, there is a need to explore the effects of electronic paper display media, ambient illuminance, and light source on reading performance and visual fatigue during long periods of reading.

In summary, electronic paper displays may replace conventional paper, books, and magazines in the future. Studies on electronic paper displays are very limited, and existing studies have used visual search or identification tasks and employed search speed or accuracy as dependent measures. Studies that measure higher cognitive performance and visual fatigue in long-duration reading tasks are required. In this study, we investigated the effects of ambient illuminance (200, 500, and 1000lx, with 1500lx added in Experiment 2) and light source (TL84 and D65) on participants’ reading comprehension and visual fatigue using three electronic paper displays (Amazon Kindle DX, Sony Reader PRS-505-SC, and iRex 1000S). A comparison was also made between reading on electronic paper displays and on ordinary paper.

@&#METHOD@&#

Two experiments were conducted in this study. The first employed the display medium, light source, and ambient illuminance as independent variables.

One hundred college students (53 male and 47 female) between 19 and 28years old (mean age, 23.3year; SD, 1.8year) participated in the experiment. All had no prior reading experience on electronic paper displays, and had corrected visual acuity higher than 0.8 and normal color vision as tested by a Topcon screenscope SS-3 and standard isochromatic charts. There was an institutional review board (IRB) approved by the Oriental Institute of Technology, and all the participants gave written informed consent. Each participant was paid NT$300 (about 10 USD).

The first experiment evaluated three independent variables: the display medium, illuminance level, and light source with the text area controlled. Three electronic paper displays and conventional office paper were used as test visual display units. The two light sources used were D65 (6500K) and TL 84 (4000K). The illuminance was set at three different levels: 200, 500, and 1000lx. Therefore, there were 18 experimental conditions [3(displays)×2(lightsources)×3(illuminances)]. This experiment used a between-subject design for all independent variables, and five participants were randomly assigned to each condition. Thus, ninety participants were used for conducting the tests on electronic paper displays. In addition, a comparison group (10 participants) was used for conducting the tests on A4 paper with D65 as the light source and an ambient illuminance of 500lx. The total number of participants in Experiment 1 was 100.

The following three electronic paper displays were used: Sony PRS-700 with a 6-in. display, 800×600 resolution; Amazon Kindle DX with a 9.7-in. display, 1200×824 resolution; and iRex 1000S with a 10.2-in. display, 1024×1280 resolution. All use E-Ink® electronic paper technology. Table 1
                            lists the specifications of the three electronic paper displays. To avoid brand effects, the three displays were designated as devices A, B, and C. Fig. 1
                            shows the three electronic paper displays with text display areas equated. The light source and ambient illuminance were controlled using a color assessment cabinet (VeriVide CAC 120-5). The ambient illuminance was measured using a TOPCON Illuminance Meter IM-2D. According to the specification of the color assessment cabinet, the uniformity of the illuminance level was better than 5% and the screen reflection was controlled. The critical flicker fusion frequency (CFF) of a participant was measured with a Lafayette Flick Fusion Control 12023.

The experimental task configuration is shown in Fig. 2
                           . The VDTs were placed inside the color assessment cabinet located on a table 73cm in height. The front edge of the table was 17cm from the screen center. The inclination angle of the screen was 105° with respect to the horizontal axis. The viewing distance was controlled to 50cm by using a chin fixture. These task setup parameters were fixed during the experiment. The participants could adjust their seating height to make themselves as comfortable as possible.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

A reading task was conducted to evaluate the participants’ visual performance and visual fatigue. A Chinese article in New Ming style font with a character height of 12 pt was used for the task. The article was a report about an earthquake, of which all participants were unfamiliar. The text was presented in black on a white background (positive polarity with a text-to-background luminance contrast of 1:5; hence, the contrast ratio was set to 5). In this experiment, the text display area and formats were controlled to be identical for each display because their screen sizes were different (see Fig. 1). The text was 30 pages long, with 17 lines per page and 20 characters per line. The participants were asked to read the text and answer 10 questions about the content as accurately and quickly as possible at the end. During reading, the participants operated the switch button on the device to turn to the next page. The switch speeds of the three devices were the same (around 0.6s). Before the formal experiment, a training session was conducted to familiarize the participants with the operation of the device. CFFs were measured before and after the experimental task. In addition, a rating scale comprising the following six items was used to obtain a subjective rating of visual fatigue [16]: (1) I have difficulties in seeing; (2) I have a strange feeling around the eyes; (3) My eyes feel tied; (4) I feel numb; (5) I feel a headache; and (6) I feel dizzy looking at the screen. Each item was rated on a 10-point scale for evaluating the severity of discomfort, with 1 representing “not at all” and 10 representing “yes, very much.”

This study recorded the reading time and comprehension accuracy to evaluate the participants’ visual performance, change in CFF, and subjective visual fatigue to assess visual fatigue. The CFF change was the CFF difference before and after the experiment. Subjective visual fatigue was determined by the total subjective rating score of visual fatigue. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to evaluate the effects of the independent variables (display medium, illuminance level, and light source) on the dependent measures. The level of statistical significance was set at 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed using Statistical Analysis System (SAS) software.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                           Table 2
                            shows the participants’ visual performance at each level of the independent variables. The data were tested and confirmed for homogeneity of variance.

The data in Table 2 shows that the reading times for the three electronic paper displays were about 1000–1200s. The ANOVA results indicated that there was no significant difference among the three displays. The difference between paper and electronic paper displays was also not statistically significant. The effects of ambient illuminance and light source on reading time were not statistically significant.

Comprehension accuracies ranged between about 50% and 60% as a function of display medium, ambient illuminance, and light source. The ANOVA results indicated that none of the variables had a statistically significant effect on comprehension accuracy. The difference between paper and electronic paper displays was also not significant.


                           Table 3
                            lists the means and standard deviations of CFF change and subjective visual fatigue at each level of the independent variables in Experiment 1.

The data in Table 3 shows that the CFF decreased by about 2–3Hz after the reading experiment. The ANOVA results indicated that there was no significant difference among the three displays. The difference between paper and electronic paper displays did not reach significance. The effects of ambient illuminance and light source were also not statistically significant.

Values of subjective visual fatigue for the three electronic paper displays were about 17–21; their differences were not statistically significant. However, the subjective visual fatigue for paper was lowest at 14.1. Under the same experimental conditions of D65 as the light source and an illuminance of 500lx, a t-test showed a significant difference between paper and electronic paper displays [t(23)=−2.1, p
                              <0.05]. Neither the ambient illuminance nor the light source had a statistically significant effect on subjective visual fatigue.

The results of Experiment 1 indicated that reading speed and comprehension accuracy were similar for the three electronic paper displays. Moreover, the change in the CFF and subjective visual fatigue were not significantly different between the electronic paper displays. That is, the major brands of electronic paper display in the market are comparable in terms of visual performance and visual fatigue. Two plausible reasons may explain the results. Firstly, all three electronic paper displays use the same E-Ink® technology. Secondly, although the display sizes of the three devices were different, the text display area and format were arranged to be identical in the experiment (see Fig. 1). Thus, the number of text pages was the same for all electronic paper displays. The results may have differed if the full screen had been used to present the text for all displays.

One plausible reason for the nonsignificant differences in visual performance and visual fatigue for the three electronic paper displays is that the text display areas were equated in Experiment 1. Ordinarily, most of the display screen area is used to present information; hence, the size of the display screen can make difference. Thus, a more realistic test is to compare the three electronic paper displays when the full screen of the display is used for text presentation. Furthermore, because the light sources D65 and TL84 have only limited effects in many studies (including Experiment 1 here), the light source was removed as a factor in Experiment 2. Moreover, a greater ambient illuminance level, 1500lx, was added because outdoor illuminance can reach this level. In addition, to enhance the motivation to read, the participants were given a NT$20 bonus for each correct answer in the 10 questions regarding the reading material.

@&#METHOD@&#

The apparatus and experimental materials, experimental conditions and procedures, and data collection and analysis were the same as in Experiment 1. The major difference was that the full screen for each display was used to display the text. Fig. 3
                         shows the same experimental devices with full screen text. There were 340, 1040, and 1167 characters per full screen page and 30, 10, and 9 pages of text, respectively, for devices A, B, and C.

Sixty college students (30 male and 30 female) between 19 and 26years old (mean age, 22.7year; SD, 0.9year) participated in Experiment 2. These students were different from the 100 participants in Experiment 1. All had corrected visual acuity of higher than 0.8 and normal color vision; none had prior reading experience on electronic paper displays or familiarity with the reading material.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

Experiment 2 evaluated two independent variables: the display medium and illuminance level. Therefore, there were 12 experimental conditions [3(displays)×4(illuminances)]. Five participants were randomly assigned to each experimental condition.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                           Table 4
                            shows the participants’ visual performance at each level of the independent variables. The data were first tested and confirmed for homogeneity of variance.

The data in Table 4 shows that device A had the longest reading time of 1252s. Devices B and C had similar reading times of 1032 and 1014s, respectively. The ANOVA results (Table 5
                              ) showed that the reading times for different electronic paper displays were significantly different [F(3, 48)=4.65, p
                              <0.05]. Fig. 4
                               shows a box plot of reading times for the three displays. Compared with the results of Experiment 1, the reading time for device A was longer in Experiment 2. The text display formats in the two experiments were identical for device A. The participants may have read more carefully so as to answer the questions more accurately and receive incentive bonus, which may explain their slower reading speed in Experiment 2. The screen sizes for devices B and C were larger; hence, there were fewer text pages to read for these devices. This may have led to less page-turning, fewer reading interruptions, and thus faster reading speed.

The effect of ambient illuminance on reading time was also statistically significant [F(3, 48)=6.49, p
                              <0.05]. The reading times for ambient illuminances of 200, 500, 1000, and 1500lx were 1306, 1194, 970, and 926s, respectively. Fig. 5
                               shows that the reading time decreased as the ambient illuminance increased.

Duncan’s multiple range test (Table 4) indicated that the reading times for devices B and C were better than those for device A. In addition, the reading times under ambient illuminances of 1000 and 1500lx were shorter than those under 200 and 500lx.

Comprehension accuracies were around 60%, which is slightly greater than those of Experiment 1 (about 57%). This is presumably because of the incentive bonus for correct answers in Experiment 2. The ANOVA results indicated that neither the display medium nor ambient illuminance had a statistically significant effect on comprehension accuracy.


                           Table 6
                            lists the means and standard deviations of the CFF change and subjective visual fatigue at each level of the independent variables in Experiment 2.

The CFF decreased by about 1–3Hz after the reading experiment. The ANOVA results (Table 7
                              ) showed that there was no significant difference among the three displays. The effect of ambient illuminance on the change in CFF was statistically significant [F(3, 48)=3.89, p
                              <0.05]. Duncan’s multiple range test (Table 6) indicated that the changes in the CFF under ambient illuminances of 500 and 1000lx were smaller than the change under 200lx. Fig. 6
                               shows that an illuminance of 200lx resulted in greater CFF reduction, i.e., greater visual fatigue than did 500 or 1000lx.

Values for subjective visual fatigue were about 15–19. The ANOVA results indicated that the display medium and ambient illuminance had no significant effects on participants’ subjective visual fatigue.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study was designed to investigate the effects of ambient illuminance and light source on users’ reading performance and visual fatigue with electronic paper displays.

With respect to the differences among the three popular electronic paper displays used in this study, the results of Experiment 1 indicated that reading speed and comprehension accuracy were similar for the three electronic paper displays. Moreover, the CFF change and subjective visual fatigue were also similar for the electronic paper displays. That is, the major brands of electronic paper display appear comparable in terms of visual performance and visual fatigue. A few reasons may explain the results. Firstly, all the three electronic paper displays use the same E-Ink® technology. The screen resolutions for the three displays are greater than 800×600 pixels. The ANSI/HFS standard [20] suggests that image quality does not improve substantially for screens with resolutions above this range. The text-to-background luminance contrast of the three displays was equated at 1:5; and the text display area and format were controlled to be identical on each display. If these conditions are set differently according to the screen characteristics of the three displays, significant differences between electronic paper displays may appear. Experiment 2 tested one such factor—the screen size. The full screen was used to present the text for each individual display (Fig. 5). The number of text pages were 30, 10, and 9, respectively, for devices A, B, and C. Device A had the smallest screen size and most text pages (the same as in Experiment 1); hence, page-turning and reading interruptions may have been more frequent than for devices B and C, which in turn may have led to the slowest reading speed. Thus, the balance between portability and reading efficiency should be considered in designing electronic paper displays. Smaller screens may be good for portability but disadvantageous for reading efficiency.

Compared with reading on paper, reading on electronic paper displays supported similar reading speed and comprehension accuracy. That is, electronic paper displays, especially those of E-Ink®, are acceptable media for reading. The suggestions [11,12] that reading on VDTs is slower and less accurate than reading on paper may not hold true for electronic paper displays. Furthermore, objective CFF decrements were similar for reading on paper and electronic paper displays. However, the results of Experiment 1 indicated that participants experienced less subjective visual fatigue when reading on paper than on electronic paper displays. These results are consistent with the findings of other studies [17,2,18]. A plausible reason is that people have more experience with paper reading. Another possibility is that screen reflections common to VDTs [19] also play a role in inducing visual fatigue.

With the portability of electronic paper displays, the ambient illuminance for electronic paper reading may vary because the user can bring it to various places to read. The results of Experiment 2 showed that ambient illuminance had a significant effect on visual performance and visual fatigue. The reading time decreased as the ambient illuminance increased. Illuminances of 1000 and 1500lx supported faster reading speeds than did those of 200 and 500lx (Table 4). However, the change in the CFF indicated that a low ambient illuminance of around 200lx may cause greater visual fatigue (Fig. 6). When visual performance and visual fatigue are considered together, ambient illuminances around 1000lx appear appropriate for reading on E-Ink® electronic papers. Overall, the results of this study support the suggestion of many studies [8–10] that the ambient illuminance for electronic paper displays must be higher than that for a CRT or LCD display. Moreover, the effect of ambient illumination appears to be greater in a long-duration reading task (e.g., this study) than in a short-duration word identification task [6,7], where the effect of ambient illuminance is usually nonsignificant.

Fluorescent light (TL84) and sunlight (D65) support similar levels of visual performance and visual fatigue when reading on electronic paper displays. Both may be proper light sources for electronic paper displays. These results are similar to the findings of many studies [7,17,1,2]. Electronic paper displays appear to be appropriate reading media both in general offices where fluorescent light is the main light source; as well as outdoors where sunlight is the light source.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In this study, users’ visual performance and visual fatigue were investigated when reading using different electronic paper displays under different ambient illuminances and light sources. The findings and suggestions are as follows:
                        
                           (1)
                           When the text display areas are identical, the three electronic paper displays are similar and comparable to paper in terms of visual performance and visual fatigue.

With the full screen used for text presentation in each individual display, the three electronic paper displays are different, and displays with larger screens and hence fewer text pages support faster reading speeds.

Both sunlight (D65) and fluorescent light (TL84) are proper light sources for reading on electronic paper displays.

Ambient illuminances of 1000 and 1500lx support better visual performance, and those of 500 and 1000lx cause less visual fatigue than an illuminance of 200lx when reading on electronic paper displays.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This study was supported by a research grant from the National Science Council of the ROC, Grant No. NSC 98-2221-E-161-009-MY2.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

