@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The evaluation of visuospatial performance between screen and paper

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The display medium affects the visuospatial short-term memory performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           The visuospatial ability of paper–pencil test was higher than the tablet PC test.


                        
                        
                           
                           The visual fatigue of paper–pencil test was lower than tablet PC test.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Visuospatial ability

Visuospatial short-term memory

Visual fatigue

Display

Paper–pencil test

PC tablet test

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study evaluates the effect of presentation media (PC tablet versus pencil and paper) on the performance, level of visual fatigue, and subjective preference of those taking visuospatial tests. Fifty university students participated and performed three visuospatial short-term memory tests and three visuospatial ability tests by using both types of display media. The display medium substantially affected all of the measured variables (p
                     <0.01). On average, the paper–pencil test scores of the visuospatial short-term memory tests were about 10% higher and the answer time was about 20% shorter than those of the PC tablet tests. The average paper–pencil test score of the visuospatial ability tests was about 35% higher than the average test score of the PC tablet test. The visuospatial performance was substantially decreased under the PC tablet condition compared with that under the pencil–paper condition. In addition, visual fatigue was greater when participants used the PC tablet than when they used a pencil and paper.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The notebook computer is becoming increasingly prominent and, subsequently, the computer-based test is also being widely applied in various fields. The advantages of using computerized tests include immediate score reporting involving test-taker performance, as well as the reduction in costs related to printing, shipping, and administering paper and pencil tests [1]. Regarding the effect of the presentation mode on test performance, Mazzeo et al. [2] studied the contrast between paper–pencil and computer-based test scores in College-Level Examination Programs (CLEP). They found that the paper–pencil mathematics test scores were 1.74% higher and the English test scores were 3.66% higher than those of the computer-based tests. The disparity in test scores was substantial and was possibly caused by a lack of familiarity and experience in using the computer-based test method. In 2003, Choi et al. [3] reported that when participants took English language tests containing grammar, vocabulary, listening comprehension, and reading comprehension material, the reading comprehension scores of those who took the paper–pencil test were higher than the scores of those who took the computer-based test. Conversely, the listening comprehension test scores were higher for those who took the computer-based test than for those who took the paper–pencil test. The negative effects of the computer-based test include difficulty in taking notes and a lack of concentration caused by eye fatigue. Although display technology has improved in recent years, participants still preferred reading from paper than reading from a screen to comprehensively understand the presented material [4,5].

Most of the previous studies investigating reading comprehension performance in relation to computerized and paper–pencil tests focused on text reading. Information regarding the differences between visual spatial test materials presented on a screen and on paper is also crucial for graphically measuring visuospatial ability. Visuospatial ability is defined as the mental attribute of imagining the shape of an object while it is rotated and remembering the position of the object. This skill involves the cognitive processes of perception, attention, mental imagery, memory, and problem solving. This ability is critical for architects, dentists, chemists, pilots, carpenters, clothing designers, and those who work in similar fields [6]. The visuospatial ability test is used for assessing cognition ability in neurodegenerative disease patients [7], mental development in children [8], and human intelligence [9].

The visuospatial ability test can be divided into three elements: mental rotation, spatial perception, and spatial visualization [10]. A large gender advantage in favor of men was identified in only the mental rotation tests [11]. Minor differences were found in the spatial perception tests [10], whereas in the spatial visualization tests, the difference was not substantial [11]. The distinct effect of gender on visuospatial ability was caused by the interaction between life experience and biological propensity [12]. In addition to the gender effect, visuospatial ability performance is also affected by display formats. Van Orden and Broyles [13] compared the visuospatial task performance of participants who used seven types of two-dimensional (2-D) and three-dimensional (3-D) displays. The authors reported that, overall, the task performance of participants who used the 2-D plan, or side-view, display type was more favorable than the task performance of participants who used any other display system, but the 3-D volumetric display type was more suitable for participants performing integration and prediction tasks in a limited 3-D space.

Visuospatial short-term memory assesses the storage demand for visual patterns or sequences of movement without performing further information processing. Traditionally, visuospatial ability and visuospatial short-term memory tests were performed with pen and paper [14] because of the ease of administration and the existence of well-established normative data [15]. However, previous studies did not consider whether the outcome of the computer-based visuospatial ability test would be similar to that of the paper–pencil-based test. Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate the effect of display media on the subjective preference and the levels of visual fatigue of participants taking the visuospatial ability test and the visuospatial short-term memory test.

@&#METHOD@&#

Fifty university students (25 male and 25 female) participated in the experiment. The ages of the participants ranged from 19 to 23years (mean=20.22, SD=0.89). The mean age of male participants was 20.40 (SD=0.99) years. The mean age of female participants was 20.04 (SD=0.78) years. All subjects were right handed. Forty of the subjects were near-sighted and all of them wore glasses to have at least 20/25 corrected vision. All participants were required to have no previous experience using a PC tablet to avoid the influence of user experience on the subjective preference of using a PC tablet.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

The independent variables in the experiment were gender (male, female) and display medium (PC tablet, paper–pencil). Participants were requested to take both a PC tablet and paper–pencil test. A PC tablet with a 14-inch touch screen (IBM ThinkPad, screen area 180×245mm, resolution 1024×768, 16-bit color) was used in this study. Taptagaporn and Saito [16] pointed out that the subjects using a positive display polarity (dark characters on a bright background) produced better visual performance with less visual fatigue than the ones using a negative display polarity (bright characters on a dark background). Thus, a positive display polarity (black text on a white background) was used in this study. The paper–pencil test was prepared using the same format as the computer-based test to minimize the differences in content between the two tests. The paper size is 258mm∗180mm. The paper size and the aspect ratio of the paper–pencil test were equal to that of the PC tablet viewing screen, as shown in Fig. 1
                           .

The visuospatial short-term memory test battery included three sub-tests (i.e., the Corsi block task [17], the arrow span task [18], and the dot memory task [19] (Fig. 2
                           )). The Corsi block task is illustrated in Fig. 2(A). After viewing a series of three images, the participant must number the blocks in the sequence that the dark block appeared. The arrow span task is illustrated in Fig. 2(B). In each image, an arrow pointing in a certain direction was displayed for one second. After viewing a series of three images, the participant was asked to write down the sequence that the arrows appeared in the boxes. The dot memory task is illustrated in Fig. 2(C). A 4×4 matrix was shown to the participant. Each matrix contained a black dot that appeared for one second. After viewing a series of three images, the participant was asked to write down the order and the location that the black dot appeared in the matrix. There was no time limit for taking the three visuospatial short-term memory tests. The participant continued to write until he or she finished the tests. The time taken to complete the tests and the test score for each test were recorded. The answer time was defined as the time interval from when the first test page was shown to the participant until the last question was answered by the participant. During the computer-based test, the answer time was recorded automatically by the computer. The participant was required to click an icon to go to the next page. The answer time ended when the participant clicked the selected answer to the final question. During the paper–pencil test, the answer time was recorded by the experimenter using a stopwatch. A shorter answer time and a higher score indicated an excellent visuospatial short-term memory.

The visuospatial test battery included the space relation test [20], card rotation test, and hidden pattern test [21], as shown in Fig. 3
                           . In the space relation test (Fig. 3(A)), the participant was presented with a two-dimensional image, and was asked to visualize the image folded into three dimensions. The participant was then asked to identify the image of the three-dimensional shape from a number of provided images. In the card rotation test (Fig. 3(B)), an image appeared on the left side. The participant was asked to decide if the image on the right was the same as the original after rotation, or if it was a reflection of the original image. In the hidden pattern test (Fig. 3(C)), a pattern was presented to the participant. The participant was asked to identify if the pattern was hidden in the subsequent images presented. Participants were given twelve minutes to take the space relation test, six minutes to take the card rotation test, and three minutes to take the hidden pattern test. The test scores of the three subtests were calculated, and a higher test score indicated greater visuospatial ability.

To measure visual fatigue, critical flicker fusion (CFF) frequency and subjective eye fatigue were evaluated. CFF is an effective measure of visual fatigue [22,23]. CFF measures the minimal number of flashes of light per second at which an intermittent light stimulus no longer stimulates a continuous sensation. The CFF was tested at the beginning and at the end of each experiment session. A decrease in the CFF threshold indicated an increase in visual fatigue [24]. Subjective eye fatigue was evaluated using the Borg CR-10 scale [25]. The Borg CR-10 scale is a 10-point scale, with 0 denoting ‘nothing at all’ and 10 denoting “almost maximal.” Regarding the subjective preference for display media, a five-point scale was used with −2 signifying “dislike it very much” and +2 signifying “like it very much.”

The experimental environment was standardized. There was a fixed room and the illuminance on the test paper or PC tablet was 400 Lux. In addition, for the PC tablet, the display parameter settings, e.g., screen brightness, contrast, polarity, etc. were consistent in the experiment. The experiments were performed from 09:00am to 12:00noon and from 14:00 to 16:00 in the afternoon. Prior to the experiment, each participant was informed of the purpose of this study and asked to fill out a written consent form. For paper–pencil practice, participants used paper and a sharpened wooden pencil to answer practice questions until they could respond smoothly (Fig. 4
                        (A)). For PC tablet practice, the participants used a stylus on a touch screen to answer practice questions until they could use it without difficulty (Fig. 4(B) and (C)). Both operations were easy and practice was completed within 5min.

At the beginning of each session, the subjective fatigue and CFF of the participants were collected as baseline measures for making comparisons. The mean score of subjective fatigue was 2.74, denoting “weak (light) feeling,” and the mean CFF value was 33.94Hz. Two tests (i.e., visuospatial short-term memory test battery and visuospatial ability test battery) were arranged for this experiment. The order of administering the paper–pencil test and PC tablet test was randomized. After completing the tests, the test scores and answer times were recorded. In addition, the CFF, the subjective fatigue rating, and the subjective preference were also recorded. The paper–pencil test and PC tablet test were administered a week apart from each other.

Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to analyze the effect of gender and the display medium on visuospatial ability test performance and the levels of visual fatigue in participants. Pearson correlations were performed to determine the inter-variable relationships. The significance level was set to alpha=0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The summarized ANOVA results are shown in Table 1
                        . The test display medium substantially affected all of the measured variables (p
                        <0.05 or lower). Table 2
                         illustrates the corresponding mean values for all of the measurements regarding the display media and gender. The average Corsi block, arrow span, and dot memory task scores for the PC tablet test were only 88%, 92%, and 88% of the paper–pencil test scores, respectively. In addition, the completion times of the Corsi block, arrow span, and dot memory task for the PC tablet test were approximately 34%, 23%, and 9% longer than that of the paper–pencil test, respectively. Among these three tests, on average, the paper–pencil test scores were about 11% higher and the answer time was about 22% shorter than those of the PC tablet tests.

The three visuospatial ability test scores of the PC tablet test were also substantially less than those of the paper–pencil test. The greatest disparity in visuospatial ability test scores between the PC tablet and paper–pencil tests was demonstrated in the hidden patterns task with scores of approximately 34.4. The smallest difference in visuospatial ability test scores between the PC tablet and paper–pencil tests was demonstrated in the space relation task with scores of approximately 12.2. The average visuospatial ability test score of the PC tablet test was about 25.3 points lower than that of the paper–pencil test.

The effect of the display medium on CFF and the subjective eye fatigue rating before and after testing was substantial (p
                        <0.01). The increase in CFF after taking the PC tablet test was 1.5Hz, which was approximately 0.3Hz greater than the increase in CFF after taking the paper–pencil test. In addition, the subjective eye fatigue rating of participants during the PC tablet test was about 0.2 points higher than that of participants during the paper–pencil test. The mean value of the subjective preference for the paper–pencil test was higher than that for the PC tablet test, which indicates that the participants preferred to use paper and pencil when performing visuospatial tests.

As shown in Table 1, gender substantially affected the test scores of only the Corsi block task, dot memory task, and hidden patterns task (p
                        <0.05). The Corsi block task, dot memory task, and hidden patterns task test scores of male subjects were about 8%, 10%, and 17% higher than those of the female subjects, respectively (Table 2). The effect of the interaction between display medium and gender on all of the measured variables was not substantial.

The correlation analysis is shown in Table 3
                        . Among the six visuospatial short-term memory test measurements, six correlations were significantly positive at p
                        <0.001, four were significantly negative at p
                        <0.05 and five were not significant (p
                        >0.05). Among the three visuospatial ability test measures, all three correlations were positive and statistically significant (p
                        <0.05). In addition, the visual fatigue and subjective preference measurements demonstrated one significantly positive correlation at p
                        <0.05 and one significantly negative correlation at p
                        <0.001. However, the correlation magnitudes were not high, which is not a unique result. The findings of Miyake et al. [9] indicate that the correlation coefficients between the visuospatial short-term memory test performance and visuospatial ability test performance were within the range of 0.23–0.40.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The present results provide evidence that the display medium affects the performance of those taking both the visuospatial short-term memory test and the visuospatial ability test. Our findings were interpreted by analyzing the three main visuospatial short-term memory processes—image detection, image generation, and image maintenance [26].

In the image detection phase, the visual load of the PC tablet test was greater than that of the paper–pencil test, as indicated by the higher subjective eye fatigue rating and the greater CFF change, and caused the visual perceptive sensitivity of the participants to decrease further during the screen-display test.

The luminance contrast and the screen resolution of the PC tablet were unfavorable compared with that of the paper–pencil test, causing a decrease in visual acuity, visual identification performance, and visuospatial short-term memory performance.

The image maintenance quality of the PC tablet test was unfavorable because of the weak image impression from the screen on the visual memory of the participants. The weak impression attenuated the image recall ability involved in visuospatial short-term memory, and resulted in a decreased test performance.

Moreover, Wästlund et al. [27] reported that reading from a screen causes an increase in perceptual information processing and cognitive demands, and subsequently causes a decrease in reading comprehension, compared with the effect on reading comprehension produced by reading from paper. In this study, the results regarding the task of reading graphic materials when performing the computer-based tests indicate that the display of the PC tablet-based test affected visuospatial short-term memory processing and test performance. The screen image quality of PC tablets remains inadequate for presenting graphic materials for visuospatial tests and, thus, causes an increase in cognitive demand and a decrease in short-term memory performance.

Our results indicate that the completion time for taking the tablet-PC-based visuospatial test was longer than that for taking the paper–pencil test. This is consistent with the results of a previous study on verbal testing [22]. Furthermore, the contrast in visuospatial memory test performance between the PC tablet and paper–pencil tests was substantial. This result is inconsistent with the findings of Shieh et al. [28], which demonstrated that the memory performance during verbal testing between electronic and paper media was similar. This reveals that the effect of the display medium on visuospatial material testing was greater than on verbal material testing.

In this study, the visuospatial ability test scores were often substantially higher for the paper–pencil test than for the PC tablet. This result is consistent with the findings of Kang et al. [22], which indicate that the comprehension of verbal material is more profound when reading from paper than when reading from a screen. Although the display resolution and interface design of contemporary computers have improved considerably, several factors that have a negative effect on the performance of computer-based visuospatial ability tests remain. For example, one factor is related to the nature of the visual input. A PC display medium differs from paper in many ways. These differences show that the PC display medium often produced visual and musculoskeletal problems including eyestrain, headache, blurred vision, dry eyes, and neck/back pain [29,30]. One of the differences between the PC display medium and paper is refresh rate. The PC display medium constantly refreshes at a certain rate, whereas paper is steady. On one hand, studies have shown that the refresh rates of the PC display medium may influence ocular symptoms [29,31]. On the other hand, Wilkens et al. [32] showed that the modulation rate of fluorescent lighting caused significant headaches and eyestrain in the subjects. Therefore, it is worth studying the interaction effect of the flicker frequency of the fluorescent lighting and the refresh rate of the PC display medium on visual and task performance. Another factor is the distinct manipulation requirements of the PC tablet test and the paper–pencil test. During the PC tablet test, the participant was required to click an icon to go to the next page, whereas when taking the paper–pencil test, the participant only had to turn the page to continue. The additional mental requirement for manipulating the PC tablet caused an information processing delay and a decrease in visuospatial ability.

Regarding text material reading, the participant preferred to read from paper than from a screen [5,28]. Moreover, the study results of Woody et al. [4] indicate that students prefer to read charts in print books than in E-books. This finding also reveals that participants prefer to read the material in graphical form from paper than from the PC tablet when taking the visuospatial test. This is supported by the favorable test performance, less subjective eye fatigue, and higher subjective preference demonstrated in this study. In order to prevent experimental errors caused by other factors such as viewing angle or lighting condition [16,33], the experimental environment of the paper–pencil test and PC tablet test was standardized. However, Dunn et al. [34] concluded that individual preferences and the ability to customize lighting conditions would affect learning performance. Thus, it is worth conducting a follow-up study that compares each subject’s performance under standardized conditions versus performance under settings (room lighting, screen brightness, etc.,) that can be configured.

The performances of males on the six visuospatial tests were either better or similar to those of the female participants in the study, which suggests that male participants may process visuospatial information more quickly than do female participants. Loring-Meier and Halpern [6] and Lawton and Hatcher [35] similarly found that males were faster than females on tasks engaging visuospatial working memory. Previous studies also show that males have an advantage on visuospatial tasks [10,11,36] and females have an advantage with language material and verbal tasks [22,37,38]. The gender differences in cognitive ability might result from brain development and environmental stimuli [12,39]. For male infants, the right hemisphere produces more mature auditory-evoked responses than the left hemisphere [40] and the right hemisphere has been shown to be more related to spatial processing tasks [41]. In preschool or at home, boys spend more time than girls playing in spatial activities, such as blocks, construction, and sand play [42]. Consequently, earlier right hemisphere development and greater spatial stimuli would cause greater spatial skill in boys than in girls.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The current findings indicate that the display medium is the dominant factor affecting visuospatial ability, visuospatial short-term memory, levels of visual fatigue, and subjective preference. The visuospatial performance was substantially decreased under the PC tablet condition compared with that under the pencil–paper condition. In addition, visual fatigue was greater when participants used the PC tablet than when they used a pencil and paper. In summary, the finding of this study suggests that the visuospatial ability of test takers would be underestimated when a tester uses a PC tablet to conduct a test, compared with the visuospatial ability of those taking a paper–pencil test.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

We thank the National Science Council of Taiwan under Grant NSC 97-2221-E-017-008 and NSC 95-2221-E-017-005 for funding this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

