@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Utilization of a composite hole transporting layer and novel homogeneous double emitting layers for performance improvement and low efficiency roll-off in organic light-emitting diodes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Composite hole transporting layer with novel homogenous double emitting layers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Balance of carrier distribution as well as the expansion of exciton formation zone.


                        
                        
                           
                           Blue OLEDs based on the structure of c-HTL and DELs exhibit improved performances.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Composite hole transporting layer

Homogeneous

Double emitting layers

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Blue organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs) combing a composite hole transporting layer (c-HTL) and novel homogeneous double emitting layers (DELs) have been fabricated. The c-HTL plays a significant role of rectification in balancing the carriers’ injection concentration which matches well with the DELs structure. The DELs is consisted of two homogeneous hosts, such as 2-methyl-9,10-di(2-naphthyl) anthracene (MADN) and 9,10-di(2-naphthyl) anthracene (ADN). The optimal device presents the maximal current efficiency of 15.9cd/A at 4.9mA/cm2 and the minor efficiency roll-off of 13.4% under the driving voltage varying from 5V to 10V, respectively. Meanwhile, the device’s maximal current efficiency and the corresponding efficiency roll-off have been obviously improved by 55.9% and 63.9% compared with those of the conventional device. These results indicate that the homogeneous DELs not only greatly facilitate carriers’ injection into the emitting layer (EML), but also evenly modulate carriers’ distribution due to natural energy barrier of the interface. The transient photoluminescence decay of double hosts further illustrates that the DELs structure can increase the recombination ratio of electron–hole pairs and improve the exciton’s utilization. Additionally, the optimal device’ current density is reduced by 44.1% under the same luminance of 25,780cd/m2 compared with that of the conventional device.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs) have attracted considerable attention due to their unsurpassable advantages in display and illumination [1–3]. Therefore, tremendous efforts have been made to improve the device performances. Some important issues needed to be resolved are the high current efficiency and good device stability achieved at various driving voltage [4]. To fulfill this goal, the balanced carriers’ concentration and effective excitons’ radiation in emitting layer (EML) are necessary. However, increasing the number of electrons is comparatively difficult as a result of the limitation of materials. In comparison, the strategy on depressing the amount of holes is easier although it may give rise to the higher operation voltage. In order to control the amount of holes without compromising much of its operation voltage, the structure of a composite hole transporting layer (c-HTL) is employed. On the other hand, a narrow recombination zone of the devices with single emission layer may results in the limitation of electroluminescence (EL) performances due to the excessive holes and accumulated space charges which could quench the radiation of excitons [5]. Some works recently have reported that double emission layers (DELs) may broaden the carriers’ recombination zone and enhance the excitons’ utilization [6–8]. However, the common DELs structure based on the same host could not evenly modulate the carriers’ distribution in the EMLs, which would results in an obvious efficiency roll-off under the high current density [9,10]. In order to improve the device’s EL performance, the novel homogeneous DELs structure is also introduced.

In this work, we have demonstrated an improved efficiency with minor roll-off for blue fluorescent OLEDs, which are consisted of the c-HTL and homogeneous DELs. The homogeneous DELs structure cannot only match well with the rectification characteristic of the c-HTL, but also evenly modulate carriers’ distribution and further to confine excitons at the interface effectively.

The devices’ structures are shown in Fig. 1
                     . In these devices, NPB doped with MADN is used as c-HTL, MADN doped with DSA-ph is used as emitting layer, and Bphen is used as ETL. All devices are fabricated on the glass substrates coated with indium tin oxide (ITO) with a sheet resistance of about 20Ω/sq. The cleaning of ITO glass is subsequently performed with detergent, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol in an ultra-sonic bath for 15min each to remove the organic contaminants. All the organic layers, Cs2CO3, and Al are deposited onto the ITO by using a thermal evaporation of BOC Edwards Auto-500 thermal evaporation coating system in an M. Braun 20G glove box at a pressure of about 7×10−5
                     Pa. The deposition rates and thicknesses of the various layers are monitored using a quartz crystal oscillator. The evaporation rate is 0.05nm/s for the organic layers, and the evaporation rate for the doped layer is determined by its weight doping ratio. Cs2CO3 and Al are evaporated onto the organic layer as the cathode with the rates of 0.01nm/s and 0.3nm/s, respectively. The active area of the emitting device is 3mm×3mm. The EL characteristics of the devices are measured by a Keithley model 2400 programmable voltage–current source and PR-650 spectra scan spectrometer. The transient photoluminescence spectra of organic materials are measured by Jobin Yvon FL3-212-TCSPC fluorescence spectrophotometer. All the measurements are carried out in ambient atmosphere at room temperature (except for the lifetime tests).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                     Fig. 2
                      depicts the EL performances for devices with various thickness of the c-HTL. The corresponding L–J–V characteristics are shown in Fig. 2(a), and the inset shows the structures of the devices. It is indicated that the current densities of the devices with c-HTL are gradually reduced with increasing the c-HTL’s thickness, and the lower current density leads to the corresponding lower luminance. However, the devices with c-HTL exhibit the higher current efficiency. It should be noted that, for device A, the carriers’ concentration in EML is unbalanced, which may bring on the lower recombination rate since some excessive carriers have not been utilized completely.

It is expected that balanced carriers are achieved by employing the structure of c-HTL which may adjust the mobility of holes to a certain extent, further to improve the device performances. As shown in Fig. 2(b), the maximal current efficiencies are 10.2cd/A, 11.7cd/A, 13.2cd/A and 12.7cd/A for devices A, B, C and D, respectively. The highest current efficiency for device C discloses that the optimal thickness of c-HTL is 20nm, which can efficiently assure the balance between holes and electrons in EML. In addition, the 20nm of NPB between c-HTL and EML is used to impede electrons’ leakage which may hop through the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of MADN into c-HTL [11]. The more direct evidence of modifying hole mobility by c-HTL can be observed from the J–V characteristics of hole-only devices shown in Fig. 3
                     , the inset depicts the structure of the hole-only device.

From Fig. 3, it can be found that the voltage required at a given current density of device containing c-HTL is higher than that of the pure NPB device, which means that hole transporting property can be modified. The modification mechanism should be rationalized by the dissipation of energy from the detrapping mechanism of holes on the highest occupied molecular orbits (HOMOs) of c-HTL [12]. The energy level diagram of devices is shown in Fig. 4
                     . The J–V curves of hole-only devices show a similar ascent trend under the low driving voltage (<3V) due to the holes may be transported mainly on the lower HOMOs of NPB (Δ
                     =0.2eV) compare with that of MADN in this c-HTL system. However, a relatively obvious rectifying characteristic is presented especially in devices III and IV with the bias increasing from 3V to 6V. Under the high driving voltage (>5V), the current densities of devices III and IV increase sharply compared with those of devices I and II, because the HOMOs of MADN would accommodate more holes as the increasing of bias. Moreover, the holes on the HOMO of MADN could be injected into the HTL easily since the direct energy barrier of 0.2eV between HOMOs of MADN and NPB. When the thickness of c-HTL is optimized to 20nm, the transporting ability of holes could be adjusted for matching the injection ability of electrons under the various driving voltage.

To further improve the EL performances for the blue OLEDs based on the c-HTL structure, the homogeneous DELs has been introduced by doping DSA-ph into bipolar hosts at various doping ratios to balance the carriers’ concentration and broad excitons’ formation zone. The corresponding EML configurations of the devices are demonstrated as follows:
                        
                           Device E: MADN:DSA-ph(3wt%, 15nm)/ADN:DSA-ph(3wt%, 15nm);

Device F: MADN:DSA-ph(3wt%, 15nm)/ADN:DSA-ph(6wt%, 15nm);

Device G: MADN:DSA-ph(3wt%, 15nm)/ADN:DSA-ph(9wt%, 15nm).

The current density and luminance for the devices with different EML configurations are shown apparently in Fig. 5
                     (a). It is obvious that the luminance of the three devices are enhanced compared to that of the single EML device C as a result of the effective excitons’ utilization. It is reported that the hole and electron mobility of ADN are in range of (1–5)×10−7
                     cm2
                     V−1
                     s−1 under operation fields in the range of 0.5–1MVcm−1, and the electron mobility of ADN is slightly higher than its hole mobility [13]. Besides, there is a small distinction of 0.1eV between the LUMOs of MADN and ADN, which indicates that ADN is prone to favor electron’s transporting. In addition, MADN is the derivative of ADN by placing a relatively small methyl-group at C-2 position of the anthracene moiety [14]. Consequently, the two hosts of EMLs (MADN/ADN) exhibit the homogeneous bipolar transporting property with interface barrier effect, which will be beneficial to the carriers’ injection and transporting. Furthermore the carriers’ distribution in two EMLs can be effectively balanced to improve the recombination rate for electron–hole pairs, which results in the enhancement of devices’ efficiency as indicated in Fig. 5(b). By keeping the doping concentration of 3wt% DSA-ph in MADN unchanged, the maximal current efficiency of Devices E-G are about 13.8cd/A, 15.9cd/A and 10.4cd/A, respectively. The maximal efficiency of the optimal device F is 1.2 times higher than that of the device C, which is mainly attributed to the homogeneous DEL model. As we know that the homogeneous DEL can utilize the excitons in double emissive layers simultaneously to generate the radiative energy for visible light. Moreover, the EL performance can be affected by the doping concentration of DSA-ph in ADN. The luminance of device E is lower than that of the devices F and G under the same bias. The utilizing ratio of excitons will be inadequate if the doping concentration of DSA-ph is relatively low (3wt%) because of the incomplete Förster energy transfer from the host to dopant. Fig. 6
                      also reveals that the device F with the doping concentration (6wt%) shows the higher EL intensity compared to that of the other devices. Meanwhile, the high doping ratio (9wt%) will result in the reducing of the current efficiency and a red-shift in the emission spectra as a result of an aggregate state, which can be certified by CIE coordinates variation shown in Table 1
                      
                     [15]. It is clearly seen that the optimal doping concentration of DSA-ph in ADN is 6wt% for device F. Its current efficiency is enhanced by 75% at 4.9mA/cm2, while its current density is reduced by 44.1% under the same luminance of 25,780cd/m2 compared to those of the conventional device A.

In order to illustrate the notable characteristics of homogeneous MADN/ADN structure, the photoluminescence (PL) transient decay in different cases of thin films are performed, which is shown in Fig. 7
                     .

It can be found that the fluorescent lifetime of MADN (τ
                     =5.41ns) is shorter than that of ADN (τ
                     =5.82ns) for film 1 and 2. This can be illustrated by the larger overlap between PL of MADN and absorption spectrum of DSA-ph than that of ADN [16]. The HOMO of ADN is higher than that of MADN, while their LUMOs’ distinction is 0.1eV. Consequently, holes and electrons are more easily delivered on the HOMO and LUMO of DSA-ph from MADN host rather than ADN host, which indicate that the energy transfer from MADN to DSA-ph is more effective. For film 3, part of the holes excited by the optical pumping on the HOMO of ADN are directly trapped by DSA-ph, and others will hop through a direct offset of HOMO levels from ADN to MADN. This means that a new relaxation channel for excitons on ADN is added, which can further shorten the fluorescent lifetime of ADN. Also from Fig. 7, the fluorescent lifetime of the homogeneous hosts (τ
                     =5.03ns) is about 0.38ns shorter than that of MADN. This indicates that the structure of homogeneous MADN/ADN can greatly improve the exciton’s utilization. In other words, a relative large offset of energy barrier is formed at the homogeneous MADN/ADN interface under the condition of electrical injection, which plays a significant role of adjusting the carriers’ distribution like a p–n junction. Part of holes on the HOMO of MADN are delivered to HOMO of guest DSA-ph, others accumulated at this interface are trapped (across) by the HOMO of DSA-ph in ADN. Meanwhile, the carriers’ distribution in double EMLs could be evenly modulated, and the excitons could be effectively confined at the interface between MADN and ADN. Eventually, the introducing of homogeneous bipolar DELs in OLEDs cannot only enhance the carriers’ recombination ratio but also improve the exciton’s utilization. Moreover, based on the characteristics of the hole-only devices, homogeneous DELs structure matches well with the rectification effect of c-HTL, which results in the overall balance of carriers’ injection in EMLs both at low and high current densities. Accordingly, the optimal device F presents a highest current efficiency of 15.9cd/A (at 4.9mA/cm2) with minor roll-off (13.4%) at a various bias (5–10V).

Moreover, we also perform the degradation time tests for three kinds of OLEDs. Fig. 8
                      depicts the accelerated lifetime decay curves for device A (control device), device C (single EML with c-HTL) and device F (optimal device). The half-lifetime under the brightness of 5000cd/m2 is about 3.7, 10.5 and 12.2h for device A, C and F, respectively. The half-lifetime under the brightness of 5000cd/m2 is about 3.7, 10.5 and 12.2h for device A, C and F, respectively. It can be found that the half-lifetime of device C and F are about 2.8 and 3.3 times longer than that of the device A, respectively. We attribute the obvious improvement in devices’ reliability to the c-HTL and homogeneous DELs structure. The c-HTL structure is beneficial to the balance of carrier injection into the EMLs. The homogeneous DELs structure matches well with the rectification effect of c-HTL, and the synergistic emitting effect of the double-emitting-layer effectively improve the device’s efficiency. This illustrates that the optimum device F can exhibit the certain luminance under a relatively lower driving voltage compared to that of the device A, which prolongs the device’s lifetime.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In summary, an approach of improving EL performances of blue fluorescent OLEDs is actualized by combing the advantage of c-HTL and homogeneous bipolar DELs in one device. The c-HTL plays a significant role of rectification in balancing the carriers’ injection concentration which matches well with the DELs structure. The novel homogeneous DELs cannot only modulate carriers’ distribution in EMLs evenly, but also confine excitons at the interface effectively and increase the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs, which are beneficial to the performance improvement of OLEDs. For the optimal device F, the maximal current efficiency and efficiency roll-off are improved by 55.9% and 63.9% compared with those of conventional device. Simultaneously, the efficiency roll-off of device F is reduced by 62.4% compared to that of device C at the driving voltage of 5–10V, and its lifetime is accordingly enhanced by 3.3 times longer than that of the control device.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 60906022), the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin, China (Grant No. 10JCYBJC01100), the Scientific Developing Foundation of Tianjin Education Commission, China (Grant No. 2011ZD02), the Key Science and Technology Support Program of Tianjin, China (Grant No. 14ZCZDGX00006), and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (863 Program No. 2013AA014201) for the support to the work.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

