@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Is the 3× reading rule appropriate for computer users?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Computer Vision Syndrome describes eye and vision problems associated with computer use.


                        
                        
                           
                           Up to 40% of individuals report tired eyes at least half the time during computer use.


                        
                        
                           
                           For optimum comfort, the text size should be at least twice the visual acuity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Higher values of acuity reserve may be necessary for older subjects.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Computer Vision Syndrome

Digital eye strain

Reading

Viewing distance

Visual acuity

Visual threshold

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  When reading from an electronic screen, many individuals report symptoms such as tired eyes or eye strain. To minimize these symptoms, a 3× acuity reserve has been suggested, i.e., the minimum print size should be at least 3 times larger than the size of the letters at the reader’s acuity limit. This study evaluated whether the 3× rule is appropriate, or if an alternative relationship between visual acuity and letter size would be preferable. The experiment was performed on 25 visually-normal subjects who viewed a series of random words on a computer monitor. The threshold distance (T) at which the text could be resolved was determined. Both reading speed and accuracy were measured during a 10min task performed at T and at 0.5T, 0.33T and 0.25T. In a second study, the procedure was repeated at 0.5T and 0.33T for 1h. Immediately following the 1h trial, subjects completed a questionnaire concerning symptoms experienced during the task. The mean T for the 10min trial was 131.4cm. While the mean reading speeds for the 0.5T, 0.33T and 0.25T conditions were significantly different from the 1T condition, they were not significantly different from each other. For the 1h trial, reading speed at 1T was significantly different from both the 0.5T and 0.33T conditions, but no significant difference was observed between the 0.5T and 0.33T trials. A significant increase in the total post-task symptoms was found after reading at the threshold distance (T), compared with 0.5T and 0.25T, but no significant difference in symptom score was found between the 0.5T and 0.25T conditions. Accordingly, based on a change in viewing distance (and angular print size) in young, visually-normal subjects, a 2× rule may be appropriate, i.e., for sustained comfortable reading, the text size should be at least twice the individual’s visual acuity. However, higher values may be necessary for older subjects, or individuals with visual abnormalities.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The American Optometric Association defines Computer Vision Syndrome (CVS) as the combination of eye and vision problems associated with the use of computers [1]. This condition has also been referred to as digital eye strain [2]. In modern society, electronic devices, ranging from desktop machines to handheld instruments are used for a broad range of activities. As portable technology is developing, users are now able to view their devices at any location.

Enhanced access to electronic devices has significantly increased the amount of time digital displays are viewed today. For example, a recent investigation of over 2000 American children between 8 and 18years of age reported that in an average day they spend approximately 7.5h using entertainment media, comprising 4.5h watching TV, 1.5h on a computer and over an hour playing video games [3]. Indeed, adults may spend even more time viewing electronic screens, with an average duration around 9.5h per day [4].

As the time spent viewing these screens rises, the prevalence of visual symptoms increases [5]. Rossignol et al. [6] reported that the prevalence of visual symptoms was significantly higher in individuals who spend more than four hours per day working on video display terminals. Common symptoms include eyestrain, headaches, ocular discomfort, dry eye, double vision (diplopia), and blurred vision at near [7–13]. Additionally, it has been noted that visually fatiguing work may result in lowered productivity, increased error rate and reduced job satisfaction [12].

It is difficult to estimate accurately the prevalence of ocular and visual symptoms associated with viewing electronic screens as both working conditions and the methods used to quantify symptoms vary widely. Nevertheless, Thomson suggested that between 64% and 90% of computer users experience visual symptoms which may include eyestrain, headaches, ocular discomfort, dry eye, diplopia and blurred vision either at near or when looking into the distance after prolonged computer use [7]. It should be noted that the resolution of modern computer displays is significantly better than was found at the time of Thomson’s study in the 1990s. Therefore, the prevalence of symptoms today might be expected to be lower and indeed, a recent investigation of office workers in New York City noted that 40% of subjects reported tired eyes “at least half the time”, while 32% and 31% reported dry eye and eye discomfort, respectively, with this same frequency [8].

In order to minimize visual symptoms during prolonged computer use, it has been suggested that a 3× visual acuity reserve (VAR) should be adopted for comfortable reading, i.e., the print size of the displayed text should be three times larger than the individual’s visual acuity (or the smallest letter that can be resolved) [14]. This 3× rule appears to originate from a low-vision treatment protocol whereby a magnifier is prescribed to enlarge the text to three times the size of the smallest letters that could be resolved for sustained viewing [15]. Interestingly, Grundy [16] stated that no task can be performed efficiently when the task detail is close to the resolving limit of the eye. He suggested that the visual acuity required to carry out a task should be at least 2× the minimum value. However, no experimental data was provided to support his claim.

In a comprehensive review of the effect of varying print size on reading, Legge and Bigelow [17] noted that the legibility of print depends on the physical characteristics of the text as well as the task demands, viewing conditions and vision status of the reader. In an earlier study of both normal and low vision patients, Legge et al. [18] examined the magnification needed to produce maximum reading speed. Reading rates were assessed for different size text scanned across the screen of a TV monitor. The screen was masked so that a single line of text was visible during each trial. The findings for normal subjects showed a sharp rise in reading rate to a peak that occurred when the print size was between 6 and 18 times greater than threshold acuity. However, reading individual lines of text scanned across a screen is very different from scanning the eyes across stationary text. Accordingly, these results may not be applicable to more conventional reading techniques. Additionally, the resolution of modern computer displays is significantly better than was found in television sets produced in the 1980s.

In a recent paper, Ko et al. [19] required subjects to perform near vision tasks at differing levels of VAR. VAR is the ratio of the size of the font to the size where characters can just be resolved accurately, i.e., the visual acuity threshold [20]. Both visual search and matching tasks were used, and task performance was assessed in terms of productivity (correct responses per minute) and accuracy, as well as a subjective rating of task difficulty. Three levels of VAR were tested, namely 3.7, 4.3 and 6.1, and the level of VAR adjusted by varying both the letter size and the viewing distance. No significant difference was observed between 3.7 and 4.3 VAR for either task productivity or accuracy, although significant improvements were found in these parameters for the 6.1 VAR condition. A linear improvement in perceived task difficulty was noted with increasing VAR. However, the use of large values of VAR (greater than 3) may not be practical with contemporary portable digital devices. For example, Bababekova et al. [21] noted that the mean font size when viewing a webpage on a smartphone subtended 12.6min of arc. To provide a VAR of either 4 or 6 would require the ability to resolve targets that subtend 3.15 and 2.1min of arc, respectively. These correspond to visual acuity values of 6/3.8
                        1
                        Visual acuity is conventionally recorded as a fraction (called the Snellen fraction), where the numerator refers to the standard test distance (typically 6m or 20feet) and the demominator denotes the distance at which the letter subtends 5min of arc.
                     
                     
                        1
                      (20/12.7) and 6/2.5 (20/8.3), respectively, which would be beyond the visual capability of most individuals.

Additionally, the term critical print size (CPS) has been used to describe the smallest print size below which reading speed begins to decline sharply. In a review of this concept, Legge and Bigelow noted that CPS typically ranges between 9 and 18min of arc, depending on stimulus factors such as font and the technique used to estimate CPS [17]. These authors also pointed out the difference between CPS and conventional acuity measurements. CPS is an estimate of the smallest character size for which reading is possible at maximum speed, whereas time is generally not restrained during visual acuity measurements. CPS has been used to evaluate reading performance in both normal and abnormal individuals [22–24].

The aim of the present study was to evaluate the 3× reading rule in normal subjects, and to examine the decline in performance when smaller VAR values are used for sustained reading from an electronic monitor. In this investigation, the angular subtense of the letters was varied by changing the viewing distance.

@&#METHODS@&#

Two experiments were conducted, both of which followed the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects after an explanation of the nature and possible consequences of the study. The protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the SUNY State College of Optometry.

This was carried out on 25 visually-normal subjects (9 male, 16 female) having a mean age of 25.3years (range 21–30years). All had habitual visual acuity of at least 6/7.5 (20/25) in each eye. None had strabismus or manifest ocular disease. Subjects viewed text on a laptop computer screen (Dell 14″ Inspiron 14Z laptop computer – Dell Corp., Round Rock, TX). The task involved reading paragraphs of unrelated words produced by copying the first and last word of each line from two fiction novels. This task has been used in previously published studies from our laboratory [25,26] and shown to be cognitively demanding. The computer text was presented using Microsoft Word (edition 10.2627.2625) software (Microsoft Inc., Redmond, WA). The text was black-on-white Times New Roman, size 12 point font with a contrast of approximately 80% (determined using a Spectra Pritchard photometer: model 1980A: Photo Research, Burbank, CA). Ambient illumination in the laboratory was provided by overhead fluorescent tubes positioned at right angles to the computer monitor to minimize glare resulting from screen reflections. All subjects wore their habitual distance refractive correction (either glasses or contact lenses) during the study. The threshold distance (T) at which they could just resolve the words on the screen was determined by first positioning the subject at a distance where they were unable to read most of the words on a line correctly, and then have them move forward a few centimeters until they were just able to read all of the words correctly (but not fluently).

The distance from the outer canthus of the subject’s right eye to the screen was measured using a rigid measuring tape. The computer was viewed in slight downgaze, although the precise angle of gaze varied with the height of the patient. Subjects were instructed to put maximum effort into reading the text as fast as possible, while making the fewest number of mistakes. Subjects were aware that their reading speed and the number of errors made were monitored during the experimental session. At the determined threshold distance (T), i.e., the maximum distance at which the subject reported they could just read the text, they read the words on the screen for a continuous 10min period. While is possible that the subjects could have leant forward slightly to improve resolution during the task, it is unlikely that this would have altered their viewing distance by more than a few centimeters. Subjects were audio recorded, and the experimenter subsequently reviewed the recording to determine both reading speed and the number of errors made during the reading task. After the first session, there was a 10min break in which the subjects remained in the lab but either had their eyes closed or looked into the distance to minimize their accommodative response.

Once T had been determined, testing was repeated for a further 3 distances, corresponding to 0.5T, 0.33T and 0.25T. These would increase the angular subtense of the target at the eye by 2×, 3× or 4×, respectively (corresponding to a VAR of 2.0, 3.0 or 4.0). Sufficient text was provided for minimal repetition across trials to avoid a learning effect. The order of testing for the three remaining sessions was randomized. Subjects were placed at the appropriate distance, and the same reading protocol described earlier was performed.

The purpose of experiment 2 was to determine the effect of a longer reading time, namely 60min. 10 (2 male, 8 female) subjects (mean age=24.1years; range=22 to 27years of age), none of whom participated in the first experiment, read at distances of T, 0.5T, and 0.33T for a continuous one hour period. Both the 0.25T trial and counting reading errors were eliminated based on the results of the first experiment (i.e., the observation of minimal differences between the findings of the 0.33T and 0.25T trials) and to shorten the experimental time. Due to the duration of the reading task, the one hour reading sessions were performed on three different days. Immediately after each one hour trial, subjects completed a written questionnaire developed by Hayes et al. [27], comprising 10 questions concerning the level of ocular discomfort experienced during the computer task. Scores were reported on a scale from 0 (none) to 10 (very severe), with a score of 5 representing a moderate response. These questions are listed in Table 1
                        .

@&#RESULTS@&#

The mean and ranges of viewing distance, angular subtense of a lowercase letter without ascenders or descenders, reading speed and the number of errors made are shown in Table 2
                        , while the mean reading speed and the number of errors made are also shown in Figs. 1 and 2
                        
                        , respectively. Analysis of variance indicated that the difference between the reading speed for the four distances was significant (F
                        =55.3; df=3.99; p
                        <0.0001) while Tukey post-hoc tests showed that the reading speed at T was significantly different from the 0.5T, 0.33T, and 0.25T conditions. However, there was no significant difference in reading speed between the 0.5T, 0.33T, and 0.25T trials. With regard to the number of reading errors, analysis of variance indicated that the number of errors changed significantly with viewing distance (F
                        =49.4; df=3.99; p
                        <0.0001). Tukey post-hoc tests showed that the number of errors at T was significantly different from the 0.5T, 0.33T, and 0.25T conditions. However, there was no significant difference in errors for the 0.5T, 0.33T, and 0.25T trials.

The mean reading distance and speed for the 1h trial is shown in Table 3
                        , while the mean reading speed as a function of distance is shown in Fig. 3
                        . Analysis of variance indicated that the difference between the reading speed for each distance was significant (F
                        =30.37, df=2.99, p
                        <0.0001). Tukey post-hoc tests showed the T condition was significantly different from the 0.5T and 0.33T conditions, while there was no significant difference between the 0.5T and 0.33T trials.

Mean values for each of the 10 symptoms questioned, as well as the total symptom score for each distance is shown in Table 1. Analysis of variance indicated that the difference in total symptom score as a function of viewing distance was significant (F
                        =16.32, df=2.99, p
                        <0.0001). However, no significant difference was observed between the symptom findings for the 0.5T and 0.33T conditions (t
                        =1.73; df=9; p
                        =0.12).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The results of the present study showed no significant difference between the findings for the 2× and 3× conditions. This indicates that for visually-normal subjects, a 2× rule is appropriate, i.e., for sustained comfortable reading the text size should be at least twice the individual’s visual acuity. Therefore, a patient with near visual acuity of 6/6 at a distance of 40cm will be comfortable reading letters that subtend at least 10min of arc (i.e. larger than 6/12 or 20/40) at this viewing distance for a sustained period of time. This was shown to be the case for both the 10min and 1h reading tasks. This result is consistent with the observations of both Grundy [16] and Legge and Bigelow [17] who indicated that the CPS is at least twice visual acuity for normally sighted subjects. However, it differs from other investigations who have suggested that a ratio of 3 or more is appropriate. For example, Legge et al. [18] showed an increase in reading rate up to between 6 and 18 times threshold. It has been noted that this particular study used experimental testing conditions (viewing individual lines of text scanned across a television monitor) that were very different from the more typical viewing situation when viewing electronic screens under naturalistic conditions. Although Bowers and Reid [20] reported that reading speed increased exponentially as a function of acuity reserve, and reached a plateau around 4:1; this finding was obtained from laser printed material, which may have produced a different result from the laptop computer used here.

In addition, Ko et al. [19] found no significant difference in either task productivity or accuracy between the 3.7x and 4.3× conditions, although significant improvements were found in these parameters for the 6.1x trial. However, as noted previously, such large VARs may be impractical given the smaller screens found in modern portable digital devices. Bababekova et al. [21] reported a range of visual acuity demands when viewing a webpage on a smartphone from 6/5.9 to 6/28.5 (with a mean of 6/15.1). To achieve a VAR greater than 3.0, this mean value would require visual acuity of 6/5.0 or better. As noted earlier, this level of visual resolution may be unachievable for many subjects. Furthermore, few printed near visual acuity charts include optotypes smaller than 6/6. Accordingly, current clinical methods for assessing near visual acuity may no longer be adequate for many individual’s reading requirements.

In the present investigation, the angular subtense of the target at the eye was altered by changing the viewing distance. The underlying assumption is that angular subtense is the critical variable and that equivalent results will be achieved if this parameter is varied either by changing the viewing distance or the letter size. However, this may not be the case. For example, variations in viewing distance will also alter the stimulus at which the eye needs to focus (accommodation) and fixate (vergence). Here, the closest distance found for the 0.25T condition was 28cm. For a fully corrected subject, this would represent a stimulus to accommodation and vergence of approximately 3.6 diopters and meter angles, respectively. Given the age range of the subjects tested in this investigation (21–30years of age), this was unlikely to be a problem. However, for older individuals, or those with uncorrected refractive error (particularly uncorrected hyperopia or astigmatism), then the ability to resolve targets at closer distances could be impaired.

Additionally, if one considers that a letter presented on an electronic display is composed of a given number of pixels, then if the actual size of the letter is doubled, the number of pixels making up the letter will also double. But if the viewing distance is halved while maintaining the same letter size, then the pixel count will remain constant. Accordingly, the limit of resolution for the two conditions may differ. This is worthy of further consideration.

It is also possible that the distance at which the subject was determined to be “just able to read the task” was actually shorter than the true threshold distance. Determination of the threshold distance will depend on a number of variables, including the effort made by the subject to read the words. Of course, this would hold true for any determination of subjective visual resolution. Nevertheless, if the measured distance was indeed shorter than the actual threshold distance, then the letters would have subtended a larger angle at the eye. Therefore, it might be most accurate to say that for visually-normal subjects, a minimum of 2× is required, i.e., for sustained comfortable reading the text size should be at least twice the individual’s visual acuity.

This study examined the relationship between letter size and reading performance. However, other factors besides letter size may also play a role in determining reading speed. For example, Dyson and Haselgrove [28] noted that the speed of reading from an electronic screen varied with scrolling patterns and line length. They also observed a trade-off between reading speed and accuracy, so that comprehension was better when reading at a normal reading speed. A limiting factor when reading aloud might be the ability of the individual to verbalize the text. If this was the case, then larger text sizes would not produce an increase in measured reading speed. However, examination of the results presented in Tables 2 and 3 suggest that this was unlikely to be the case in the present investigation. For experiments 1 and 2, the mean reading speed for the shortest distance tested was 131 and 119words/min, respectively. However, the measured individual reading speeds were as high as 210words/min. While reading speed is a function of the testing protocol, values as high as 4.5words/s (equivalent to 270words/min) have been reported previously [29].

Darroch et al. [30] examined the effect of varying text size while proof reading material on a handheld computer and noted minimal change in either reading time or accuracy once a critical font size was reached. Interestingly, they also found that the preferred font size was slightly larger for older subjects (61–78years of age) compared with a group of 18–29year old individuals. Given that the present investigation only included subjects between 21 and 30years of age, slightly different findings might be obtained on an older age group who may require print larger than twice their threshold visual acuity. However, Ko et al. [19] reported no significant difference in reading performance in groups of younger (18–35years of age) and older (55–65years of age) subjects.

In the present investigation, care was taken to minimize reflections from the computer screen, which can reduce the visibility of the display and produce discomfort [31]. Ko et al. [19] observed that reflective glare (produced by an additional light source positioned above and behind the subject’s head) produced a significant change in the viewing distance. Subjects reduced their viewing distance (mean change from 50.5cm to 47.5cm) when glare was present. Interestingly though, the presence of reflective glare did not produce any significant change in task productivity. The authors suggested that the decreased viewing distance in the presence of glare could either have been to increase the angular subtense of the target or to move the reflections away from the reading area. Additionally, the effects of reflective glare were similar in both young (18–35years) and older (55–65years) age groups.

It is perhaps not surprising that relatively high total symptom scores were observed following the 1h task (see Table 1). Requiring subjects to read unrelated words aloud for a continuous 1h period is likely to be highly demanding. While it is unlikely that subjects would perform such a challenging task under more naturalistic conditions, it should also be noted that 1h is not a long period of screen viewing. For example, a recent survey of Australian adults found that participants reported an average of 9.5h per day viewing digital screens [4]. Thus, the task adopted here was high in terms of visual demand, but relatively short in duration.

In summary, the results of the present investigation demonstrated that to read comfortably and accurately from a computer screen, visually-normal individuals require text that is at least twice their visual acuity. This is a lower ratio than has been widely reported previously (3× rule) for computer users [14]. Nevertheless, given that the font size on handheld devices may be as small as 6/6, this still requires threshold acuity levels of 6/3. Many (if not most) individuals will be unable to achieve these demanding visual requirements, and so the designers of smartphones and other small electronic digital screens should ensure that the information presented on these devices is of an adequate size to allow comfortable viewing for a sustained period of time. We recommend that the stimuli should be at least twice the minimum resolvable type.

None of the authors have a financial interest in any of the products described in this manuscript.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

