@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of 3D displays: A comparison between shuttered and polarized displays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined the effects of 3D displays (shuttered and polarized displays) on the viewers.


                        
                        
                           
                           People experience brightness or fidelity differently depending on the image conditions (2D or 3D).


                        
                        
                           
                           Readability on a shuttered display is greater than a polarized display.


                        
                        
                           
                           Brightness positively correlated with the effects on the viewers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Flickering negatively correlated with the effects on the viewers.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

3D displays

Shuttered displays

Polarized displays

Stereoscopic images

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The current study investigates the effects of 3D displays (shuttered display vs. polarized display). People experienced superior fidelity and brightness when they watched 2D still images on a shuttered display, rather than on a polarized display. Conversely, people experienced greater brightness when they watched 3D still images on a polarized display, rather than on a shuttered display. Second, people were able to read a smaller font or characters on a shuttered display than on a polarized display. Third, people noticed flickering on a shuttered display when they watched 3D images. Fourth, people experienced greater brightness when they watched 3D moving images on a shuttered display, rather than on a shuttered display. The perceived brightness of the screen positively correlated with enjoyment, content satisfaction, and 3DTV satisfaction when the viewers watched a 3D movie. The flickering, on the other hand, has a negative correlation with enjoyment and 3DTV satisfaction.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In Human–Television interaction (HTI), most studies of displays are about the effect of the resolution, size, or viewing distance on the viewer. In general, more advanced technologies affect the viewer more positively or strongly than incumbent technologies do [1]. Many HTI studies on 3D displays show consistent results in which viewers of 3D images experienced greater presence when they watched a 3D display than when they watched a 2D display [2–4]. Therefore, discussion about 3D television can transition from the effects of 3D pictures to the conditions which increase the effects of 3D pictures.

One of the factors that can improve 3D perception is 3D panels. Although several display methods are used in 3D, two methods, shuttered-glasses and polarized-glasses, are the most recent mainstream stereoscopic display methods [5]. On the 3DTV display market, there are major suppliers such as Samsung, Sony, and LG. The shuttered method adopted by Samsung (25%) and Sony (12%) accounts for a great share of the 3DTV market. Although the polarized method adopted by LG (16%) has a comparably small market, it has grown rapidly. Moreover, the polarized method which LG has adopted is the same method as that used by 3D cinemas.

Various methods are investigated as a new technology is developed. At that time, standardization is very important. In the 3D field, being selected as a 3D display standard means that the standard becomes the criteria according to which 3D displays and content are produced. Since there are various ways to show 3D images, display standardization is a hot issue in the emerging 3DTV market. Likewise, 3DTV panel selection is an important issue for the 3D market.

On the other hand, despite its commercial importance, the 3D panel difference demonstrated by shuttered vs. polarized displays may not be significant to viewers since both panels have 3D depth information. In other words, the differences in the representation methods may be minor, unlike the difference between 2D and 3D displays. Similarly, people better remembered and liked content when they watched it on larger displays. On the other hand, people do not prefer high fidelity displays to low fidelity displays when the differences are visually tenuous [6]. Like this, it is still unclear whether the 3D panel difference has any effect on viewers.

Both shuttered and polarized methods have different forms of production in the panels and 3D glasses. There are some differences such as fidelity and brightness between the two methods. Even if people cannot explain the technological differences, they can still detect the effects in the experiment [6,7].

The shuttered method uses flickering. If a viewer feels this flickering when they watch the display, the viewer will feel uncomfortable with the mediated environment. People are less interested and evaluate negatively when they feel uncomfortable with the mediated environment, even if they do not know why [6,8]. Therefore, if a viewer recognizes the flickering of the shuttered display, it may have negative effects.

The purpose of the current study is to investigate whether differences in 3D panels between shuttered and polarized methods affect the viewer. In particular, we want to study media form variables of the 3D panels—fidelity, brightness, and flickering—and viewing experiences—physical presence, immersion, enjoyment, content satisfaction and 3DTV satisfaction. In the following sections, we will briefly review the two different display methods and discuss implications based on the results of our experiment.

Two images that have slightly different angles and distances from an object are used in a 3D display. The polarized display method presents 3D images through polarizing films on the screen. The viewer wears polarized glasses that contain a pair of different polarizing films. Each eye sees a different image, because each film passes only the light that is similarly polarized. The most common polarized display method is the patterned retarder method, in which the images are shown separately as even-numbered lines of an image and odd-numbered lines of the other image (Fig. 1
                        ). The viewers can see the added image between even-numbered and odd-numbered lines of the images when they do not wear polarized glasses, while they see separated images when they wear polarized glasses [9].

The disadvantages of the polarized display method are: (a) the resolution of an image is halved, because eyes each see only even-numbered lines or odd-numbered lines [10]; and (b) when people watch the 2D images without polarized glasses, the fidelity and brightness of the polarized display may be lower than that of a shuttered display. This can be explained by the attached polarizing film on the polarized display.

In contrast, the advantages of the polarized display are: (a) the eyes are more comfortable and the polarized display is brighter when people watch 3D images with polarized glasses rather than shuttered glasses, since there is no flickering on the polarized display; and (b) polarized glasses are cheaper and lighter than shuttered glasses [11].

In the shuttered display method, each image is rapidly switching in order. Each eye’s glass is transparent when the image is synced. It becomes dark when the image is not synchronized (Fig. 2
                        ). The glasses are controlled by a wireless transmitter that sends a timing signal that allows the glasses to be shut down or transparent [9]. The disadvantage of the shuttered display is that the shuttered glasses are more expensive and heavier than the polarized glasses for a polarized display. In addition, the shuttered glasses need to be recharged. Conversely, the advantages of a shuttered display are: (a) the fidelity is better than that of a polarized display [10]. That is, there is no degradation of the resolution, as each eye sees full resolution images; and (b) when people watch 2D images without 3D glasses, the shuttered display supports higher fidelity and more brightness than the polarized display does, as there is no attached film on a display.

Watching 2D images on a 3DTV display is as much important as watching 3D images. People do not use 3DTV for watching 3D images only. They may want to use their new 3DTV set to watch regular television programs with 2D images. Besides, television is not highly immersive media. Nielsen’s survey (2011) found that 42% of Americans who own tablets are using their device when watching television. Only 12% of tablet owners and 13% of smartphone owners never use their device when watching television. This shows a new trend in television viewing, interworking with the Internet to do web surfing, SNS, or e-book (e.g., Google TV or Apple TV). Therefore, watching 3D images is not a sole function of 3DTV, but watching 2D images or reading texts are also important functions of 3DTV. As such, we will examine people’s perception of both 2D and 3D images shown in two different display methods in the current study.

The following hypotheses and research questions were proposed based on the previous discussion on the advantages and disadvantages of the two different display methods:
                           Hypothesis 1
                           People will feel that a display’s (a) fidelity is higher and (b) brightness is greater when they watch a 2D image on a shuttered display than on a polarized display.

It will be possible for people to read smaller text on a shuttered display than on a polarized display without wearing 3D glasses.

People will feel that a display’s (a) fidelity is higher and (b) brightness is greater when they watch a 3D image on a polarized display than on a shuttered display.

It will be possible for people to read smaller text on a shuttered display than on a polarized display when wearing 3D glasses.


                        Research question 1. Will people recognize (a) interlaced lines on a polarized display and (b) flickering on a shuttered display?


                        Research question 2. Will people be satisfied differently between a polarized display and a shuttered display?

@&#METHOD@&#

Experiment 1 was a two-group (polarized display vs. shuttered display) within subject study. Four pictures were taken for the current experiment with a 3D digital camera, Fuji W3 to measure the fidelity and brightness. Two pictures were shown as 2D images, and the other two pictures were shown as 3D images. The order of showing the images was randomized. Simple sentences that consisted of different font sizes were uploaded on a webpage to measure the readable text size under 2D conditions (Fig. 3
                        ). Four scripts with two languages, two scripts for English and the other two scripts for Korean, were chosen for the experiment. The order of showing the text was randomized. An eye sight test image was chosen to measure the readable text size in 3D (Fig. 3). A 47-in. polarized display and a 46-inch shuttered display were chosen to compare the display methods. The displays were surrounded with same-sized black bezels and the logos on the display were hidden, since people can be affected by brand name or display sizes.

Thirty-two participants were recruited from a university in Korea. There were sixteen male and sixteen female participants. All participants signed an informed consent form before the experiment. They were debriefed at the end of the experimental session, and were awarded $3 for their participation.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

All participants came to a lab equipped with a polarized and a shuttered display. Participants were asked to watch two 2D images and then two 3D images. Both displays showed the same images. They were asked to wear 3D glasses when they watched 3D images. The images were shown only once. Participants completed questionnaires that asked them to evaluate each image, comparing the two displays simultaneously when watching the images. The time participants took to complete the questionnaire for one image was about 2min.

After the participants finished completing the questionnaires about the images, they were asked to read English texts from the top line (large size font, 13pt) to the bottom line (small size font, 3pt) on the left display. The smallest font size that the participants were able to read was recorded. After they finished reading using the left display, the participants were asked to read another English text on the right display. After the participants finished reading the English texts, they were asked to read a Korean text in the same way.

After measuring the readable font size, the participants were asked to wear 3D glasses and watch the left display. They were asked to read numbers or characters on the eye sight test image as requested randomly by a researcher. The smallest font size that the participants were able to read was recorded. After they finished, the participants were asked to answer on the right display.

After the participants completed the experiment, they were asked to free-write about the two displays briefly.

The participants may be affected by the order and the position of the displays. Thus, the left and right positions of the displays were changed after half the participants completed the experiment.


                        Fidelity is an index composed of four items measured by 10-point scales anchored by “Not at All” (1) and “Very Much” (10): (a) the resolution of the picture is good; (b) the picture looks clear; (c) the picture looks distinct; and (d) the picture looks vivid (Cronbach’s α
                        =0.91).


                        Brightness is an index composed of two items measured by 10-point scales anchored by “Not at all” (1) and “Very much” (10), using the following two items: (a) the picture looks bright; and (b) the picture looks dark (reversed) (Chronbach’s α
                        =0.77).


                        Interlaced line and Flickering were measured by 10-point scales anchored by “Not at all” (1) and “Very much” (10), using the following two items: (i) for interlaced line, I can see unnecessary lines and (ii) for flickering, it is flickering.


                        Overall satisfaction was measured by a 10-point scale anchored by “lowest” (1) and “highest” (10), using the item, “Give a score to each display.”

@&#RESULTS@&#

The paired-samples t test was conducted to evaluate (i) H1 that people evaluate both shuttered and polarized displays for fidelity and brightness when they watch 2D images and (ii) H2 that a readable font size is tested without 3D glasses.

Consistent with H1, people reported higher levels of fidelity and brightness on a shuttered display, compared to a polarized display when they watch 2D images. H2 was also supported. People were able to read smaller text on a shuttered display than on a polarized display when they watch 2D images. Table 1
                         shows the means, standard deviations and t values of all the variables tested on these two groups.

The paired-samples t test was conducted to evaluate H3, H4, RQ1, and RQ2. H3 and H4 are the same concept as H1 and H2, except using 3D images with 3D glasses. RQ1 is about unnecessary visual information due to technical limitations, such as interlaced lines or flickering. RQ2 is about overall satisfaction about the displays.

Partially consistent with H3, people reported higher levels of brightness on a polarized display compared to levels on a shuttered display when they watched 3D images. However, there was no significant difference in the fidelity. H4 was supported. People were able to read smaller numbers or characters on a shuttered display than on a polarized display when they watched 3D images.

Analysis of RQ1 revealed a significant difference in the flickering, but no difference in the interlaced line. People experienced more flickering when they watched a shuttered display than when they watched a polarized display. Analysis of RQ2 on overall satisfaction did not reveal a significant difference between the two displays. Table 2
                         shows the means, standard deviations and t values of all the variables tested on these two groups.

Experiment 2 was conducted to examine the impact of a 3D movie on the viewer, depending on display methods such as shuttered and polarized displays. Based on the results of Experiment 1, we examined whether brightness and flickering are associated with viewing experience for 3D content.

Experiment 2 was a two-group (shuttered display vs. polarized display) between-subject study. Alice in Wonderland, a movie developed by Tim Burton, was chosen for the experiment. Alice in Wonderland was chosen because most people are familiar with the story and can easily understand the scenes, even if they watch the movie for only 20min.

Thirty participants were recruited. There were fifteen male and fifteen female participants. All participants came to the lab equipped with a shuttered display or a polarized display. Participants were told that they would watch a movie and be asked what they thought of the movie. After an experimenter’s brief instruction, participants watched Alice in Wonderland for 20min wearing 3D glasses. After watching the movie, participants completed questionnaires that asked them to evaluate the display and their feelings about the movie.

The measures such as brightness and flickering were the same as those employed in Experiment 1. In addition, the following measures, often used in media effect studies to measure media experience were included.


                        Physical presence is relevant to the study of media form such as display size, viewing angle, and quality [12]. In the context of 3DTV, we believe that the vividness of the content is a unique value of 3DTV and physical presence is an appropriate construct to measure such feelings. Lee (2004) defines physical presence as a psychological state in which virtual (para-authentic or artificial) physical objects are experienced as actual physical objects in either sensory or non-sensory ways [13]. Physical presence occurs when technology users do not notice either the para-authentic nature of mediated objects (or environments) or the artificial nature of simulated objects (or environments). Physical presence is an index composed of two items measured by 10-point scales anchored by “Not at All” (1) and “Very Much” (10): (a) while I was watching the movie, I felt as if the characters in the movie were realistic; (b) while I was watching the movie, I felt as if the objects in the movie were real (Cronbach’s α
                        =0.79).


                        Enjoyment was measured by a 10-point scale anchored by “Not at all” (1) and “Very Much” (10), using five adjective items, bored (reversed), enjoyed, entertained, having fun, and good (Cronbach’s α
                        =0.89).


                        Content satisfaction is an index composed of three items measured by 10-point scales anchored by “Not at All” (1) and “Very Much” (10): (a) overall, the movie was good; (b) overall, the movie quality was high; (c) overall, the movie was made well (Cronbach’s α
                        =0.93).


                        3DTV satisfaction is measured by 10-point scales anchored by “Not at all” (1) and “Very Much” (10) using two items: (a) overall, the 3DTV was good; (b) overall, I have a positive attitude about the 3DTV. (Cronbach’s α
                        =0.90).

@&#RESULTS@&#

A paired-sample t test was conducted to confirm the results of Experiment 1. Similar to the results of Experiment 1, people reported higher levels of brightness on a polarized display compared to on a shuttered display when they watched a 3D movie. People also experienced more flickering when they watched a shuttered display than when they watched a polarized display. Table 3
                         shows the means, standard deviations and t values of all the variables tested on these two groups.


                        Table 4
                         shows a full correlation matrix of the measured variables. Brightness is correlated with 3DTV satisfaction. Flickering is correlated with physical presence, enjoyment and 3DTV satisfaction.

@&#DISCUSSIONS@&#

Based on the results of the current study, we can draw the following five conclusions: (a) people experience greater fidelity and brightness viewing the shuttered display when they watch 2D still images, while people experience greater brightness for the polarized display when they watch 3D still images, (b) people are able to read smaller font or characters on the shuttered display than the polarized display for both 2D and 3D conditions, (c) people observe flickering on the shuttered display, (d) people experience greater brightness when viewing the shuttered display when they watch 3D moving images; additionally, when people watch a 3D movie, the brightness of a display is correlated with enjoyment, content satisfaction and 3DTV satisfaction, and (e) when people watch a 3D movie, the flickering of the display is negatively correlated with enjoyment and 3DTV satisfaction. We discuss the implications of each conclusion below.

First, people experience fidelity and brightness of displays differently, depending on whether the dimension of watched still images is 2D or 3D. Participants reporting a shuttered display observed higher fidelity and brightness than they did on a polarized display when watching 2D still images because an attached film on a polarized display decreased the fidelity and brightness when the display showed 2D still images without 3D glasses. Conversely, participants reported a polarized display supported greater brightness than a shuttered display did when they watched 3D still images. A shuttered display uses a method that makes each side of the shuttered glasses black in turn. Thus, participants felt a shuttered display was darker than a polarized display.

Second, the readability of a shuttered display is superior to that of a polarized display. It was possible for participants to read smaller fonts or see smaller characters when they watched a shuttered display than a polarized display in both 2D and 3D. A trend of the recent television market is combining 3DTV and “Smart TV” in which television converges with the Internet. Readability may be an important factor for smart TV, because text is frequently used. Therefore, a decline in readability of a polarized display should be considered.

Third, people perceive flickering on a shuttered display with both 3D still and 3D moving images. Participants reported that the shuttered display had more flickering than the polarized display. Moreover, six participants directly reported that they felt flickering on a shuttered display in an interview in which the participants wrote freely about the displays after they completed the experiment. Flickering may increase the artificiality of 3D images. However, more serious side effects such as headache, eye fatigue, or flash effect can occur if flickering is too fast. Although flickering should be complemented, the possible side effects have to be considered since people can perceive flickering.

Fourth, unlike the results of the 3D still images, people experience greater brightness viewing the shuttered display when they watch 3D moving images. In addition, greater brightness of a display has psychological effects on viewers that are more positive when they watch a 3D movie. The brightness of a display is positively correlated with enjoyment, content satisfaction and 3DTV satisfaction when people watch a 3D movie. Perceived brightness of a display is significantly different between a shuttered display and a polarized display with 3D moving images. From this point, higher brightness may be an advantage of the viewers’ viewing experience when watching 3D moving images. It is possible that perceived brightness may affect viewers’ buying intention since brightness is correlated with satisfaction with the content and the device.

Fifth, more perceived flickering has greater negative psychological effects on viewers when they watch a 3D movie. The flickering of a display is negatively correlated with viewers’ enjoyment and 3DTV satisfaction. When people perceive flickering, they experience less enjoyment and are less satisfied with the device when they watch a 3D movie than people who do not perceive the flickering. This means that the flickering of 3DTV is an important factor in the viewing experience. As I mentioned in the introduction, if users feel uncomfortable when they experience mediated environment, they have less interest and evaluate negatively. From this viewpoint, a shuttered display’s flickering may be a significant disadvantage.

Overall, a shuttered display and a polarized display have their pros and cons, depending on the image conditions. From the results, a polarized display seems more suitable for 3D still functions such as using 3D pictures than a shuttered display is. On the other hand, a shuttered display seems more suitable for 2D still images and 3D moving images than a polarized display does. Especially, readability on a shuttered display is better than for a polarized display. In a free-writing interview, sixteen participants directly reported a higher level of brightness and fidelity with the shuttered display. However, flickering of a shuttered display can be a disadvantage in 3D conditions. From the results of the current study, we know that technological differences in displays can affect viewers. These effects are an important factor affecting the standardization of 3DTV display panels. Therefore, future studies of 3DTV should consider the effects on viewers. Overall, we believe that this study is an important step toward an understanding of 3DTV displays and viewers.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This research was supported by WCU (World Class University) program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (Grant No. R31-2008-000-10062-0).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

