@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of the single and double (overlap) scanned excimer laser annealing on solid phase crystallized silicon films

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Poly-Si TFTs were fabricated by SPC+ELA process.


                        
                        
                           
                           Correlation between the performance of AMOLED and ELA condition was studied.


                        
                        
                           
                           We found the optimized ELA condition for SPC treated a-Si for AMOLED.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

AMOLED

Thin film transistors

Excimer laser annealing

Solid phase crystallization

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Thin amorphous silicon (a-Si) films were crystallized into polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si) by combining solid phase crystallization (SPC) and subsequent excimer laser annealing (ELA). Then thin film transistors (TFTs) were fabricated by using the poly-Si formed in the single and double excimer laser scanned area. The device performance of the TFTs fabricated with the excimer laser energy density of 230mJ/cm2 is almost equal for the single and double scanned area. This observation indicates that the overlapping laser irradiation with the laser energy density below 230mJ/cm2 does not change the characteristics of TFTs. Based on this result, we discuss the correlation between performance of active matrix organic light emitting display (AMOLED) panels and excimer laser energy density during ELA for SPC treated and non-treated poly-Si films.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Use of low temperature processed poly-Si TFTs has been drawing an increasing interest for applications in large-area display electronics. The performance of TFTs is influenced by several factors, including gate insulator (GI), interface state between poly-Si and GI, activation, and hydrogenation. One of the critical steps in the fabrication of poly-Si TFTs is transforming amorphous silicon (a-Si) active area into poly-Si. Typically, poly-Si films are obtained either via directed deposition of poly-Si films using the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or via crystallization of a-Si by thermal or laser annealing. Among these various methods to crystallize a-Si, ELA has attracted much research interest as an alternative low-temperature processing method to crystallize a-Si films.

The TFT uniformity issue about the overlapped area of excimer laser scans on a-Si layers has been investigated by Chang et al. [1]. They found that the higher excimer laser energy density dominates ELA-TFT characteristics, and the device performance in the overlap laser scanned area can be good as that in the non-overlapped area. Some attempts to improve the TFT performance by ELA process for SPC treated poly-Si films have been also proposed. Kodama et al. [2] have reported that the mobility is improved compared to the conventional TFTs. They also found that the mobility are same for both p- and n-channel TFTs, fabricated with the excimer laser energy densities ranging from 230 to 307mJ/cm2 and from 230 to 420mJ/cm2 for the 80nm and 120nm thick SPC treated poly-Si films, respectively. Recently, Jin et al. have reported the material properties of ELA processed poly-Si films and also enhanced electrical performance of TFTs formed in the single and double (overlap) scanned area along the long axis direction at various energy densities [3]. They found that the device performances were approximately equal to each region for the low excimer laser energy density (200mJ/cm2) processed TFTs. This fact indicates that the overlapped laser irradiation during ELA does not change the characteristics of TFTs while non-uniform line images were observed with a higher excimer laser energy density. Although the alteration of material properties of poly-Si films due to the high laser energy density during ELA was suggested as an origin of observed non-uniformity, it is not clear thus far how TFT parameters are evaluated with the excimer laser density and affect on AMOLED.

In this work, SPC process to improve TFTs performance is initially used to produce poly-Si films with very large but defect-rich grains, and subsequently ELA is processed to reduce in-grain defects, keeping the large grain size [4]. We analyze the correlations between the performance of AMOLED panels and irradiated excimer laser energy densities on SPC treated poly-Si films during ELA process in the single and double (overlap) scanned area.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

To fabricate coplanar TFTs, we used Corning 1737 glass that was 370×400mm2. The main TFT fabrication has been reported in previous [3]. Silicon nitride (SiN
                           x
                        ) and silicon dioxide (SiO2) films were deposited on the glass substrate as a buffer layer to block impurities from glass substrate. Next, the a-Si layer was deposited by plasma enhanced CVD (PECVD). Dehydrogenation was performed at 400°C for 490s. The a-Si film was crystallized in an In-line furnace, [5] with the surviving grains acting as SPC seeds. The resultant SPC treated poly-Si films were then irradiated by XeCl excimer laser beam with a wavelength of 308nm at different laser energy densities ranging from 200 to 300mJ/cm2 at room temperature. To investigate the dependency on laser scanning time and laser energy density, scanning was carried out as shown in Fig. 1
                        . The line shaped laser beam was scanned to partially overlapped. As a result, two different regions of poly-Si films were generated. After an interlayer deposition, the dopant was thermally activated using a conventional furnace. Then the contact holes were patterned and the source/drain metals were deposited, followed by subsequent patterning to form electrodes, thus completing the actual fabrication processes to make TFTs. For evaluation of TFT characteristics such as threshold voltage (Vth
                        ), field effect mobility, and sub-threshold swing (S factor), we fabricated self-aligned, conventional p-channel top-gate TFTs. Our AMOLED panel is composed of PMOS for reduction of mask steps as well as low-cost production.

Raman spectroscopy measures the inelastic scattering of light from materials which results from changes in the polarizability of atoms. Thus, any effect which may change the lattice spacing and polarizability of nonmetallic solids (e.g., stress, temperature, crystal structure) will result in changes in the Raman signature. Fig. 2
                         shows the Raman spectra of the films before and after SPC of a-Si films. The Raman spectrum of a-Si (before SPC) shows a typical characteristics of a-Si; the broad peak indicates the wide optical phonon (lattice vibration) states of a-Si while the peak position of 480cm−1 exhibits the zone center of the optical mode. However, the spectrum from SPC treated poly-Si films shows a sharp peak at 520cm−1 with the full width at half maximum intensity of 6.8cm−1 which corresponds to the crystallized phase. These observations confirm our expectation of crystallized a-Si films after the SPC treatment.

To clarify the effects of combined SPC+ELA process and also irradiated laser energy density on SPC treated poly-Si films, the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the fabricated TFTs in single and double scanned regions at various laser fluences were measured by using a HP4145B semiconductor parameter analyzer for both TFTs fabricated via SPC+ELA and only SPC without ELA. Fig. 3
                         shows device parameters which are extracted from the drain current–gate voltage (Id
                        
                        −
                        Vg
                        ) characteristics of the SPC+ELA processed TFTs crystallized in each region at various excimer laser density (210, 230, 250, 270, and 290mJ/cm2). The channel width and length are 7μm and 7μm, respectively. In this study, the threshold voltage (Vth
                        ) is defined as a gate voltage which induces a drain current of 10nA at a drain voltage of Vd
                           
                        =−5.1V. The field effect mobility (μfe
                        ) is estimated by assuming the validity of the following equation for poly-Si TFTs;
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       μ
                                    
                                    
                                       fe
                                    
                                 
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             Lg
                                          
                                          
                                             m
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             WC
                                          
                                          
                                             ox
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             V
                                          
                                          
                                             d
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 ,
                              
                           
                        where gm
                         is the transconductance, Cox
                         is the capacitance per unit of area for the gate insulator, W is the channel width, and L is the channel length. The SPC-TFT without ELA showed the average values of p-channel field effect mobility of 16.9cm2/Vs, the threshold voltage of −4.6V, and the sub-threshold swing of 0.9V/dec, which are insufficient values for AMOLED panel application. In fact, Miyasaka and Stoemenos [6] proposed combining the low temperature SPC with subsequent ELA 25–50nm for thick a-Si films to crystallize into poly-Si for their AMOLED panel application. Discussing the relation between the material properties and the electrical performance of poly-Si film, they reported that subsequent irradiation of excimer laser light to the SPC specimens with energy density ranging from 220 to 280mJ/cm2 improves film quality. Consistently to their observation, the PMOS TFT formed on a-Si films annealed by the energy density of 200mJ/cm2 showed field effect mobility of 0.15cm2/Vs, threshold voltage of −11V, and sub-threshold swing of 1.6V/dec in the single and double scanned region. It indicates that TFTs which were annealed but low laser density of 200mJ/cm2 have also poor characteristics [3]. The circuit design specification in our AMOLED panels is limited to the mobility of 30cm2/Vs and the threshold voltage of −4V. This fact implies that the performance of poly-Si TFTs fabricated at the energy density of 200mJ/cm2 without SPC crystallization is not enough for driving AMOLED. However, as shown in Fig. 3, the threshold voltage, field effect mobility, and sub-threshold swing of poly-Si TFTs are significantly enhanced by ELA with higher energy density than 200mJ/cm2 and exhibit strong dependency on the annealing excimer laser energy density. As expected, the data favored lower mobility and higher S factor as the excimer laser energy density decreased [7]. At the laser energy density below 230mJ/cm2, we found that the device performance is approximately equal to each region, in which the overlapping irradiation does not change the characteristics of TFTs.

It is well known that the mobility, threshold voltage, and sub-threshold swing (gate voltage swing) of poly-Si TFTs are strongly influenced by the grain size and trap density of poly-Si. In particular, the gate voltage swing (S factor), which represents the defect states at interface between the gate insulator and poly-Si layer in TFT, is typically sensitive to the defect density at the interface. For the completely depleted TFTs, in which the contained trap state density is related to defects, the S factor can by expressed as [8]
                        
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 S
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       kT
                                    
                                    
                                       q
                                    
                                 
                                 ln
                                 10
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          1
                                          +
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      q
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      2
                                                   
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      D
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      ts
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      C
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      ox
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 ,
                              
                           
                        where q is the electronic unit, k is Boltzman’s constant, and T is the absolute temperature, and Dts
                         (eV−1
                        cm−2) is the density of total trap states in the vicinity of the intrinsic Fermi level [6]. Thus, for the conventional and laser-irradiated SPC films, the trap density Dts
                         can be calculated by measuring the S factor. The calculated values are summarized in Table 1
                        . These results indicate that the defect density in SPC thin films annealed below 230mJ/cm2 is almost same in the single and double (overlap) scanned area. Previous reports have connected the TFT field-effect mobility to the density of trap states close to the conduction and valence bands (tail states), whereas the threshold voltage and the sub-threshold slope seem to be more sensitive to the deep states near midgap [9,10]. Tail states are believed to emanate mostly from the defects within the grains of the poly-Si [11] while deep states are typically related to grain-boundary defects, especially dangling bonds [9,12]. If the overlapped irradiation does not change the TFT characteristics, it is very useful because the length of the beam will not limit the available panel size.

However, these results differ from those in Ref. [3], which shows almost the same electrical transport properties of poly-Si films processed with the excimer laser energy density below 200mJ/cm2. These experimental observations indicate that the laser energy density needed for the SPC treated specimens is roughly 15% higher than that needed in the amorphous specimens. The difference is attributed to the melting temperature of the a-Si which is 17% lower than the crystalline silicon, namely 1132°C and 1414°C for a-Si and crystalline Si, respectively [13] The exothermic reaction of transformation from a-Si to poly-Si releases the energy of 11.95kJ/mol [14].

To investigate the feasibility of SPC+ELA processed poly-Si TFT in the single and double laser scanned area, we have developed a full-color 2.8-inch AMOLED display by employing the TFTs for both switching and driving of AMOLED pixels as well as several Vth
                        -compensation transistors. For evaluating the uniformity problem in the both short and long axis direction, the whole images of 2.8-inch AMOLED panels are illustrated in Fig. 4
                         as the contrast-enhanced figures. These results provide a strong evidence of correlations between the uniformity in brightness of AMOLED panels and performance difference of the TFT devices in the single and double excimer laser scanned area. As shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), non-uniformity is observed for AMOLED panel fabricated with the excimer laser density higher than 230mJ/cm2. However, for AMOLED with the excimer laser energy density of 230mJ/cm2, the panel exhibits a very uniform image even though it has an overlapped scan area.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Thin a-Si films were crystallized into poly-Si films by combining SPC method and subsequent ELA process with various laser energy densities (210, 230, 250, 270, and 290mJ/cm2). We found that the device performance of SPC+ELA poly-Si films formed with the excimer laser energy density of 230mJ/cm2 is approximately equal at the single and double scanned regions while the different characteristics are observed for the higher excimer laser energy density. These observations indicate that the overlapping irradiation does not change the characteristics of TFTs. The 2.8-inch AMOLED panel was demonstrated successfully without any non-uniform line images with the excimer laser energy density of 230mJ/cm2 while a non-uniformity was exhibited for higher excimer laser energy density. These observations clearly clarify that the electrical device parameters of TFTs directly affect the brightness and resultant uniformity of AMOLED.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

For the work done at Chungnam Nation University was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the NRF of S. Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2012R1A2A2A02013936).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

