@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Electrochemically-switchable emission and absorption by using luminescent Lanthanide(III) complex and electrochromic molecule toward novel display device with dual emissive and reflective mode

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Electroswitching of emission and coloration was achieved by Eu(III) complex and viologen.


                        
                        
                           
                           Coloration of the material was associated with the electrochromic reaction.


                        
                        
                           
                           Emission control was induced by intermolecular energy transfer from Eu(III) ion to viologen.


                        
                        
                           
                           Complex-molecule system can be used as display material with dual emissive and reflective modes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Numeric indication and mutli-color representation of dual-mode display were demonstrated.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Dual mode display

Energy transfer

Lanthanide(III) complex

Electrochromism

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Electroswitching of emission and coloration was achieved by a combination of a luminescent Eu(III) complex and an electrochromic molecule of diheptyl viologen (HV2+), indicating that the complex-molecule combination could be used as a display material with dual emissive and reflective modes. The coloration of the material was associated with the electrochromism of HV2+. Emission control was found to be possible due to the electrochromism of HV2+ via intermolecular energy transfer from the excited state of the Eu(III) ion to the reduced state of HV+. By using this mechanism, dual emissive and reflective representation of numerical characters were demonstrated.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In recent years, reflective displays have attracted much attention as low power consumption display devices. However, reflective displays are not effective under dark conditions. On the other hand, emissive displays such as organic light emitting devices (OLEDs) and transmissive liquid crystal displays (LCDs) using backlights are suitable when dark conditions are required, for example, for displaying movie contents; however, viewing under direct sunlight is difficult in this case. Dual-mode display (DMD) devices can operate in both emissive and reflective modes combining both their advantages and are extremely promising as next-generation displays. By using DMD devices, we can choose either the reflective or the emissive mode depending on the situation. However, few studies have been published on DMD devices because they include two different mechanisms in one device, and hence, the system becomes complicated [1]. For obtaining DMD devices with simple configurations, novel material that enables the control of both emission and reflection in response to external stimuli is required.

Materials with stimuli-responsive optical properties have attracted considerable research interest since they are prominent candidates for chemical sensors [2], biochemical sensors [3], molecular logic gates [4], molecular memories [5], and display devices [6]. These materials can change their photophysical properties, such as fluorescence intensity, fluorescence wavelength, and absorption wavelength, in response to external triggers. Various external triggers, such as thermal, electrical, optical or chemical stimuli, are used to realize reversible switching of the optical properties of materials modified with thermosensitive [7], electroactive [8], photoactive [9], or pH-sensitive species [10].

Among them, materials with multifunctional response to external stimuli have attracted great attention. Materials showing both fluorescence switching and absorption switching have been reported, for example, a thermochromic system containing a fluoran dye and developer; the aggregation structure of this thermochromic system changes in response to thermal stimuli, and these changes are accompanies by color changes [11]. In this system, fluorescence on–off switching is induced by fluorescence resonance energy transfer from a fluorescent dye to a colored fluoran dye. Photoresponsive multi-functional systems that show both color and emission changes have also been reported; these systems consist of a photochromic diarylethene derivative associated with a luminescent moiety [12]. In fluorophore–diarylethene systems, turn-on/turn-off fluorescence occurs; the initial fluorescent open-ring isomer is switched off during diarylethene photo-cyclization, and closed-ring isomers at best show very weak fluorescence resulting from energy or electron transfer from the fluorophore to the closed-ring form of the diarylethene. The fluorescence can be readily restored through visible light irradiation.

Among multifunctional materials, we focused on electrical stimuli-responsive material because this type of stimuli is particularly suitable for display application as the stimuli can be applied rapidly, remotely, and reversibly [13]. As electrochemically active materials, electrochromic materials, which show reversible color changes as a result of electrochemical redox reactions, have been considered as potential candidates for multifunctional devices because they have been successfully applied to functional devices, such as smart windows, dimming mirrors, electrochromic tags, and digital signage [14]. We have reported that both emission and absorption can be controlled through electrochemical reactions [15]. These multifunctional systems were fabricated by integrating a luminescent Eu(III) complex and an electrochemically active material, diheptyl viologen (HV2+). Generally, Eu(III) complexes have unique optical properties such as line-like red emissions, long luminescence lifetimes, high transparency in the visible region (large Stokes shift), and high emission quantum efficiencies, which have resulted in their widespread application, particularly in phosphors, bioassays, and sensor development [16]. In our system, fluorescence switching was caused by energy transfer between the fluorescent material and electrochemically active material in response to electrical stimuli (concept of the composite material is shown in Fig. 1
                     ).

In this paper, we investigated detailed electrochemical, photophysical properties of the multifunctional material enabling the control of both luminescence and coloration. We employed tris(hexafluoroacetylacetonato) (Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2) and 1,1′-diheptyl-4,4′-bipyridinium dibromide (HV2+) (chemical structures are shown in Fig. 2
                     ) as the luminescent and coloration materials, respectively. Coloration and emission control were achieved by only electrochemical reactions. The coloration of the composite material was controlled by the HV2+ electrochromism. Photoluminescence control was also achieved by the HV2+ electrochromism via intermolecular energy transfers from the excited states of Eu(III) ions to colored HV+ and HV. And finally, we demonstrated dual-mode representation of numerical character by using 7-segment device, and we also achieved multi-color DMD representation.

Europium acetate tetrahydrate and hexafluoro acetylacetonato (hfa) were purchased from Tokyo Kasei Industries Ltd. 1,1′-Diheptyl-4,4′-bipyridinium Dibromide (HV2+) was purchased from Aldrich co. Ltd., Propylene carbonate (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.) was used as a solvent after removing water by molecular sieves. Tetra-n-butylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.) was used as an electrolyte (50mmol/L) without further purification.

Europium acetate monohydrate (5.0g, 12.5mmol) was dissolved in 50mL of distilled water by stirring at 0°C. A solution of 1,1,1,5,5,5-hexafluoro-2,4-pentanedione (7g, 33.6mmol) was added dropwise to the above solution. The mixture produced a precipitation of white yellow powder after stirring for 3h. The reaction mixture was filtered. The resulting white yellow needle crystals were recrystallized in methanol/water. Yield: 85%. 19F NMR (acetone-d6, 400MHz) δ
                        =−72.80 (s, CF3) ppm. The chemical shifts were determined with hexafluorobenzene as an external standard (δ −162.0 (s, Ar-F) ppm). Anal. Calcd for C15H7O8F18Eu: C, 22.48; H, 0.88%. Found: C, 22.12; H, 1.05%.

UV–Vis absorption spectra of the samples were measured using a spectrophotometer (JASCO, V-570) by using quartz cells (path length: 1.0cm). Photoluminescence spectra were obtained using a spectrofluorometer (JASCO, FP-6600). Excitation wavelength of the samples was 337nm. The emission lifetimes were determined by using a N2 laser with a 337-nm wavelength and 4-ns pulse width (Spectra-Physics, VSL337) and a photomultiplier (Hamamatsu Photonics, H10721-20MOD, response time 0.8ns). Samples were excited by nanosecond pulse of N2 laser (337nm). Emission from the sample was guided to the photomultiplier through a sharp-cut filter. Emission decays were monitored with a digital oscilloscope (Sony Tektronix, TDS3052, 500MHz) synchronized to single-pulse excitation. The quantum yields were determined by standard procedures with an integral sphere (JASCO, ILF-533, diameter 10cm) mounted on a spectrofluorometer (JASCO, FP-6600). The solution for optical measurements was purged with nitrogen gas for 20min before each measurement.

Cyclic voltammograms and chronoamperometric measurement were recorded on a potentiostat/galvanostat (ALS, 660A) equipped with a computer. A three-electrode cell was constructed with an ITO glass as working electrode, Pt wire as counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl electrode as reference. The scan rate was 50mV/s. Absorption spectra were recorded in situ during the potential sweep using a diode array detection system (Ocean Optics, USB2000). The solution for electrochemical studies was purged with nitrogen gas for 20min before each experiment. In order to measure the emission spectra and the emission lifetime under voltage application, the DC voltage was applied to the cell by using DC source (HIOKI 7011 DC signal source).

A two electrodes cell was constructed with ITO glass electrodes and plastic spacer (70μm; Lintec Co.). The PC solution containing Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, HV2+, and TBAP was sandwiched between ITO electrodes to evaluate the electrochromic and emission property. Concentration of the Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, HV2+ and TBAP were 10mmol/L, 10mmol/L and 200mmol/L, respectively.

The dual mode representations of numerical characters were carried out by using 7-segments patterned ITO electrodes. The DMD cell was fabricated by sandwiching PC solution of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, HV2+, and TBAP between 7-segments patterned ITO electrode and plane ITO electrode with keeping inter-electrodes distance of 70μm by plastic spacer. The concentration of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, HV2+, and TBAP were were 10mmol/L, 10mmol/L and 200mmol/L, respectively. The negative voltage was applied to certain patterned segments by using DC source (HIOKI 7011 DC signal source).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS@&#

The emission spectra of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, and Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ in propylene carbonate (PC) are shown in Fig. 3
                        . Each solution exhibited sharp red emissions from the excited state of the Eu(III) ion. The emission bands observed at around 580, 590, 615, 650, and 700nm are attributed to the f–f transitions 5D0
                        →
                        7F
                           J
                         (J
                        =0, 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively). The 5D0
                        →
                        7F2 transition is an electric dipole transition and strongly varies with the local symmetry of Eu(III), whereas the 5D0
                        →
                        7F1 transition corresponds to a parity-allowed magnetic dipole transition that is independent of the coordination structure. The intensity of the electric dipole transition (615nm) of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ was stronger than that without HV2+. The relative intensity (Irel
                        ) of the 5D0
                        →
                        7F2 transition to 5D0
                        →
                        7F1 transition has been widely used as an indicator of the Eu(III) site symmetry [17]. Here, they are summarized in Table 1
                        . Irel
                         of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ (23.0) was greater than that of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2 (15.2); this indicates that the coordination structure of the Eu(III) ion has a more dissymmetric structure due to the interactions between Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2 and HV2+. The emission quantum yield of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2 in PC solution also increased upon HV2+ addition (Table 1), probably due to the suppression of the vibrational quenching of excited Eu(III) ions. Moreover, the interaction of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2 and HV2+ possibly suppresses the vibrational quenching due to the coordinated H2O molecules. The emission lifetime of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ became longer than that of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2.

In order to investigate the electrochromic properties of the composite material, cyclic voltammograms (CVs) and changes in the absorbance at 600nm during cyclic potential sweeps of HV2+, Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, and Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ were measured in a 0.2mol/L tetra-n-butylammonium perchlorate (TBAP)/PC electrolyte (Fig. 4
                        ). The Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2 solution did not show obvious reductive and oxidative reactions in the measured potential region, and hence, there were no absorbance changes during the potential sweep. In the case of the HV2+ solution, two reduction peaks and corresponding oxidation peaks were observed at the potentials of −0.48 and −0.82V and −0.32 and −0.71V, respectively. As the reductive current increased, the absorbance at 600nm of the HV2+ solution increased from −0.5V. From absorption spectra of the sample, new absorption bands at around 400 and 600nm was observed; this represents typical electrochromic behaviors of HV2+
                        [18]. On the other hand, the reduction peaks of the Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ solution were observed at potentials of −0.6 and −1.2V; these potentials are negatively shifted from those of the HV2+ solution. In addition, the oxidation peaks of the Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ solution were shifted to +0.2V, and the reduction and oxidation peaks showed large separations. These results indicate the interactions between HV2+ and Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2 that were also indicated by the emission measurements. During the HV2+ reductions in the Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ solution, the absorbance of the solution increased to −0.5V, resulting in vivid color changes to cyan. The absorption bands of the colored Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ solution were in good agreement with those of the colored HV+ and HV solutions (Fig. 5
                        ). This results indicate that the coloration of HV2+ in the presence of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2 represents electrochromic behavior of HV2+. The Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ solution is clearly an effective electrochromic material.

In order to demonstrate the emission and coloration control by using the electrochromic reaction of HV2+, we fabricated a two-electrode cell by sandwiching a PC solution of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ and TBAP between two indium tin oxide (ITO) glasses. From the CV measurement of the two-electrode cell, EC reaction of the HV2+ was occurred above applied voltage of −2.0V. Fig. 6
                         shows the absorption spectra of the Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ cell. No absorption bands were present in the visible region when the circuit was open, thereby indicating that the cell was colorless (photo of Fig. 6); this can be considered as a ‘reflection-off’ representation. When a bias voltage of −2.2V was applied for 10s, new absorption bands appeared at around 400 and 600nm; they could be assigned to the absorption bands of the reduced species of HV+ and HV. The cell color changed from clear colorless to cyan as the number of new absorption bands increased, resulting in a ‘reflection-on’ state.

On the other hand, strong red emissions were observed from the Eu(III) complex under the excitation of hfa ligands (337nm) when the circuit was open (Fig. 7
                        ); this was considered the ‘emission-on’ state (photo in Fig. 7). The red emission of the Eu(III) complex was completely quenched when a bias voltage of −2.2V was applied, resulting in an ‘emission-off’ state. The emission intensity of the cell when −2.2V was applied decreased to less than 1/3000 in the cell under open circuit conditions, resulting in low emission quantum yields (<0.001). The emission lifetime also decreased when a voltage was applied to the cell. The emission lifetime of the cell was 240μs after the voltage was applied for 3s (Fig. 8
                        ), and subsequently, the emission intensity and lifetime reduced to below the detection limit (Table 1). On the other hand, the emission intensity, quantum yield, and lifetime of the Eu(III) complex without HV2+ in the two-electrode cell were not influenced by the bias voltage (Fig. 9
                        ), strongly indicating that the colored HV+ induced the control of the Eu(III) emission.

The quenching efficacy (ηq
                        ) and energy transfer efficiency (ηENT
                        ) of the film were calculated using following equations:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       η
                                    
                                    
                                       q
                                    
                                 
                                 =
                                 1
                                 -
                                 
                                    
                                       ϕ
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             ϕ
                                          
                                          
                                             0
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       η
                                    
                                    
                                       ENT
                                    
                                 
                                 =
                                 1
                                 -
                                 
                                    
                                       τ
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             τ
                                          
                                          
                                             0
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where ϕ
                        0, ϕ, τ
                        0, and τ are the emission quantum yield in the emissive state, emission quantum yield in the quenched state, emission lifetime in the emissive state, and emission lifetime in the quenched state, respectively [19]. The estimated quenching efficacy was >99.9% and resulted in emission switching in the film being good. On the other hand, the energy transfer efficiency was found to be 99%. These results indicated that dominant cause of the emission quenching in the cell was the energy transfer from the excited Eu(III) ions to the reduced species of HV+ and HV. The absorption band of the colored HV+ and HV species appeared at around 600nm, and this overlapped well with the emission band of the Eu(III) complex. Such an overlapping of the absorption and emission bands enable efficient energy transfers from the excited states of the Eu(III) complex to the excited states of reduced HV+ and HV. On the other hand, the electron transfer between photo-excited Eu(III) complex and reduced HV species will also quench the Eu(III) emission. We measured the retention times of the reduced HV+ and HV under photo-excitation of the Eu(III) complex, resulting that the retention times of the HV+ and HV was not influenced by photoexcitation of the Eu(III) complex. Take those results into consideration, the emission quenching of the Eu(III) complex was mainly due to the energy transfer from the Eu(III) ion to the reduced species of HV+ and HV.


                        Fig. 10
                         shows changes in the absorption and emission of the cell when −2.2V was repeatedly applied in an open circuit. In the first case, as the absorption band increased at 600nm, the emission of the Eu(III) complex was rapidly quenched within 5s. After the circuit was open, the cell absorbance gradually decreased with the quenching of the colored HV+ and HV in 15min. When the absorbance of the reduced species of HV+ and HV decreased, the Eu(III) complex emission could be recovered. The emissions and absorbance changes were repeatable, but the stability and response time still need to be improved by introducing counter electrode reaction materials.

In order to demonstrate the dual mode representations of numerical characters, we fabricated a prototype DMD cell by using a 7-segment cell. The cell was fabricated by sandwiching the PC solution of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/HV2+ and TBAP between a 7-segment-patterned ITO electrode and plane ITO electrode (Fig. 11
                        a). When a negative voltage of −2.2V was applied to certain segments in order to reduce the HV2+ molecule, the voltage-applied regions were colored from clear transparency to cyan by the HV2+ electrochromism; this resulted in numerical representations with a reflective mode (Fig. 11b). Under UV light (365nm) irradiation, a strong red emission was observed from the cell surface except in the colored area, which led to emissive representations of the numerical character (Fig. 11c).

Finally, we demonstrated the prototype devices for multi-color DMD representations by introducing other emission and coloration materials. The DMD cells showing red-emission/magenta-coloration, blue-emission/cyan-coloration, and green-emission/cyan-coloration were fabricated by using electrolyte solution of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2/dimethyl terephthalate (DMT), 9,10-diphenylanthracene/HV2+, and Tb(acac)3(H2O)2/HV2+, respectively (Fig. 12
                        ). DMT molecule is known as good EC material for magenta coloration [20]. The devices showed obvious coloration by application of reduction voltage (−4.0V for magenta coloration, −2.0V for cyan coloration). On the other hand, the RGB photoluminescence of the devices were also well switched by the electrochromic reaction. In these systems, the emission spectra of the diphenylanthracene and Tb(III) complex were overlapped with absorption spectra of the colored HV species (Fig. 13
                        a and b), therefore, the FRET mechanism would contribute to their emission switching. On the other hand, the overlapping of the emission of the Eu(III) complex and absorption band of the colored DMT was much less than these of other systems (Fig. 13c), although the Eu(III) emission was well quenched by the DMT coloration. The photo-induced electron transfer would be cause of the emission switching in this case. The detailed study for the switching mechanism and reproducibility of the devices are now in progress. However, the multi-color DMD device will indicate the possibility of full color dual-mode representations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In conclusion, we have described electroswitchable emission and coloration by using a luminescent Eu(III) complex Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2 and an electrochromic molecule HV2+. The Eu(III) complex emission was controlled by the HV2+ electrochromism via an intermolecular energy transfer mechanism. When HV2+ was in a colorless state, a strong red emission was observed from Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2. On the other hand, the electrochemically colored state of HV+ and HV effectively quenched the red emission of the Eu(III) complex. A prototype 7-segment DMD cell was also fabricated. The cell represented numerical characters with emissive and reflective modes. We also achieved mutli-color DMD representation by introducing suitable materials. Further studies on improvement of the response time and representation of the multicolor representation are in progress. We believe that the results of this research will contribute to the development of novel display devices such as novel monitors, digital signages, and e-papers.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was partly supported by a Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research, MEXT (No. 23750208), the CASIO Science Promotion Foundation, the Konica Minolta Science and Technology Foundation and the Futaba Electronics Memorial Foundation.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

