@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A study of the relationship between color-concept association and occupational background for Chinese

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The associations between ten colors and sixteen concepts were tested for four groups of Chinese with different occupations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Nine out of sixteen most-frequent color associations are the same for these groups.


                        
                        
                           
                           People with similar occupations yield similar color-concept associations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Color-concept association

Occupational background

Color display

Chinese

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  The use of colors in visual displays can facilitate visual search and perception, but their use may not be effective without consideration of differences in the interpretation of their connoted meanings between individuals of different occupational backgrounds.
               
               
                  Objective
                  This study examined color-concept associations for Hong Kong Chinese students and white-collar workers, and then compared their associations with those of two other occupational groups to assess whether occupational background is related to color-concept associations.
               
               
                  Method
                  A questionnaire survey was used to examine color-concept associations among 100 university students and 100 white-collar workers in Hong Kong. The participants were presented with 16 safety-related concepts and were asked to choose one of 10 colors that best represented each concept. The associations reported by four groups with different occupations (the two groups in this study and the groups of managerial staff and steel workers examined in our previous study) were compared. A chi-square test was applied to determine whether significant color association(s) existed for each concept.
               
               
                  Results
                  Our results revealed that each concept was significantly associated with at least one color (p
                     
                     <
                     0.01). The Hong Kong white-collar workers and managerial staff in mainland China both expressed the same color associations for 14 of the tested concepts, and differed only over which colors were associated with “strong,” and “radiation hazard.” These findings generally suggest that populations with similar occupations can have similar color perceptions. However, the students and the other three employee groups reported different color associations with the concepts “normal,” “off” and “potential hazard.”
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Occupational background is associated with how color is interpreted for its connoted meaning. One should consider occupational background carefully when choosing colors in product designs, especially for safety.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The effective use of colors in visual displays can facilitate visual search and perception [1–4]. However, the potential benefits of using colors cannot be realized if we fail to consider how people with different occupation backgrounds interpret the connoted meanings of colors. Previous research has shown that occupation background has a significant effect on color perceptions. For example, steel workers [5] and industrial workers [6] associated yellow with the concept of “caution,” but managerial staff working in office environments [5] interpreted red as denoting “caution.” Misunderstanding the connoted meanings of colors can be dangerous for employees, especially when they misinterpret the colors used in safety–critical visual displays and systems such as warning labels or the interfaces of industrial equipment. Nevertheless, little research and knowledge of color perception by various types of employees is available in the literature.

Previous studies have shown that some color-concept associations are common among university students [7–9], but these findings cannot be applied to specific occupations. Although Courtney [10] examined individuals with various occupations concerning their color-concept associations, he did not indicate the differences in associations made by different occupational groups. Borade et al. [6] focused on color application in the manufacturing industry by enrolling a group of Indian industrial workers to test their perceptions of hazards in terms of associations between nine safety words and seven colors; however, their study examined only male workers. Or and Wang [5] examined the associations between 10 colors and 16 concepts among 139 steel workers and 74 managerial staff from a northern region of China. Their results provided some basic knowledge of the color associations for populations working in the manufacturing industry and in offices. Ergonomists and product engineers can design color displays more efficiently for people of similar or different occupations if we understand the cross-occupational patterns for color-concept associations, but no study to date has shown what the patterns are.

We thus set out to examine whether populations having similar occupations have similar color-concept associations and whether the associations for students are similar to those for employees. Thus, the objectives of our study were (1) to examine color-concept associations for students and white-collar workers in Hong Kong and (2) to compare the associations among four occupational groups–the two groups surveyed in this study and the managerial staff and steel worker groups examined in our previous study [5].

@&#METHODS@&#

The experiment involved a questionnaire-based study using 10 colors and 16 safety-related concepts to examine self-reported color-concept associations. We examined white-collar workers and students in Hong Kong to learn their associations. The reason we selected Hong Kong white-collar workers was that their occupations and the environments in which they work were similar to those of managerial staff in our previous study [5]. We felt that this similarity would enable us to compare the associations between two groups in different regions. Hong Kong students were included so that we could find out how students interpret the connoted meanings of colors and whether students have similar color-concept associations as employees. By including the color data collected from steel workers and managerial staff in mainland China [5] along with the data for the two groups surveyed in this study, we were able to compare the most frequent color-concept associations among these four groups.

Our study involved two groups of participants: 100 white-collar workers and 100 university students in Hong Kong. The white-collar participants included office assistants, researchers, secretaries and finance officers. The student participants were randomly recruited from a local university in Hong Kong. Participant recruitment was done through emails and personal contacts.

We used the self-administered questionnaire developed in our previous study [5] to collect the participants’ associations between 10 colors (i.e., black, blue, gray, green, orange, pink, purple, red, white and yellow) and 16 concepts (i.e., cold, hot, danger, safe, go, stop, hard, soft, off, on, normal, caution, potential hazard, radiation hazard, strong and weak). The participants received their copies of the questionnaire either from our research assistant or via email. When they finished the questionnaires, they either gave their hard copies directly to the research assistant or sent the completed soft copies to us. Our study stopped enrolling new participants when we received 100 valid questionnaires from each of the study groups. In the survey, the participants were instructed to fill in their demographic information (i.e., gender and age), and to select the one of 10 colors that they believed to best represent each of the 16 concepts. One color could be associated with more than one concept. An additional option, “None of the ten colors is suitable,” was provided in case none of the ten colors were considered to represent the concept.

A chi-square test was used to examine whether significant color associations existed for each concept, and a detailed comparison of the most frequent color-concept associations was conducted among the four study groups.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Of the university student participants, 40 were males and 60 were females, and their ages ranged from 18 to 20 (28%), 21 to 30 (67%), and 31 to 40 (5%). Among the white-collar participants, 53 were male and 47 female, and their ages ranged from 21 to 30 (62%), 31 to 40 (12%), 41 to 50 (15%), and older than 51 (11%) years. All participants reported having no color-blindness.

The Hong Kong students provided a total of 1600 color-concept associations, among red-concepts associations accounted for 23.6% and green-concepts for 12.4%. The Hong Kong white-collar workers produced another 1600 color-concept associations, of which red-concepts accounted for 25.6% and green-concepts for 16.4%. Table 1
                         shows the percentages of associations for each color with each concept as indicated by these two study groups. The results of chi-square tests, also presented in Table 1, revealed that each concept was associated with at least one color at the 0.01 level of significance.


                        Fig. 1
                         compares the most frequent color-concept associations reported by the Hong Kong students, Hong Kong white-collar workers, managerial staff in mainland China and steel workers in mainland China.

As shown in Fig. 1, the Hong Kong white-collar workers and managerial staff in mainland China expressed the same color-concept associations for 14 of the tested concepts. Only two of the concepts (“strong” and “radiation hazard”) had differing color associations for these groups. The 14 shared associations were as follows:
                           
                              •
                              green=“go,” “safe,” “on,” and “normal”;

red=“stop,” “hot,” “danger,” “off” and “caution”;

blue=“cold”;

black=“hard”;

pink=“soft”;

orange=“potential hazard”; and

white=“weak.”


                        Fig. 2
                         presents a detailed comparison of these 14 color-concept associations for the two office-worker groups.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Despite having different occupations, all four of the occupational groups shared nine of the color-concept associations (see Fig. 1). This commonality could have been due to cultural similarity, as all of the groups were ethnically Chinese. Designers could use these shared associations, which appear to be the same among Chinese from various parts of the country and various vocations, in preparing the color schemes for displays and products intended for Chinese. Moreover, out of the nine major color-concept associations, four (green for “go,” green for “safe,” red for “stop,” and red for “danger”) have also been shown to be common for individuals of other populations [8–10]. One reason for these four fairly universal associations could be that the uses of red and green have deeply permeated into people’s daily lives (as in the color coding used in traffic lights) and thus have influenced people’s color perceptions around the world.

In our study, the students and the three occupational groups indicated differing color associations for three of the listed concepts. First, Hong Kong students associated white with “normal,” consistent with a previous study [9], but the other three groups selected green to denote “normal.” This difference could have been due to the tendency of employees to interpret a “normal” situation as one in which “machines operate well,” or there is “no dangerous issue.” Thus, they associated green with an ongoing safe and normal working conditions. However, university students may not have any such experience in working with machines or operating in hazardous environments, and thus they may have associated white with a neutral or normal condition. The second difference in color association between students and employees was for the concept “off.” As “off” is a common command on control panels, the three employee groups in our studies associated this concept with red, as in “stop the machine by turning it off.” The student group, however, associated “off” with black. Possibly the students considered “off” as meaning “the light is off,” which led them to picture darkness or blackness, rather than redness.

Considering that the four groups in our studies perceived green as the most-frequently used color for “on,” one may use red for the antonym “off” in future designs of color displays. Another concern is the potential confusion concerning “hazard,” as the students associated this concept with yellow, and the three employee groups selected orange. According to a recommendation in the Safety Color Code Standard [11], orange should be used to indicate the dangerous parts of machines or powered equipment that could pose a hazard. However, the students gave similar meanings to yellow and orange, and they used yellow to connote both “radiation hazard” and “potential hazard.” This set of associations could prove dangerous for students who mistakenly interpret yellow as indicating “potential hazard” when it actually indicates “radiation hazard.” Thus, ergonomists should take care when using yellow or orange to convey information related to hazards. In general, the different associations of students and employees should be well understood, and it may not be assumed that the color data gathered from students in previous studies [4,7–9,12] can be applied to employees.

Our surveys found similar color-concept associations between Hong Kong white-collar workers and managerial staff of the northern region of China. Both of these groups had similar occupations, used similar working tools for sedentary works (e.g., computers, printers and scanners) and had similar working environments (e.g., offices with tables and chairs). Our results demonstrated that these two office-work groups expressed the same color associations for each of 14 concepts (i.e., go, safe, stop, hot, danger, caution, cold, hard, soft, normal, on, off, potential hazard, and weak), as shown in Fig. 2. It appears that southern and northern Chinese office workers interpreted the meanings of colors in a similar way, as they shared similar occupations. However, before one seeks to apply this finding in real situations, certain differences between the two office-worker groups should be noted. A higher percentage of the Hong Kong white-collar workers agreed on color associations such as red for “danger,” “caution,” “stop,” and “hot.” It may be that Hong Kong people are more likely to denote red as indicating situations involving risk or potential risk. In addition, the two office-worker groups associated different colors with “strong” and “radiation hazard.” Red was selected to denote “strong” by Hong Kong white-collar workers, as in the findings of Chan and Courtney [9]. However, the managerial staff in mainland China most frequently chose black to denote “strong,” as in the finding of Jacobs et al. [7]. One reason for this difference could be that “strong” is interpreted and used differently by office staff in different sectors, such as “the economic growth is strong” for office workers in the financial sector and “the power of the machinery is strong” for office workers in the industrial sector.

Moreover, care should be taken when designing warning labels or products to convey radiation warnings in office environments, because the managerial staff in mainland China associated “radiation hazard” with purple, and the Hong Kong white-collar workers associated this hazard with yellow. Using purple or yellow to denote radiation is partially supported by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration [13], which recommends using purple on a yellow background in warning signs concerning radiation. To convey information on radiation hazards quickly and accurately, it may be better to use both of these associated colors along with the icon for radiation in environments that are exposed to radiation.

Researchers may determine that certain color associations are stereotypical for a given population according to a specified criterion, such as the criterion suggested by Bergum and Bergum [8] that an 85% common response be the minimum level for determining a population stereotype. However, none of the Chinese groups in the present study, our previous study [5], or in the Chinese populations of other studies [9,10] have shown any color association that was common to 85% or more of the participants. Thus, we suggest that more studies are needed to identify the correct level of shared association that determines the existence of a color stereotype among Chinese.

Colors can be interpreted in different ways. For instance, red was interpreted as meaning “stop,” “danger,” or “hot”; therefore, careful attention should be paid when applying colors for a certain intended concepts. For example, Hong Kong students, Hong Kong white-collar workers, and managerial staff of mainland China all denoted red as indicating “caution,” as in the result of Chan and Courtney’s study [9]. However, previous studies have revealed evidence of a link between red and “danger” when that concept is conveyed by using either words [5,6,14] or symbols [4,14]. If red is used for “danger” and “caution” at the same time, then the line between these two concepts could be vague, and could possibly lead to inaccurate understandings of the intended messages. To distinguish “caution” from “danger,” one may consider the American National Standards Institute [11] recommendation that suggest the use of yellow to indicate “caution,” even though our survey results did not entirely support this interpretation.

Some degree of caution is warranted in making use of our findings in any design of color displays or products. We used words for colors and asked our participants to associate them with words for concepts. Future studies should use printed colors as stimuli, as hue, saturation, and intensity could have an effect on the readability and interpretation of visual displays [2]. Once color coding is established and confirmed, color-concept associations should be applied consistently to decrease perception errors and to speed up the recognition of visual information [9,15].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Our study demonstrated that the primary colors red and green yielded the largest number of color-concept associations. More studies are needed to identify the correct level of shared association that determines the existence of a population stereotype for the meaning of a color, as none of the Chinese groups we surveyed showed agreement levels of 85% or more concerning any color-concept association. Despite having different occupations, the Hong Kong students, Hong Kong white-collar workers, mainland Chinese managerial staff and mainland Chinese steel workers agreed on nine common color-concept associations, which could be used in future designs of color displays and products for Chinese. Evidence was also found that populations with similar occupations could have similar color associations across different geographical locations. However, caution should be taken before applying the color data collected from students to employees, as differences in color perception between students and employees were revealed. In addition, using color-coding on its own could be problematic for users with deficiencies in perceiving color. Thus, it is recommended applying color-coding together with other redundant methods involving icons, locations, sizes, shapes or sounds to create the maximum effect possible.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Faculty of Engineering and the Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering at the University of Hong Kong – Hong Kong, China. The authors would like to thank the participants for their time and the reviewers for their comments.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

