@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Improved efficiency and lifetime for green phosphorescent organic light-emitting diodes using charge control layer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Green PHOLEDs have been fabricated using charge control layer (CCL).


                        
                        
                           
                           The distributed recombination zone and charge balance are achieved through the CCL.


                        
                        
                           
                           Green PHOLEDs with CCL exhibited efficient carrier and triplet exciton confinement.


                        
                        
                           
                           Electroluminescent performance improvement as efficiency and lifetime was realized.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Green phosphorescent organic light-emitting diode

CBP

Ir(ppy)3




                  

Charge control layer

Exciton distribution

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  We investigated green phosphorescent organic light-emitting diodes (PHOLEDs) with charge control layer (CCL) to produce high efficiency and improve operational lifetime. Three types of devices were fabricated following the number of CCL within emitting layer (EML), maintaining the thickness of whole EML. The CCL and host material, which was 4,4′-bis (carbazol-9-yl)biphenyl (CBP) with bipolar property, can control carrier movement in EML. Therefore, the electroluminescent (EL) performance improvement as efficiency and lifetime was realized with a good charge balance, an effective triplet exciton confinement, and the reduced triplet exciton quenching effect in EML. Device 2 with a CCL as exciton distribution structure exhibits the remarkable EL performances for the maximum luminous and external quantum efficiency of 65.34cd/A and 20.42%, respectively. Moreover, operational lifetime is nearly improved 2.5 times than the conventional device.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) are one of the most promising technologies which will likely replace the existing liquid crystal display at present [1]. The rapid pace of technological development on OLEDs directed toward display applications including all of the known products in market [2–5]. In addition, many efforts are done in order to improve the performance of OLEDs. Above all, phosphorescent OLEDs (PHOLEDs) have received a considerable attention due to their highly efficient electroluminescence (EL) performance compared with fluorescent OLEDs [6–8]. Phosphorescent light-emitting materials can generally generate both singlet and triplet exciton by converting the singlet exciton to triplet exciton via intersystem crossing [9,10]. For this reason, an application of PHOLEDs become an essential requirement to achieve highly efficient OLEDs, which can both utilize the singlet and triplet exciton for generating light emission. In order to improve the EL performance of PHOLEDs, most important task require careful selection of high performance material and more advisable device structure [11]. From the direction of device structure engineering, significant process has been made in developing device structures based on both recombination process and triplet exciton confinement [12,13]. It has been studied on various OLEDs configuration using double emitting layer (EML), mixed host in EML, stepwise doping, and hybrid EML [14–17].

In this paper, we report on fabrication and characterization of green PHOLEDs with an exciton distribution structure consisting of charge control layer (CCL), which has a bipolar property. The CCL with a high triplet state was introduced to confine triplet excitons inside the EML and to manage triplet excitons by controlling charge injection/transport. Thus, we achieved high efficiency and operational stability of green PHOLEDs by improving the carrier recombination efficiency in a wider emissive region and by prohibiting triplet excitons diffusion out of each EMLs.

To fabricate the green PHOLEDs, 180nm thick indium-tin-oxide (ITO, sheet resistivity of 10Ω/square) was cleaned in an ultrasonic bath using the following sequence: acetone, methyl alcohol, distilled water. After stored in ethyl alcohol for 48h, the ITO-coated substrates were dried by nitrogen (N2) gas and baked at 110°C for 10min in convection oven. The substrates were treated by oxygen (O2) plasma with a condition of 125W for 2min under 2×10−2
                     torr. All stacked layers were thermally evaporated under a high vacuum (5×10−7
                     torr) at a rate of 1.0Å/s for organic materials and 0.1Å/s for lithium quinolate (Liq), respectively. Finally, aluminum (Al) was evaporated on Liq film at a rate of 10Å/s as cathode. A thickness of whole film and a doping concentration of an emitter were controlled and optimized by quartz thickness monitor. The OLED devices were encapsulated in a glove box with O2 and H2O concentrations below 1ppm after depositing the organic and metal layers. A barium-oxide powder as a desiccant material was used to absorb the residual moisture in encapsulated OLEDs. A current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the OLEDs were measured with a source measure unit (Keithley 238) with the DC voltage bias. An optical and EL properties of the OLEDs such as luminance, luminous efficiency (LE), Commission International de L’Eclairage (CIE) coordinates and EL spectra were analyzed by spectroradiometer (CHROMA METER CS-1000A). An operational lifetime was measured using lifetime tester (Polaronix M6000).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                     Fig. 1
                     (a) shows chemical structures of key materials used in this study including 4,4,N,N′-dicarbazolebiphenyl (CBP) and tris(2-phenylpyridine)iridium (Ir(ppy)3). CBP is a typical bipolar host material and Ir(ppy)3 is the most well-known material as a phosphorescent green emitter [18,19]. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of CBP and Ir(ppy)3 were 2.6/5.9eV and 2.8/5.2eV, respectively [20]. The LUMO and HOMO of Ir(ppy)3 are located inside the band gap of CBP. As shown in Fig. 1(b), three types of OLEDs with structures of ITO (180nm) as an anode/4,4′-bis[N-(napthyl)-N-phenyl-amino]biphenyl (NPB, 50nm) as a hole transporting layer (HTL)/4,4′,4″-tris(N-carbazolyl)triphenylamine (TCTA, 10nm) as a triplet exciton blocking layer (TEBL)/Ir(ppy)3 doped in CBP as an EML (8wt.%, 30nm) and CBP (5nm) as a CCL (devices 2 and 3)/2,2′,2″-(1,3,5-benzenetryl)tris(1-phenyl)-1H-benzimidazol (TPBi, 10nm) as a TEBL/4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (Bphen, 30nm) as an electron transporting layer (ETL)/Liq (2nm) as an electron injection layer (EIL)/Al (100nm) as a cathode were fabricated. In these structures, each of devices has one CCL (device 2) with a fixed thickness (5nm) and two CCLs (device 3) within EML, respectively, and device 1 without any CCL is reference device. All devices also maintain an overall thickness of the EML as 30nm.


                     Fig. 2
                      shows a luminance versus voltage characteristics and inset of Fig. 2 also shows current density versus voltage characteristics of green PHOLEDs. Devices 1, 2, and 3 exhibited current density values of 21.76, 8.59, and 9.49mA/cm2 at 7V, and luminances of 9033, 4463, and 4450cd/m2 at 7V, respectively. Devices 2 and 3 showed a lower current density and luminance values at the same voltage than those of device 1 because of the increased number of interface by inserted CCL. However, the results of the current density and the luminance as a function of the voltage for all devices show almost similar behaviors.

The LE and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) versus current density characteristics are shown in Fig. 3
                     . The maximum LEs of devices 1, 2, and 3 were 51.69, 65.34, and 59.43cd/A, and the maximum EQEs of devices 1, 2, and 3 were 15.85%, 20.42%, and 17.29%, respectively. Device 2 showed higher efficiencies than other devices because of inserted CCL at center of EML. Device 1 as a conventional OLED structure has a narrow localized recombination zone within EML due to difference of mobility between electrons and holes. However, unlike device 1 without CCL, device 2 can control a mutual movement of both electrons and holes. The controlled electrons and holes at both sides of CCL can facilitate a formation of excitons in a wider emissive region of EML than device 1. The CCL distributes excitons evenly within the EML, and some of holes and electrons arrive at the other EML after transporting through the CCL. After work, the generated triplet excitons were radiatively released to their ground states without energy being transferred to the host and TEBL molecules. It is well known that EQE and LE are fairly increased owing to an efficient charge recombination and exciton confinement [12,13]. In the case of device 3, despite an application of two CCLs, lower efficiencies than device 2 were observed due to extremely narrow emissive region [21].

As indicated in Fig. 4
                     , the time spent prior to the 30% luminance-decay denotes as the time to 70% of initial luminance (LT70, L/L0
                     =0.7) of devices 1, 2, and 3 [22]. The lifetime measurements were made at room temperature after setting the initial luminance (L0) of all three devices at 8700cd/m2. The LT70 of devices 1, 2, and 3 were 6.24, 14.80, and 9.20h, respectively. The device 2 using a CCL has 2.5 times longer LT70 than that of reference device 1. The insertion of the CCL can help a carrier transport at both sides of EML and prevent an excessive charge accumulation. As a result, CBP as bipolar host material is helpful to balance a carrier transport into the emitter and to increase the probability of carrier recombination in EML. Device 3 with a short lifetime has the narrow width emissive region due to increased CCL number, which may lead to a higher triplet exciton quenching probability [21].


                     Fig. 5
                      shows illustration of carrier injection/transport behavior and the exciton transfer mechanism in optimized device 2, which achieved a high EL performance. Excitons are generated from various regions in EML, resulting in easy transfer of electrons and holes by CCL of the bipolar transporting property. This phenomenon led to an enlargement of a recombination zone in which more excitons were generated and more electron–hole pairs were recombined.

Base on the knowledge of the model shown in Fig. 5(a) and a location of the main recombination zone, we could indicate the energy transfer paths in device 2. As observed in Fig. 5(b), both triplet exciton transfer and energy transition are shown by broken arrows, while phosphorescent emission from triplet state to ground state is shown by solid arrows. The TEBL, CCL, and host material have higher triplet energy levels than the Ir(ppy)3 as a triplet emitter. It can be explained that should be an efficient exothermic energy transfer from TCTA, CBP, and TPBi triplet state to the Ir(ppy)3 triplet state, and an excellent triplet energy confinement on the triplet emitter within the EMLs [21]. Therefore, device 2 used bipolar material as both host and one CCL, improved excellently EL performance in the green PHOLED.


                     Fig. 6
                      shows a normalized EL spectra and a CIE
                        x
                     
                     ,
                     
                        y
                      coordinate of the devices 1, 2, and 3. The devices show a green
                        1
                        For interpretation of color in ‘Fig. 6’, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.
                     
                     
                        1
                      color coordinates; device 1 (0.29,0.61), device 2 (0.29,0.62), and device 3 (0.30,0.62) at 7V, respectively. All devices show a similar and stable color chromacity. From the EL spectra, it was verified the devices 1, 2, and 3 had same maximum peak at 511nm at 7V due to the emission from Ir(ppy)3.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In summary, we have successfully fabricated a high performance green PHOLED with bipolar property as CCL. The optimized green device using the CCL shows a peak EQE of 20.42% and LE of 65.34cd/A, respectively. The device also showed 2.5 times longer operational lifetime than conventional device. The high performance green PHOLED by using CCL can be explained by the following: (1) an increased charge balance between electrons and holes due to the bipolar property of the EML host materials; (2) more effective charge recombination and uniform exciton distribution of preventing the damage caused by excessive charge accumulation; and (3) the efficient triplet exciton confinement inside the EML.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of Science, ICT&Future Planning), Korea, under the ITRC (Information Technology Research Center) support program NIPA-2013-(H0301-13-1004) supervised by the NIPA (National IT Industry Promotion Agency) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (CAFDC/Young Kwan Kim/No. 2007-0056090).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

