@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Instrumented film-insert injection compression molding for lens encapsulation of liquid crystal displays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           New technique developed for lens encapsulation of thin and flexible LCDs.


                        
                        
                           
                           In process, pressure and thermal history collected with real-time instrumentation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Display substrate options characterized according to recorded thermal history.


                        
                        
                           
                           Using PEN substrate and post-process annealing found to be effective for part quality.


                        
                        
                           
                           Warpage reduced by application of process optimization technique.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Injection compression molding

Film insert injection molding

LCD

Thermoplastic polyurethane

Lamination

Thermal characterization

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A film-insert injection compression molding process was introduced to encapsulate cholesteric liquid crystal displays with flexible and rigid lens for full protection of displays to replace the currently used time consuming hand lamination technique. For this purpose, a new interchangeable cavity instrumented hot runner mold was designed and constructed. This complex method was carefully optimized considering challenges arising from an insert multilayer display with +80% liquid crystal content as well as different thermal expansion coefficients between the layers and the lens material as a high potential of delamination and warpage. Concerning the desired physical properties including transparency, low melt viscosity and melting temperature as well as a wide range of hardness grades from soft (flexible) to hard (rigid), three different hardness grades of thermoplastic polyurethanes were found to be the best candidates for this lens application. During proposed lens encapsulation, the pressure changes were evaluated with screw and mold movements using position detection via displacement transducers attached to track the mold closure and screw forward motion. The quality of encapsulation and shrinkage related problems, as well as their elimination, were all discussed. Display substrate material selection criteria for lowered warpage were defined with supporting thermal characterizations. Among the process parameters, tested also by applying the design of experiments with Taguchi method, mold temperature was found to be the most influential parameter on warpage, followed by pin gate opening time, packing pressure, and cooling time.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Full color, reflective, bistable, lightweight and flexible cholesteric liquid crystal displays are introduced to the market offering numerous applications such as electronic skins with real time switchable colors for consumer device cases, walls and windows. They add an ultimate personalization feature to the application area and device by providing a discrete color with the advantage of low power consumption. For the current use, plastic/glass film lenses are hand laminated on the displays with a pressure sensitive optical adhesive for increased protection and ease of application. However, this process is a labor intensive process, increasing the production time and failing to encapsulate the edges of the displays as it involves only adhesion of the lens on the display. Therefore, there is a need for a more economically viable process to create fully protective display encapsulations allowing use in rigid and flexible applications. The injection molding process can be considered as a good candidate for encapsulating the displays, although the process complexity is likely to cause challenges to be resolved. Encapsulation application demands for the film-insert injection molding technique however, the traditional injection molding would generate over the limit pressure values on the delicate display elements.

In the film-insert injection molding (FIM) process, the molten polymer is injected into the mold cavity where one side of the mold wall is insulated by a pre-attached film. FIM is a cost and time-effective technique eliminating various post-processing procedures (screen printing, spray painting, laminations etc.) and improving surface quality as well as durability. Many products such as automotive interior parts, cellular phone cases, logo designs on plastic products are produced using FIM method [1,2]. Adhesion between the film and the substrate may be enhanced using this process as the injected hot molten resin can partially melt the film [3].

Disadvantages of the FIM process include the possibility of washing off the printed ink on the film, unexpected weld line, wrinkling of the film, warpage, and uneven part shrinkage [1]. Traditional injection molding process creates residual stresses due to shear and extensional flows within the process. During packing, high pressure and during solidification and cooling, thermal stresses are imposed on the part as previously mentioned; and thus, it causes deformation. The FIM process interrupts heat transfer in perpendicular direction to the cavity wall, which causes very severe residual stresses on the part. This asymmetric residual stress distribution is shown to result in extreme warpage and non-uniform shrinkage [1,4]. The effects of injection molding conditions such as injection speed, melt temperature, mold temperature, packing time, and pressure on viscoelastic behavior and deformation of film insert molded parts, were investigated in many studies [1,2,4]. Beak et al. reported their work on warpage of polycarbonate, acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene (ABS) substrates, and polymethylmetacrylate (PMMA) films [5]. Film inserts were annealed at higher temperatures to minimize the effects of thermal shrinkage and residual stress on warpage of the final parts; the thermal expansion coefficients were calculated and compared for annealed and non-annealed films [1,2,5]. Effects of film and substrate thicknesses on warpage were investigated in detail [4]. In the above mentioned studies, warpage reversal phenomenon (WRP) was also observed and presented as the combined effect of the thermal shrinkage of inserted film and the relaxation of residual stresses in FIM part during annealing. Annealing was found to affect warpage variation more than any other injection molding parameter [5]. It is clear that warpage will be a major problem for the rigid lens encapsulation of displays. As a solution to this problem, injection compression molding (ICM) process was introduced to reduce the pressures exerted on the part.

In recent years, manufacturing of precision plastic optical parts for high-quality parts such as lenses and disk substrates by injection–compression molding processes gained popularity. These are a combination of the traditional injection molding process and the compression molding process. There are many devices produced by traditional injection molding, from automotive parts to medical sensors; however, there are disadvantages involved in using this technique for making optical parts, such as high injection and packing pressure, uneven shrinkage, warpage, residual stress, and sink marks [6]. Optical birefringence is an outcome that significantly reduces optical performance (e.g. double-vision) of an optical electronic device -for instance, liquid crystal display- due to residual stresses brought about during the process. In the compression molding process, the molten polymer is compressed by the moving platen to flow into the cavity. The pressure produced in this process is more uniform along the cavity wall, and lower for post filling stage, and therefore results in less residual stress as well as less part warpage [6,7]. Drawbacks for this method include low productivity due to the time-consuming charging step, and the limitation for producing large complex shaped parts. The injection compression molding differs from traditional injection molding in terms of cavity filling, where there is further melt flow and reduction of cavity volume during the packing step. The compression stage after the partial melt filling of the cavity decreases the mold pressure and clamp tonnage by 20–50%, and reduces the cycle time and residual stresses [8]. The process is also reported to allow even packing, and thus, lower uneven shrinkage and warpage [9]. High-precision optical parts manufacturing via injection compression molding is presented in both experimental and numerical forms in the literature for various cases [10–13]. Studies conducted on molding optical lenses concluded that the parts had better quality compared to the traditional injection molded parts at the same cooling time [10,11]. The injection compression molded disks (e.g. CD-R) are shown to have enhanced dimensional accuracy on the direction perpendicular to the compression, as well as improved conformity to cavity profile and reduced warpage [12,13].

The objective of this research is to introduce a new combination of processing method, film-insert injection compression molding (FICM) for lens encapsulating displays and to investigate the process effect on transparent polyurethane lens encapsulation of cholesteric liquid crystal displays (Fig. 1
                     ). The displays are composed of an electrical tab with Kapton tape, a PET layer, a conductive coating, polymerization induced phase separated LC layer, a conductive coating, a PET layer and a thin layer of carbon coating for light absorption. A hybrid method developed to encapsulate displays is considered to reduce production time and allow full protection of the display, including display edges, as a better alternative to the currently used hand lamination technique. The goal is to encapsulate displays with a lens without delamination or damage to the liquid crystal layer and the electronics of the display. Therefore, our primary focus is to optimize processing conditions while maintaining the integrity of potentially compressible display layer of +80% liquid crystal domains. For this purpose, a highly instrumented interchangeable cavity mold was designed and built; the effect of different process conditions on final part quality was investigated along with the design of experiments for warpage optimization. A variety of grades for polyurethane lens encapsulations are presented to find use among the current rigid market applications and to foster flexible future applications of these liquid crystal displays. The potential display substrates, PET and PEN, and their thermomechanical properties were also discussed to explain lower warpage results.

The display PET layers were heat stabilized and supplied by Dupont. The 51μm PET film was used as substrate material in all displays except the optional 127μm PEN substrate displays. In some displays, 178μm PET or 127μm PEN was laminated for extra protection of the liquid crystal layer. The conductive coating on the substrate layers, the back side carbon black with binder coating, and the acrylate encapsulated cholesteric LC with spacers for the entire display device assembly, were prepared by Kent Displays Inc. The substrate layers were laser singulated for complete sealing of the device.

In order to encapsulate the LCD display, a range of thermoplastic polyurethane from flexible to rigid was used as lens material. Three grades of ε-captolactone based thermoplastic polyurethanes with 87A, 57D, and 65D shore hardness were supplied by Lubrizol Corporation (Table 1
                           ) [14]. These thermoplastic polyurethanes (TPUs) were selected in order to ensure good adhesion to PET and PEN display substrates through polar interactions such as hydrogen bonding. The reported surface energies of 43.9mJ/m2 and 39mJ/m2, respectively for the PET substrate and the selected TPU, support this information [15]. This class of materials also has excellent low temperature properties, high transparency, low melt temperature, hydrolysis and UV resistance.

@&#METHODS@&#

A prototyping mold was designed as shown in Fig. 2
                               to be used both as film insert and injection compression mold. The mold had a female (Mold A) and a male (Mold B) part to prevent flashes during injection compression molding. Mold A consists of an interchangeable female cavity with inner edge vacuum vents for holding the display on the cavity wall, and adjustable shims allowing the production of center or edge gated lens encapsulations with different thicknesses ranging from 0.5mm to 2mm. The vents on this side are also used with air compression to eject the sample at the end of process, instead of ejector pins that would potentially damage the device. Mold B consists of an interchangeable male core with Teflon squeeze insert to prevent flushes onto electronic circuit attachment of the display, and a hydraulic three zone pin gated hot runner. A P.E.T.S. hot runner system with flush mount small diameter pin gate was used in the system. The center gated lenses were designed to be used in parts having logos in the center to close the gate mark. The Plastic Engineering & Technical Services, Inc. (P.E.T.S) hot runner system allows the melt to be at lowest viscosity when it reaches the cavity to exert reduced flow pressure on displays. The mold temperatures can also be controlled with water mold heating/cooling units from Polymer Processing Equipment.

In order to investigate the dynamics of injection molding parameters during the full cycle of injection/compression molding, an instrumented injection molding machine and the mold cavity shown in Fig. 2 (1–4) were designed.

The real time process control hardware and software consists of:
                                 
                                    −
                                    Three 0.08mm Omega Insulated Thermocouples with Stripped Leads (Fig. 2(1)) that can be placed on Mold A cavity wall-PET substrate (a), PET substrate-LC layer (b), PET substrate-PU melt (c) interfaces for temperature monitoring on every layer. These locations are expected to show the temperature changes in each layer of the display during the injection process, which helped us identify and solve the problems caused by the experienced complex thermal history.

Two Kistler flush mounted Unisens® Quartz Cavity Pressure Sensors (Fig. 2(2)) controlled by an ICAM voltage amplifier unit for pressure monitoring, flush mounted on the mold core side.

Two Schaewitz LVDTs placed respectively, on mobile mold half (Fig. 2(3)) and screw motor (Fig. 2(4)) for compression and material flow monitoring.

A Labview program software to get the signal outputs and plot the results.

The Milacron Roboshot S2000i110B electric injection molding machine with these modifications was used in pre-injection mode to work as an injection compression system where the material is injected while the mold continues to close after designated pre-touch point.

The single and double side encapsulation steps are shown on Fig. 3
                              (A) and (B). The display is first placed and held in the cavity by the vacuum system. The injection cycle starts with the mold movement, when the desired pre-touch mold position as set parameter is reached; then the clamp compression starts, and material is injected at the touch position set on the software (Table 2
                              ). The melt is compressed during and after injection until the mold is entirely closed. The pin gate movement for the hot runner is controlled by a hydraulic system according to the pre-set time (Table 2). After the cooling cycle, the mold reopens and the sample is ejected out off the cavity using compressed air from the vents. The single side encapsulated sample is reversed when a double side encapsulation is required, and the shim thicknesses are adjusted to inject the second side with the same process steps.

The processing conditions used in these experiments are summarized on Table 2. The “standard conditions” designated on the table with an asterisk (∗) were kept constant while others were altered in ranges for various optimization experiments in Milacron Roboshot S2000i110B electric injection molding machine software.

The mold temperatures are different for plate A and B due to the fact that mold A is insulated by the plastic display insert, and therefore, cools down slower than mold B. The mold B is always kept at a higher temperature to approach near symmetrical cooling.

A TA Instruments Q400 thermal mechanical analyzer (TMA) was used for measuring dimensional changes in the substrates of 7mm length and 3.5mm width as a function of temperature. The force applied to the sample was 0.05N, and heating and cooling rate during the TMA scan was 25°C per minute and 3°C per minute, respectively, to simulate the in-mold temperature change kinetics. The results are normalized for real display sizes of 7cm length to 3.5cm width.

The samples were stored for 48h at the ambient temperature in order to relax residual stresses after injection molding. The warpage was measured by a micrometer with an accuracy of 0.01mm. The calculation for radius of curvature is shown in Eq. (1) where L is the length of the sample from one end of the curved edge to the other, and H is the warpage measured. Average value from three samples was recorded for each molding condition for accuracy of measurement.
                              
                                 (1)
                                 
                                    R
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                1
                                             
                                             
                                                4
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                L
                                             
                                             
                                                2
                                             
                                          
                                          +
                                          
                                             
                                                H
                                             
                                             
                                                2
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          2
                                          H
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        

Higher radii of curvature mean flatter samples, and thus, lower warpages. On Fig. 4
                           , the arc 2 has a smaller curvature compared to arc 1 and a higher radius of curvature, explaining the inversely proportional relation in the previous statement.

Taguchi method is used in order to locate optimum parameter settings for quality improvement of this application. As warpage is a major problem especially for thin wall parts with non-symmetric cooling, this optimization technique is a common way to get effective process parameters [16–18]. The orthogonal array experiments produce a reduced variance for the experiment consisting of the selected optimum parameters with a small number of experimental trials. The quality indicator in these experiments is the signal to noise ratio reflecting both average and variation of desired property of the product. It is used to evaluate effect of changing parameter on the product performance. Evaluation of the S/N ratio is based on the standards of “lower the better”, “nominal the best” or “higher the better”. In this study, lower warpage therefore, higher radius of curvature is expected. Thus, lower the better standard is chosen for the S/N ratio characteristic calculated as in Eq. (2).
                              
                                 (2)
                                 
                                    S
                                    /
                                    N
                                    =
                                    -
                                    10
                                    
                                       
                                          log
                                       
                                       
                                          10
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             1
                                             /
                                             n
                                             
                                                ∑
                                             
                                             1
                                             /
                                             
                                                
                                                   y
                                                
                                                
                                                   i
                                                
                                                
                                                   2
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where yi
                            is the value from the performance/quality characteristics, radius of curvature in this case, for ith trials, n is the number of repetitions for one trial.

Considering eight controllable processing parameters with three levels (Table 3
                           ), the L18 orthogonal array was used for this experiment.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In this research, the LCD device was placed on the wall of the mold core cavity, held in by vacuum (see Fig. 5
                     ) and a melt stream was injected either from electrical tab end or from display center, the mass of material flows along the cavity until complete filling with the action of injection and compression. Since the cavity side is insulated by the display, the frozen layer formation becomes asymmetric and thinner against this surface due to slower cooling compared to the core mold wall side where melt directly contacts the mold surface as it flows into the cavity. Therefore, the mold core side temperature was set 20°C higher than the cavity side to be able to reduce the asymmetrical heat distribution and resulting warpage.

The real-time process monitoring elements in this mold allowed us to monitor each step of the process closely as stated previously. The mold and screw movements and pressure changes are shown on Fig. 6
                      below for standard process conditions of the flexible low viscosity TPU. The process starts with mold closing (Stage I). A and B sides gets engaged (Stage II), pin gate opens at set cavity gap and material flows into the cavity where the first pressure transducer records the first peak (Stage III). The material continues to flow with compression toward the end of cavity and pin gate open (Stage IV). The pin gate open for the cycle, the mold full closure results in rising pressure for both sensors near gate (up) and flow end (down) locations (Stage V). For later stages, pin opening and mold closure can be modified according to the selected material, maximum pressure allowance, and packing criteria. Pressure peak profiles are closely related with the pin gate open/close cycles as seen here in Stages VI and VII where the pin gate closes first and an immediate pressure decrease is observed and followed by a new pressure peak at reopening. The Stage VII is the beginning of the second pin gate on/off cycle. Peak values can be controlled easily by changing shot size, pin gate open/close cycles, cavity gap, lens thickness, and material (Fig. 7
                     ). The higher viscosity TPU injection generated a higher pressure profile as expected. The selection of a lower viscosity TPU has the advantages of getting lower pressure profiles as well as lower melt temperatures compared to higher viscosity TPU. Shot size and pin gate cycle adjustments have a significant impact on the pressure control, and by varying them not only the profile height but also the width can be controlled. The comparison of single and double side lens encapsulation cases justifies that pressure exposure can be diminished by a factor of 1.8 if the pin gate cycle and the shot size is reduced as shown on Fig. 7 graph (b). The final lens thickness effect on pressure profiles is shown on Fig. 7 graph (c) where with higher lens thickness, higher pressure trend behavior is observed. Although for the thicker lens there is more space in the cavity gap, the increased amount of material (shot size) that enters in the cavity causes increased pressure values. Similarly, thinner the display to be encapsulated for a fixed final lens thickness (Fig. 6(d)), lower is the pressure profile recorded. These observations allowed us to understand the residual stress development on parts depending on the pressure history. Detailed comments on the warpage behavior will be found further below.

Pressure control is crucial since the LC display contains as much as 80% low molecular weight liquid crystal in compartments surrounded by an acrylate polymer matrix, and therefore does not exhibit high mechanical integrity under compression. The acrylate encapsulated LCs may be damaged if pressure exceeded the separator bead support tolerance (Fig. 8
                     ). It is observed that the maximum pressures that can be used in this process to maintain the display integrity, or in other words, to prevent liquid crystal destruction, is 20.68MPa for regular displays and 31.02MPa for displays with PEN substrate. The highest pressure experiment at 44.81MPa did not cause any damage on the extra 178μm PET or 127μm PEN laminated samples. Maximum pressure experienced on successful parts for different lens and display thicknesses are given on Fig. 9
                     .

During this process, a spatio-temporally complex series of events occurs. The surface facing the melt heats and results in a thermal gradient across the thickness with one side being the insulating molten plastic insert and the other side the metal mold wall. Furthermore, the rest of the surface is heated as the melt flows along the cavity, establishing thermal gradients. The temperature varies along the display length and through the thickness direction and is monitored by the real-time temperature measurements showing this complex thermal history (Figs. 10 and 11
                     
                     ).

Near gate and middle sections of the display substrate faces temperatures higher than its glass transition temperature (72°C) during the injection step. In contrast, the end section receives melt flow at lower temperatures as shown on Fig. 10. Additionally, a comparison of Graph A and Graph B reveals that the inner layer point of the display experiences lower temperatures than the outer layer at same location at the same time frame. This causes differences in expansion/shrinkage behavior at different layers in the thickness direction of the display. The complex thermal history in this process, combined with differences in thermal expansion/shrinkage behavior of different layers of display, can lead to delamination. The substrate expands upon melt contact heating if temperature rises above 90°C and upon cooling it shrinks as shown in TMA results (Fig. 11). This creates different expansion/shrinkage behavior along display length as shown on peak temperature versus position on display graph. The temperature profiles experienced at each of the points from close to gate to flow end result in not only differences between them but also differences on the machine direction to the transverse direction of single point as well. At high temperature profile history point close to gate location, the machine direction is greater than the transverse direction shrinkage as the thermal peak point exceeds the glass transition temperature of PET. If the expansion/shrinkage behavior at the flow end with lower temperature profile is placed into the same scale graph as the high temperature profile point near the gate, the shrinkage value would be extremely low, and therefore, a higher degree of delamination and warpage is expected and observed near the gate location than cavity end. Warpage in single side encapsulated displays can be reduced in two different ways: first is by setting the mold B temperature higher as shown on Table 2. Second is by using a post-processing by heating the injected side on a hot plate (HP) of 60°C after the injection molding process. This post-processing creates a symmetrical cooling effect by diminishing the cold metal wall and hot insulating plastic wall effect (Fig. 12
                     ). Table 4
                      below shows the increase in the radius of curvature of single-side 1mm and 1.5mm high viscosity lens materials encapsulated displays placed on HP after injection. These results indicate that the displays were more flat, and had less warpage than the single side lens injection molded displays without annealing post-processing.

Changing the substrate material of display from PET to PEN also results in reduced warpage results with higher radius of curvature values (Fig. 13
                     (a)). This behavior is expected as PEN has a higher Tg (121°C) than PET (72°C), and therefore, PEN is experiencing lower thermal expansion shrinkage values at same temperature profile (Fig. 14
                     ). The radius of curvature increases, warpage decreases as the display insert and lens thickness increases as seen on Fig. 13(a) and (b) respectively. In regular film insert injection molded samples, this behavior is observed as warpage increases with increasing film and decreasing lens thickness unless the film insert is annealed [2]. For the display assembly, the substrates are thermally annealed around 200°C, warpage reversal phenomenon occurs in this case and the warpage decreases with increasing display insert thickness. As also supported by previously reviewed results, thinner the lens, the lower is the pressure exerted during injection which increases the shrinkage on the part. Additionally, the lower the thermal insulation, the faster the parts cools down and has not time to relax the residual stresses which causes higher warpage. Processing parameters also affect the radius of curvature (Fig. 13(b)). Lower warpage is observed at higher injection speeds. The melt flowing faster into the cavity, the frozen skin layer is thinner and there is less thermal gradient through the thickness of the part. This effect combined with slightly higher pressure results in lower warpage. The warpage dependence on injection speeds is not always inversely proportional. Very high injection speeds can also create high orientation of polymer chains in the flow direction compared to the transverse direction which, in turn, causes a differential shrinkage and higher warpage. In this case, more uniform cooling and pressure effect apparently overcomes the orientation effect.

Shorter pin gate opening cycle selection is a plus, as more cycles can occur during a designated time injection step (filling+packing) as opposed to a longer pin gate cycle setting (Fig. 15
                     ). While compression continues along with injection, the amount of melt material getting into the cavity as well as the pressure ratio is lower at shorter pin opening cycles. This will reduce the residual stresses and shrinkage for each proceeding cycle and in return cause lower warpage (Fig. 13(b)).

The summary of radius of curvature and S/N ratio results are given on Tables 5 and 6
                     
                     , and Fig. 16
                      respectively. The ranking in terms of the most influential factor to the least is also given on Table 6 showing the most effective factor to be mold temperature. The optimal process parameter combination for this application therefore is 1L2, 2L3, 3L3, 4L3, 5L3, 6L2, 7L3 and 8L3. The graphs in Fig. 15 are plotted for the ease of understanding Table 5 results and rankings.

Using these optimum process parameters, the radius of curvature was increased by 16% from the highest result obtained in the design of experiment run 3.

Successful switchable encapsulated displays obtained by this method were summarized in Table 7
                     .

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A new hybrid method was developed for encapsulating liquid crystal displays. This combination of the film insert and injection–compression molding methods required process optimization for reliable product results free of delamination and with significantly reduced warpage (more than 10%). In order to accomplish this goal and avoid processing related problems such as warpage, the processing machine was highly instrumented as described and a design of experiment was established.

Overall, problems such as delamination and warpage were avoided or significantly reduced (16%), and switchable lens encapsulated displays were obtained by setting process conditions as found in Taguchi method. Using post process annealing, increasing lens and display thickness were also shown as solutions to the warpage problem. The second side injection also prevents warpage as the thermal history is symmetrical on both sides of the display in that case. Apart from process optimization, changing the display substrate from PET to PEN was also demonstrated to be an effective design modification to obtain delamination-free and reduced warpage parts supported by the thermomechanical behavior comparison of these two materials.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2015.01.001.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 1
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

