@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A perceptual evaluation of grating frequencies and velocities in the analysis of dynamic images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           To propose visual evaluation methods recommendations for displaying dynamic images.


                        
                        
                           
                           To examine the influence of psychological factors of dynamic images on viewer.


                        
                        
                           
                           To meet the best grating feature combinations of viewer.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cognition

Grating

Visualized evaluation

Dynamic images

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Dynamic images that possess beauty and are user-friendly can increase the use of digital technology. In addition to information conveyance, dynamic images also act as a communication bridge in the human–machine interface. Dynamic images are widely used in the application of digital media. Therefore, understanding the visual effects of dynamic images on viewers is a very important issue. From a visual communication design perspective, dynamic images influence not only image quality, but also the viewers’ perception and impression of the displayed image. In the contemporary age characterized by universal usage of dynamic images, designers should attain synchronized knowledge and understanding of relevant media technology so as to present preferred design quality in the management of digital design such as animation design, Web page design, multimedia design, and so on. The current study noted that psychological effects such as viewers’ visual attention, preferences, and understanding were more important than image quality. Therefore, this study adopted the viewpoint of “visual design” and conducted a perceptual evaluation of grating frequency and grating velocity. The pair-comparison method and scale method were adopted in the research methodology to simplify perceptual evaluations and enhance their validity. The purpose of this study was: (1) To propose recommendations for displaying dynamic images and improving image performance using perceptual evaluation methods. (2) To examine the influence of psychological factors on viewer’s comfort when they experience dynamic images. (3) To identify the best grating feature combinations that meet viewer’s psychological characteristics and propose recommendations for dynamic images design. The study concludes that it is useful to establish criteria for evaluating users’ perception and to, develop perceptual evaluations of dynamic images. It is recommended that designers find a balance between watching a moving imaging display “clearly” and watching it “comfortably” for successful reception by the viewer.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the digital era, dynamic images that possess beauty and afford comfort can increase usage efficiency [1]. In addition to information conveyance, dynamic images also act as a communication bridge in the human–machine interface [5]. Dynamic images are used on a major basis in the application of digital media. Therefore, understanding the perceptual effects of dynamic images on viewers in order to meet the requirements of successful digital design communication is a very important issue [2]. To effectively control the quality of dynamic icons, not only clear identification, but also aesthetic factors, such as pleasure in particular, are taken into account [3,14]. Due to the impact of a digital life on the present age, liquid crystal displays (LCD) have become more widely available in our daily life. The reason for the increasing popularity of the LCD is its capacity to display complex dynamic images and transfer messages through its portability and delicate interface. Examples include TV videos, motion pictures, web browses, and others. The research exploring evaluation methods for image quality has, therefore, received increased emphasis. In the past, evaluations of image quality mainly focused on physical methods such as measurement machines to obtain objective data. Unlike perceptual evaluation methods that account for the psychological mechanisms involved, these evaluation methods tend to disregard them. Consequently, establishing a standardized evaluation method characterized by an evaluation pattern that takes account of both the human eye and the machine has become a significantly valuable research subject. As numerous digitalized dynamic images must be transmitted via LCD, the current study suggests that synchronized and advanced knowledge of media technology with respect to dynamic images display is necessary in the fields of multimedia design and visual communication design in order to demonstrate that visual design is able to offer improved quality control. In light of the essentiality of establishing and applying a perceptual evaluation method to dynamic images, the current study adopted a perceptual evaluation method and applied it to image output frequencies. Verification tests were conducted using the parameters gained from the evaluation results and high-speed photography. The pair-comparison method and scale method were adopted in the research methodology. The purpose of this study was: (1) To propose a perceptual evaluation method and make recommendations for displaying dynamic images and improving image performance. (2) To examine the influence of psychological factors with respect to dynamic images and the viewer’s comfort. (3) To identify the best grating feature combinations that allow for optimal performance of the viewer’s psychological characteristics and to propose recommendations towards dynamic images design.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

With reference to the relevant research on aesthetic surveys of visual designs and methods for analyzing obtained data, Chen and Guan [2] implemented the “AIR (aesthetic information ratio)” concept to explore the aesthetic evoking (AE) level of dynamic images. Their results revealed that initial verification of the aesthetics of dynamic images was obtained through “positive and negative information”. Hung and Guan [15] investigated the relationship between the emotional imagery of advertising images and color preference factors by utilizing expert interviews and multidimensional scaling (MDS). Key factors in color preferences were used in their study, and the relationship between these factors and the aesthetics of dynamic images was analyzed as well as the predictability of these factors employing simultaneous regression using multiple regression analysis. Chen and Guan [3] adopted the “chromatic aberration” concept to investigate the level of influence of the color offset by the dynamic image. The level of color offset was predicted by curve estimation using regression analysis. Chen and Guan [4] adopted a three-step questionnaire to verify the influence of aesthetics factors on different posters. They the influence of attention, the aesthetic ‘quantity’ in the posters and visual features in independent samples. Tsai [16] adopted the quantity evaluation of information entropy in a closed system in his study, “An Information Entropy Approach to the Aesthetics of Web”. The study’s fundamental contribution was to try related statistical analysis methods, such as linear regression, Pearson correlation coefficient, factor analysis, etc. However, its major weakness was the incomplete examination of visual characteristics, indicating the lack of enough feature information for the evaluation. Limited feature information was examined and quantified in their study, which might cause sampling bias and ignore the influence of other feature information. Locher [11] proposed a semantic differential method to measure the information content of aesthetic stimuli in experimental aesthetics. In terms of research focusing on the exploration of perceptual evaluations of dynamic images, Chen and Guan [3] proposed the “scale method”: using color-shift analysis in the perceptual evaluation of dynamic images. The scale served as a frame of reference for the subjects to find a similar aberration match in standardized color samples. Under different time and environmental conditions, the scale allowed the subjects to perform a perceptual evaluation using the same measurement tool. Their research explored different gradient tools in various image design programs to create a perceptual evaluation window with a “seven scale of gradient colors” in the hope of finding the most appropriate evaluation method. The concept of “color aberration” was implemented in the study to examine dynamic images with complicated colors and contents and to explore various kinds of perceptual evaluation methods. Ida, Furuta, Miyama, and Himuro [8] employed the MTF (Modulation Transfer Function) technique to evaluate the quality of the LCD dynamic images. The so-called “MTF” is a method to objectively evaluate the image-forming capability of optical systems at different spatial frequencies. The MTF, describing the resolution and performance of an optical system, is the ratio of relative image contrast divided by relative object contrast. (MTF=Relative Image Contrast/Relative Object Contrast). When the MTF ratio is close to 1, the image quality of the LCD is close to the original object (illuminated target). The Ida et al.’s [8] study utilize the MTF to assess the image resolution performance displayed by different kinds of LCDs and CRTs. They concluded that, not only does the MTF provide a means to quantitatively verify the quality of the image’s definition and resolution using physical measurement, but is also able to verify the relationship of image and object contrasts in an optical system through grating frequencies and positions in the user’s field of view. Nevertheless, the research of Ida et al. [8] lacked a perceptual evaluation for cross-verification. Psychological effects such as visual acuity, visual acceptance, and visual attention are generated after the optic nerve receives signals during the image viewing process. When factors such as speed as well as the frequency of gratings are altered, the psychological effects might also vary. Kurita and Saito [9] utilized the time frequency feature of the “eye-tracing integration model” and the MTF (Modulation Transfer Function) technique in their study of quantitative data. In addition, the viewers’ visual attention was used as subjective evaluation of imaging frequencies. The results concluded that the dynamic burred effect is related to how optical messages or signals are processed in the retina. The dynamic burr could be assumed to be the result of the “hold-type”. Kurita and Saito [9] adopted a subjective judgment, that is, observers’ “visual contrast”, in their study. Participants were asked to adjust imaging waves on the AMLCD (Active-matrix Liquid Crystal Display) to assess any wave changes after moving the dynamic amplitude module. The experiment was implemented under various ambient light levels. The results revealed that increase of external ambient light sources would decrease the accuracy of eye-tracing integration during the visual process. The current study considered dynamic wave change as change in spacing. The process of viewing/tracing changes of imaging frequencies explained the spotlight effect of attention. The “visual comparison” method described the degree of attention influenced by the spotlight effect. Guan and Tong [7] used six commonly-used evaluation methods: the grey scale, pair comparison, ranking, ratio, category and absolute threshold methods. The different forms of perceptual evaluations mentioned in the literature are ones that have been proposed mainly in cognitive psychology. However, the different studies mentioned mainly focus on static images and more studies are needed to examine the applicability of perceptual evaluation methods to dynamic images.

Gratings are stripe patterns of black and white. In general, visual acuity to detect and differentiate visual signals can often be influenced by the spatial frequency between stripes (number of bright and dark areas within a certain distance) and their contrast (the apparent difference in brightness between bright and dark areas of the image). Consequently, gratings are frequently applied to the process of visual perception and discussed in relative research. The grating adaptation effect is when our optic nerves automatically generate a fading phenomenon on the edges of gratings, which occurs when human vision has been stimulated by a black-and-white grating contrast for a long time. This phenomenon could last for a period of time to help stabilize the optic nerves to receive signals or stimuli. In brief, gratings transform from clear-cut black and white stripes into a less apparent contrast in brightness between bright and dark areas of the image, and then into a uniform shade of gray, that is, a contrast fading phenomenon occurs [12]. From the point of view of vision, the phenomenon of grating resulting from dynamic images is called a “visual afterimage”. When viewers watch the edges of a moving foreground, there is a visual persistency period that automatically memorizes previous sensations of brightness and colors, which interferes with background color. In addition, as a result of the visual afterimage effect, brightness adaptation of the edge of the shape caused by continuous stimulation of brightness contrast would produce edge fuzziness to mend visual fatigue arising from stimulation of brightness contrast. Consequently, the blurred screen edge and interference phenomena occur during movement of the dynamic images [13]. Moreover, in the literature pertaining to the relationship between luminosity contrast and BEW, the most popularly explored variable is visual acuity; viewers are usually required to watch moving images, clear and dull, to understand how different variables affect visual acuity [10,12,6]. The study of Kaiser et al. in cognitive psychology aimed at investigating adaption and the fading phenomena in viewers when they experience brightness contrast. The study found reduced visual acuity due to low brightness contrast and increased visual acuity due to high brightness contrast. Their study suggested that the fading phenomenon experienced with dynamic images leads to increased adaptability to fuzziness. In the meantime, the acceptability of fuzziness by the viewer’s perceptual frame also improves.

@&#METHOD@&#

The current study started with an expert consultation conference to estimate the pros and cons as well as the effectiveness of perceptual evaluation methods extracted from the literature review. Three experts participated in the “expert conference”. One of them has more than ten years of experience in design and is specialized in the use of perceptual evaluation methods in the field of applied engineering. Another is serving as an instructor at a college and has eight years of experiences in design, and specializes in visual communication design research. The third expert has a background in visual communication design, eight years of experiences in design, and is a professional designer with copious practical experiences. In order to achieve the goals of this study, the expert conference involved four stages. First of all, the researchers proposed appropriate perceptual evaluation methods and a pilot experiment design based on the research question. Second, the researchers delineated the construction of relevant perceptual evaluation methods and conducted an effectiveness evaluation regarding all the methods. Third, the three experts discussed and recommended modifications to the study’s methodology. Last but not least, the researchers decided and finalized the experiment design and methodology of the study. After a discussion, the “pair-comparison method” and the “scale method” were selected to be the basis of the research methodology using T. Kurita and A. Saito’s experiment window mode. The subjects were requested to simultaneously compare the “static gratings in the upper part of the window” with the “flickering gratings in the lower window”, that is, to subjectively distinguish the differences between the two. Therefore, the current study included verification tests of two factors, namely “grating frequency” and “grating velocity”. The grating frequency factor enabled the researchers to observe different grating frequencies and compare the variance between static and flickering gratings with a fixed grating velocity. Grating velocity, on the other hand, helped in observing the differences caused by different grating velocities when grating frequencies of both upper and lower windows were controlled. The experimental stages are described below:

(1) The experiment screen size was 600×400 pixel and it was divided into upper and lower window sections (screen size of each section was 600×200 pixel). The background color was slate-gray (RGB=128). The upper window section displayed static gratings (black and white stripes in between) (see Fig. 1
                              ). The lower window section displayed flickering gratings with the same frequency. (2) The subjects compared the “clear and blurred” levels of the original “static image” and “flickering image” with the same grating frequency. (3) The 200×200 pixel was used as the basic colored square measure for cycling (segmentation); for example, 2.5 cycles signified 2.5×2=5 (five segmentations, i.e., white–black–white–black–white). (4) During the experiment, the researchers tested the frequencies of 10 gratings (see Fig. 2
                              ). (5) The moving direction of the square stripes was from left to right at a speed of 30 pixel per frame.

Based on the experts’ suggestions, Totally 10 frequencies of gratings were included: f1.5(3 segmentations); 2.5(5 segmentations); 3.5(7 segmentations); 4.5(9 segmentations); 5.5(11 segmentations), 6.5(13 segmentations); 7.5(15 segmentations); 8.5(17 segmentations); 9.5(19 segmentations); 12.5(25 segmentations); etc., (see Fig. 2). Grating cycles (in frequencies using linear regression)=(0.1389)×(number of scale)+(−1.7262)×(number of scale)+(11.0635)×(number of scale)−9.4286, R
                              =1.

(1) The experiment screen size was 600×400 pixel and it was divided into upper and lower sections (screen size of each section was 600×200 pixel). The background color was slate-gray (RGB=128). The upper window section displayed static gratings (black and white stripes in between). The lower window section displayed flickering gratings with the same frequency. (2) Subjects then compared the “clear and blurred” levels of the original “still image” and “moving images” with the same grating frequency. (3) The 200×200 pixel was used as the basic colored square measure for cycling (segmentation); for example, 1.5 cycles signified 1.5×2=3 (three segmentations, i.e., white–black–white) (see Fig. 3
                              ). (4) The researchers tried to verify the differences in perception for 10 different grating speed, for example, 2 pixel/frame–50 pixel/frame.

Totally 10 velocity of gratings were included: 2pixel/frame; 4pixel/frame; 6pixel/frame; 8pixel/frame; 10pixel/frame; 14pixel/frame; 20pixel/frame; 30pixel/frame; 40pixel/frame; 50pixel/frame, etc.

The current study consisted of both “high-speed photography” and “visualized evaluation” in order to simultaneously test and verify different influences on level of color aberrations using different image display hardwares. The high-speed photography evaluation of dynamic images was completed by the Taiwan TFT LCD Association (TTLA), while perceptual evaluation was included in the current research (see Fig. 4
                           ).

The researchers selected three LCDs with different response times to be included in verification tests. See Table 1
                            for the spec chart (see Table 1):

The Farnsworth-Munsell 100-hue test was adopted to select the participants because of the limitation of experimental variables. Sixty participants who passed the test were the major participants and each of them completed one perceptual evaluation. The visual acuity of all the participants, naked or corrected, was acceptable as long as it met the experimental requirement (i.e., field of view is between 6 and 8 degrees and is capable of identifying the images clearly). The participants were also all university students whose ages were around 20–24 and were of the equal proportion in terms of gender. Finally, the experimental staff were next to the participant’s computer, set up the hardware for participants, and, more importantly, recorded the data presented on the computer screen and explained the experimental and operating process.

This experiment included two phases and thirty participants for each phase. Thus, there were a total of 60 participants. The first phase aimed at assessing “grating frequency”. Thirty participants took part, generating a total of 10(frequency)×3(LCD)×30(participants)=900 for data analysis. The second phase aimed at evaluating “grating velocity”and involved a different group of thirty participants. A total sample of 10 (velocity)×3(LCD)×30(participants)=900 was generated for data analysis. Participants were randomly assigned to either the first or second phase, and 10 types of the frequencies/velocities were randomly shown to the participants. A test sequence involving three LCDs was also assigned to participants. Each participant had to watch three LCDs successively.

According to Kurita and Saito [9], the precision of dynamic image integration during the visual processing mode tends to be lower as light sources from the outside environment are increased. Therefore, in order to enhance precision, the formal experiment was conducted in a completely sealed darkroom where the screen light was the only light source. “Viewing angle” was identified as the degree between subjects’ eyes (a line of vision) and the dynamic rectangle above the standard line. The objective samples were 6cm (128×598 pixel) and the distance between the screen and viewers’ eyes were 50cm. The viewing angle was about 6.8 degrees based on the formula used.

Before subjects proceeded on the task, an introductory remark with a detailed description of the research purpose was provided to them. The subjects were informed that the study aimed at verifying the degree of blurriness of moving images on a monitor screen resulting from different grating frequencies as well as grating velocities and at investigating various influences on visual and cognitive perception, such as visual clarity, visual comfort, and attention-getting. The task required subjects to observe “moving gratings” first with special attention on the “overall blurry level” of gratings. The subjects were then asked to compare and contrast them with the static images demonstrated in the upper part of the screen. In addition, the subjects were asked to indicate the level of difference they perceived between the static and flickering images using a five-point Likert Scale, where 1 represented no difference, 3 little difference, and 5 a huge difference. After subjects completed a visual evaluation of each moving image, the screen was refreshed for the next window.

Dependent variables were visual clarity, visual acceptance, visual attention, BEW (in pixel) and BEW transformation (BEW converted to values between 0 and 1). Descriptions of each of the dependent variables follow:

The subjects observed both static and flickering gratings to compare and contrast the discrepancies between “clear” and “blurred”. A five-point Likert Scale was employed to rate the visual acuity of dynamic images-1 point denoted very clear, 5 very blurred, and 3 intermediate visual acuity. In order to match the subjective data with the physical data (MTF values), the evaluated results were converted to values between 0 and 1, where 0 denoted very blurred and 1 not blurred at all. The formula used to calculate visual acuity was visual acuity(transformation value 0–1)=−0.25×(Likert-scale)+1.25.

The subjects assessed image quality at various grating frequencies/velocities and rated the level of acceptance of motion blur, i.e., whether the subjects felt annoyed or comfortable when viewing dynamic images. The subjects were asked to rate their level of acceptance from 1 to 5:1 and 5 represented extremely not acceptable and extremely acceptable respectively, and 3 representing acceptable. Finally, the Likert-scale data were converted into values between 0 and 1 where 0 meant extremely not acceptable and 1 extremely acceptable. The greater value denoted a higher level of visual comfort. The formula used to calculate visual acceptance was visual acceptance (transformation value 0–1)=0.25×(Likert-scale)−0.25.

The subjects rated their level of visual attention of the stimuli using a five-point Likert-scale, where 1 point represented not eye-catching at all, 5 totally eye-catching, and 3 a medium level. The data were then converted into values ranging from 0 to 1, where 0 meant not eye-catching at all and 1 totally eye-catching. The greater value denoted a higher level of visual attention. The formula for calculating visual attention was visual attention (transformation value 0–1)=0.25×(Likert-scale)−1.25.

The current study designed a “visual chart of seven scales” after referring to the concept of the “scale method” and exercising the motion blur function of the software Photoshop to measure the BEW of moving edges at 10 different grating velocities. The subjects were requested to observe the motion blurred edge and judge on which scale point it fell. Experiment procedures were as follows: (1) The subjects compared the scale chart of the first scale, denoted as the sharp edge (clearest), with that of the seventh scale, denoted as the blurred edge (most blurred). The BEW (in pixels) was then converted using linear regression. (2) The BEW was calculated and found to be BEW (in pixels using linear regression)=(0.1222)×(number of scale)3
                           +(−1.1452)×(number of scale)2
                           +(7.5230)×(number of scale)−6.4190, R
                           2
                           =0.996.

In order to be able to compare test data obtained from both perceptual evaluation and physical measurements, the current study converted the BEW value into a number between 0 and 1. The BEW on the sharp edge was defined as 1. Greater values indicated a less blurrier edge and smaller values a more blurrier edge, but 0 denoted being on the blurred edge. Visual clarity was calculated and found to be visual clarity=−0.1696×(number of scale)+1.1686.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The results of the perceptual evaluation in terms of visual acuity indicated the smallest difference between “clear and blurred” at a grating of 1.5 (visual acuity=0.534), whereas grating 7.5 (visual acuity=0.179) represented the greatest difference. Echoing the results from the perceptual evaluation, the results of the physical measurement of MTF values revealed that grating 1.5 (MTF=0.795) had the highest imaging quality whilegrating 12.5 (MTF=0.250) had the least quality (see Table 2
                           ).

With respect to the perceptual evaluation results of visual acceptance, subjects accessed “the level of comfort” when observing the stimuli. Results indicated the highest at a grating of 1.5 (visual acceptance=0.591) and the lowest at a grating of 7.5 (visual acceptance=0.225) (see Table 3
                           ).

Regarding perceptual evaluation results of “the level of visual attention”, grating 7.5 (visual attention=0.760) revealed the highest visual attention, whereas grating 1.5 (visual attention=0.475) the lowest (see Table 4
                           ).

The data obtained from the four criteria, visual acuity, visual acceptance, visual attention, and the MTF values of physical measurement were selected as variables to administer the correlation coefficient. As shown in Table 5
                           , test results indicated no significant correlation among TTLA’s machine measurement and the three perceptual evaluation criteria. Despite the fact that the perceptual evaluation had threshold limits, how an observer accepts and attends to dynamic images should also be taken into account when judging the performance of images other than objective measurements of their quality. The data analysis also revealed a positive correlation between visual acuity and visual acceptance. The Pearson correlation coefficient was 0.983** (significantly correlated, two-tailed), denoting that as the level of visual acuity increases, so does that of visual acceptance. In addition, test results showed a negative correlation between visual acuity and visual attention, with a −0.927** Pearson correlation coefficient (significantly correlated, two-tailed). Therefore, when the level of visual acuity increases, the level of visual attention decreases. Moreover, a negative correlation between the visual acceptance and the visual attention was found. The Pearson correlation coefficient was −0.934** (significantly correlated, two-tailed), expressing that an increase in the level of visual acceptance results in a decrease in the level of visual attention. To conclude, the observer would feel more comfortable with a clearer image display. On the other hand, when the image displayed became blurred such that the observer could not see clearly, the observer would demonstrate a decreased level of acceptance. Furthermore, the observer would pay more attention to the blurred images than the clear ones (see Fig. 5
                            and Table 5).

In addition to the BEW measurement, the researchers applied regression to convert BEW data to values between 0 and 1 to obtain measurements for “visual clarity”. Based on the data analysis, while grating 20 pixel/frame (BEW=23.62 pixel and visual clarity=0.577) had the highest value, grating 2 pixel/frame (BEW=1.0072 pixel and visual clarity=0.980) had the smallest value. With respect to physical measurement, the BEW of grating 50 pixel/frame (BEW=61.375 pixel) had the highest value, transforming to 0; whereas that of grating 2 pixel/frame (BEW=2.673 pixel) had the lowest, transforming to 0.952 (see Table 6
                           ).

In relation to the difference between “clear and blurred” evaluation, grating 2 pixel/frame (visual acuity=0.931) exhibited the highest value, whereas grating 30 pixel/frame (visual acuity=0.083) demonstrated the lowest value (see Table 7
                           ).

Results indicated the highest visual acceptance at grating 2 pixel/frame (visual acceptance=0.799) and the lowest at grating 30 pixel/frame (visual acceptance=0.128) (see Table 8
                           ).

With regard to “the level of visual attention”, results demonstrated the highest visual attention at grating 30 pixel/frame (visual attention=0.893), but the lowest at grating 2 pixel/frame (visual attention=0.475) (see Table 9
                           ).

The five evaluation criteria were selected as variables to execute the correlation coefficient analysis on the data obtained from the perceptual evaluation of visual acuity, visual acceptance, and visual attention, as well as visual clarity (BEW converted into values between 0 and 1), and the physical measurement (BEW converted into values between 0 and 1). As shown in Table 4, there was a positive correlation between “visual acuity” and “visual clarity (BEW converted into values between 0 and 1)”; the Pearson correlation coefficient was 0.954** (significantly correlated, two-tailed), indicating that as the “visual acuity” increased the BEW decreased. Test results showed evidence that the visual acuity (visualized evaluation employing a five-point Likert-scale) and the visual clarity (machine measurement of BEW) were positively correlated. Moreover, there was a negative correlation between visual acuity and visual acceptance. The Pearson correlation coefficient was −0.967** (significantly correlated, two-tailed), describing that an increase in the visual acuity resulted in a decrease of visual acceptance. In addition, a negative correlation between visual acuity and visual attention was also found; the Pearson correlation coefficient was −0.974** (significantly correlated, two-tailed), demonstrating that when the visual acuity increased, the visual attention decreased. With respect to the correlation between visual acceptance and visual attention, a positive correlation was found; the Pearson correlation coefficient was −0.985** (significantly correlated, two-tailed), indicating that when the level of the visual acceptance increased, so did the level of visual attention. Results also suggested a negative correlation between visual acceptance and visual clarity; the Pearson correlation coefficient was found to be −0.895** showing that when visual acceptance increased, visual clarity decreased. Last but not least, test results exhibited a negative correlation between visual attention and visual clarity; the Pearson correlation coefficient was −0.906** (significantly correlated, two-tailed), showing that an increase in “visual attention” led to a decrease in “visual clarity” (see Fig. 6
                            and Table 10
                           ).

For the ten kinds of grating frequencies, “visual acuity” (F
                        =0.374,Sig.=0.688) was analyzed via the Duncan post hoc multiple comparison method and no significant difference was found among the three LCD screens. No significant difference was also found for “visual acceptance” (F
                        =2.016, Sig.=0.134), and “visual attention” (F
                        =0.158, Sig.=0.853). For the ten different grating velocities, the “blurred-edge-width” (“BEW”) was tested using a post hoc multiple comparison. Results showed no significant difference in the response time among the three screens. The response time of the three screens for “visual acuity” (F
                        =0.021, Sig.=0.979) showed no significant difference. No significant different was also found for “visual acceptance” (F
                        =0.646, Sig.=0.525), and for “visual attention” (F
                        =0.052, Sig.=0.950). According to the above-mentioned test results, neither of the 10 grating frequencies nor 10 grating velocities exhibited significant differences in the response time for “visual acuity”, “visual acceptance”, and “visual attention” as reflected by the perceptual evaluation results, indicating no difference in the viewer’s visual judgment on the rendered information of dynamic images affecting by the response time differences in the LCD.

One-way ANOVA analysis demonstrated a significant difference; therefore, Duncan post hoc analysis of participants’ perceptual evaluation, including their visual acuity, visual acceptance, and visual attention was conducted. Visual acuity showed a significant difference (F
                        =30.062, Sig.=0.000**) for the 10 grating frequencies, Analyzed results presented 7 groups, with the highest visual acuity being at the 1.5 cycle and the lowest at the 7.5 cycle. Visual acceptance averaged on the post-hoc test for the 10 grating frequencies. Test results indicated a significant difference (F
                        =24.101, Sig.=0.000**). 6 groups presented themselves, and the highest visual acceptance was at the 1.5 cycle while the lowest was at the 7.5 cycle. Finally, visual attention also averaged on the post-hoc test. Analyzed results indicated a significant difference (F
                        =16.201, Sig.=0.000**). There were also 6 groups and the 7.5 cycle demonstrated the highest visual acceptance whereas the 1.5 cycle demonstrated the lowest (see Fig. 5). For the 10 grating velocities, “visual acuity” (F
                        =207.411, Sig.=0.000**) was analyzed via the Duncan post hoc test and a significant difference on the participants’ perceptual evaluation was found, Analyzed results presented 8 groups, with the 2 pixel/frame depicting the highest, and 30 pixel/frame the lowest. A significant difference was found in “visual acceptance” (F
                        =113.614, Sig.=0.000**). The analyzed results presented 8 groups, where the highest emerged at the 2 pixel/frame, and the lowest at the 30 pixel/frame. As for “visual attention” (F
                        =145.772, Sig.=0.000**), the 10 grating velocities revealed a significant difference, Analyzed results presented 7 groups, with the 30 pixel/frame showing the highest, and 2 pixel/frame the lowest (see Fig. 6). In the final analysis, this study found that for both the 10 grating frequencies and the 10 grating velocities there were significant differences on participants’ perceptual evaluation.

One-way ANOVA post hoc analysis of both variables, “grating frequencies” and “grating velocities” for three types of perceptual evaluation, including visual acuity, visual acceptance, and visual attention was conducted. The three perceptual evaluations showed a significant difference (F
                        =20.724, Sig.=0.000**) with regard to the variable “grating frequencies”. Analyzed results presented two groups, namely, visual acuity and visual acceptance in one group and visual attention in the other. For the variable “grating velocities”, the three evaluations indicated no significant difference (F
                        =1.057, Sig.=0.361). Based on these test results, it was concluded that the perceptual evaluation results varied depending on various frequencies and velocities. The variable of grating frequencies demonstrated a significant influence on the three perceptual evaluations, Furthermore, the viewer’s three types of perceptual evaluations were not affected by grating the velocities.

An Independent-sample t-test was conducted to analyze the variables of “perceptual” and “machine measurement” so as to further examine the relationship between subjective ratings and physical parameters. An analysis of three types of perceptual evaluation, including visual acuity, visual acceptance, and visual attention was conducted. In order to verify whether there was a significant difference between subjective ratings and physical parameters. The ratings of on both variables, “perceptual evaluation” and “machine measurement”, averaged on the t-test. Perceptual evaluation and machine measurement for “grating frequencies” exhibited a significant difference. “Visual acuity” (t
                        =−5.527, Sig.=0.000**) was analyzed using a t-test and a significant difference was. A significant difference was found for “visual acceptance” (t
                        =−4.580, Sig.=0.000**). No significant difference was found for “visual attention” (t
                        =−0.934, Sig.=0.363). For “grating velocities”, “visual acuity” (t
                        =−1.485, Sig.=0.155) was analyzed using the t-test and no significant difference was found. No significant difference was found for “visual acceptance” (t
                        =−1.582, Sig.=0.131) and “visual attention” (t
                        =−0.510, Sig.=0.616). Otherwise stated, both visualized evaluation and machine measurement results revealed no significant difference for the different grating velocities. Nevertheless, experimental results of subjective ratings and physical parameters showed significant differences for the different grating frequencies, suggesting that participant’s visual evaluation would be affected by different grating frequencies.

Defining relevant perceptual evaluation variables, that is visual acuity, visual acceptance, visual attention, and visual clarity, to verify physical measurement results of machines was the original purpose of the current study. The results pointed close relationships between the perceptual evaluation results and grating frequency as well as the grating velocity. At the first stage of the experiment, applying ten different grating frequencies, the results exhibited that with the same conditioned speed, there was a positive correlation between visual acuity and visual acceptance and a negative correlation between the former and visual attention. The outcome explained that when images are displayed at the same speed, the clearer images lead to higher acceptance yet lower attention levels in the observers. At the second stage of the experiment, applying ten grating velocities using a single sample, the results revealed that visual acuity was negatively correlated with visual acceptance and visual attention respectively. The results show that when dynamic images are displayed at different velocities, the clearer images result in decreased visual acceptance as well as visual attention. In conclusion, the key factor with regard to dynamic images display should be a balance between executing the frequency on the one hand and the velocity on the other hand so that viewers can enjoy both clarity and comfort while observing the display. Further research in exploring this balance is recommended.

The present study found that the final perceptual evaluation results were not affected by the response time of the LCD. Consequently, the researchers assume that the study results might be different if the LCD with a shorter response time was applied in follow-up studies. However, the difference might not be significant for the perceptual evaluation results. In conclusion, this study suggested a new direction of thinking; while visual acuity was one of the perceptual criteria when evaluating dynamic images rendered on the LCD, other factors such as viewer’s visual-psychological factors should be taken into account and the “visual-psychological quality” in the practical usage of products, including comfort, preferences, and aesthetics, and others should also be focused on. This study examined the influences of “visual communication” on the rendered dynamic image quality and results are provided as a future reference in visual communication design.

This research proposed a “synchronized comparison of perceptual evaluation and machine measurement” for the purpose of examining the differences between the two in terms of message conveyance and image quality, which was lacking in both domestic and international literature. Study results verified the existence of differences between the two primarily due to the fact that the viewer’s psychology influenced greatly the results of the perceptual evaluation. These results suggested the importance of subsuming viewer’s psychological factors when exploring the quality of dynamic images. In addition, the present study proposed a conversion formula from a 5-point Likert scale to 0–1 for the synchronized analysis of the perceptual evaluation results and machine measurement data. Although the existence of possible error might be avoided without conversion, the 0–1 conversion allows researchers to find out the differences between the two. Finally, in terms of perceptual evaluation methods, this study applied the“pair comparison method” and “visual scale method”. Study results manifested that both methods met the requirements of the experimental design. As to whether the methods were applicable to more complex dynamic image evaluations, follow-up studies are recommended.

This research presented a practical example to facilitate understanding of the academic contribution and practical value of the study.

Visual acuity has been used as a critical criterion in many experiments on perception. The perception of graphics could be understood by stimulating vision through alternations of black and white lines, i.e., grating frequencies. Study results indicated that presenting dynamic gratings increases the complexity of images to viewers. In order to compensate the fatigue response of vision, the human visual system would automatically homogenize the contrast of brightness in the gratings. As a result, it is suggested that perceptual criteria, including visual acuity, visual acceptance and visual attention satisfy viewer’s acceptable range when rendering dynamic images, particularly in situations where images are moving at various velocities. Fig. 6 was between the 8 pixels/frame and 10 pixels/frame. This also described the interspersed slow velocity of the image displayed within normal playback speed to emphasize and highlight the plot. Viewers could easily pay attention to, understand, and accept messages through the fast and slow time differences of the display. This study attempted to explore the optimization of proportional time difference of displays and suggested the concept of a “3:1 time difference”, that is, 24:8 (pixels/frame) or 30:10 (pixels/frame) for visual design purposes.

Patterns, either static or dynamic images, are often applied in the visual design of website advertisements and background design of animated webpages. In terms of dynamic image design, the most important of gratings presented in patterns was background: the main function of background was to harmonize dynamic images and highlight the themes (foreground). Therefore, this study suggests taking viewer’s psychological visual balance into account when rendering dynamic images in patterns. Based on the concept that pattern background should not be stronger than the theme of the image, designers should put more importance on visual acceptance than visual attention and visual acuity. Finally, the present study recommends visual acceptance of “grating frequencies”. According to Fig. 5, grating frequencies decreased from the highest of 1.5 to the lowest of 7.5. Consequently, this study suggests that viewer’s psychological threshold limit is between 1.5 and 7.5. Viewer’s visual judgment would be interfered if the grating frequency were to exceed 7.5. With respect to visual acceptance of “grating velocities”, Fig. 6 demonstrated a gradual decrease from the highest grating velocity of 2 pixels/frame to the lowest of 30 pixels/frame. Consequently, this study suggests the 2–30 pixels/frame as viewer’s psychological threshold value. Viewer’s visual judgment would be interfered with if we were to exceed the 30 pixels/frame.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

