@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effects of screen size on rotating 3D contents using compound gestures on a mobile device

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The display size and the task-completion time are inversely related. Using a smaller display results in a shorter completion time.


                        
                        
                           
                           Tasks with obvious characteristics for the 3D objects require a shorter time to complete.


                        
                        
                           
                           Using familiar hand gestures leads to a shorter task-completion time.


                        
                        
                           
                           The Control–Display ratio is an important factor that affects the performance of the 3D rotation tasks.


                        
                        
                           
                           Adaptability and familiarity should be taken into consideration when introducing new hand gestures.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Touch gestures

Small touch screen

3D Immersive heritage

Control–Display ratio

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The development of mobile devices nowadays shows an increasing trend toward interacting with 3D digital content on a 2D touch screen. However, many issues regarding the appropriateness of the control mode require further exploration. The experimental design in this study designates displays of two sizes—five inches and seven inches—with three groups of hand gestures controlling the X-, Y-, and Z-axis, respectively. The three groups of gestures are compared in terms of how they interact with the 3D content. In the experiment, 30 adult research subjects twice completed a task that involved rotating three 3D immersive-heritage models. Their characteristics, completion time, subjective evaluation, and frequency of gesture change were measured and examined. The results from the experiment and the statistics from a two-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) indicate: (1) the display size and the task-completion time are inversely related. Under the effect of the Control–Display ratio, using a smaller display results in a shorter completion time while using a larger display results in a longer completion time; (2) tasks with obvious characteristics for the 3D objects require a shorter time to complete, but those with no obvious characteristics require more time; and (3) using familiar hand gestures leads to a shorter task-completion time, while using unfamiliar hand gestures leads to a longer completion time. The findings of this study show that the Control–Display ratio is an important factor that affects the operational performance of the 3D immersive-heritage model’s rotation tasks completed with hand gestures on small displays. In addition, adaptability and familiarity should be taken into consideration when introducing new hand gestures. Hence, the suggestions in this study constitute important guidelines for museums designing technology for the interaction between mobile devices and 3D immersive-heritage models.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Given the richness of information in today’s digital content, and the social educational responsibilities of museums and art galleries, the use of machines for reading and browsing is the best solution for insufficient manpower at the lowest cost. Due to the advancement and popularization of modern smartphones and other mobile devices, as well as multimedia technologies, research on the interaction of 3D objects in mobile communication has become a trend [1]. This is like creating an immersive interaction method on a virtual museum platform, which help the public understand and appreciate cultural heritage. Therefore, the interactive browsing content of museums can be expected to be closer to users [2]. As animation software matures, designers can produce a simulation of 3D objects with the relevant software. In such a case, interacting with artifacts without physical contact by using a mobile device is highly anticipated, and in-depth studies of 3D space display, gesture control, and natural interaction with 3D objects are of great importance [3].

The motivation for this study is to replace the mouse and keyboard—with which we have been accustomed for a long time as input tools—with touch control, because touch-control technology is becoming increasingly advanced and popular. Manipulating text and graphics with this technology is easier and more intuitive. However, when manipulating 3D objects on a 2D display, the restriction of the small screen size may cause disruptions when using touch gestures, resulting in frustration and a deterioration of the operational performance.

Thus, in consideration of the above-mentioned circumstances, this study aims to analyze the performance of manipulating 3D-simulated artifacts on 2D displays of different sizes with hand gestures in an experimental design. In addition, a quantitative method is adopted to analyze the statistics, and suggestions are made to help designers improve the rotational touch gestures for controlling 3D immersive heritage.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

To facilitate natural and rapid communication between humans and machines with current touch-screen technology, we rely on the operational interface for touch gestures [4]. A touch gesture is defined as the act of touching the display while moving over the display’s surface without losing contact before releasing. Windows Touch includes eight standard gestures, namely Panning, Press and tap, Press and hold, Select and drag, Rotation, Zoom in/out, Flicks & Two Finger tap. Standardized gestures reduce the difficulties in product development and allow users to have a more consistent experience.

Regarding the interaction between a mobile device and 3D immersive heritage mentioned in this study, consensus was reached based on studies of smartphone-users’ touch gestures to establish classification standards and to compile a touch-gesture reference guide that can be referenced for future designs and explorations in touch-gesture technology [5]. In light of racial and cultural differences, the sample size should be enlarged such that the touch-gesture classification is more comprehensive, and customized touch gestures can be explored in the future to accommodate the demands of different tasks. Moreover, an increasing number of studies are available concerning interactive touch gestures for 3D objects. For instance, the introduction of a calibration program to deal with vertical or horizontal offsets returned by vertical or horizontal drag gestures when rotating 3D objects with touch gestures is recommended in order to meet user expectations. In addition, in the descriptions of a lasso or rotational-drag touch gesture, adding circular guiding lines to the outline of an object that correspond with the different rotating axes or adding control interfaces for switching different axial modes is recommended in order to address the difficulties in matching the axes from 2D touch gestures with 3D content [6]. However, the adaptability to small touch screens still requires further exploration. Dibber et al. developed a mobile 3D-gaming prototype based on the concept of using touch gestures to perform 3D-gaming motions on the 3D display of a handheld device [7]. However, more in-depth studies on 3D perceptual and navigational technologies are needed. Moreover, the games require testing with different display devices. This technology will be conducive to the interaction between mobile device and 3D artifacts. Liang et al. asked their research subjects to interact with 3D objects using hand gestures on handheld devices with bigger screens. They analyzed the gestures and the relevant issues with an experimental design and proposed recommendations that were later used as a reference for designing a hand-gesture interaction interface [8]. Because screens of only one size were used in the experiment, however, it is recommended that comparisons be drawn by introducing screens of different sizes in the future and with more than one operational object. The issues mentioned above should be included in the discussions of similar studies. Marco et al. made use of camera technology and large mobile devices to interact with 3D sculptures, and as a result they developed a network-based systems that was humanized, flexible, and expandable [9]. Considering the differences in the shapes and functions between heritage from the East and that from the West, the feasibility of sharing the same system calls for further investigation. This paper researches different areas targeting artifacts from the East. Nils et al. offered a 3D-interactive experience using 3D Web technology that was novel to users [10]. As a result, mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets together with Web applications facilitate interaction with 3D artifacts on 2D displays. Museums in particular can build databases of 3D immersive-heritage models using the Web, and such models are not bound by geography, time, or distance and can be browsed at any time. Vlad proposed highly efficient 3D-object interaction and portrait-rotation techniques for mobile devices [11]. However, their rotation techniques are still constrained by thumb occlusion, display size, specific functions, etc. When the degree of rotation increases for complex tasks, the effectiveness depreciates because users are more likely to suffer from fatigue. Apart from rotational interaction, other issues including the coordination of tasks such as dragging and zooming are yet to be resolved. Nonetheless, rotational tasks are indeed an important factor in the interaction with 3D immersive-heritage models, making rotational hand gestures a focus for research.

Discussions of related issues such as the display size and the Control–Display ratio are also available. An increase in information has led to an increase in the display sizes of smartphones and tablets. Yet, mobile devices remain limited. Cuong found that controlling the navigational system with the cursor and fingers on a touch screen is the solution to the problem of dragging on touch screens for users with large fingers [12]. Given the limited number of research subjects, more in-depth studies are needed. This issue reflects the diversity of digital content in museums, and there is vast room for development in areas outside heritage interaction, such as in the area of augmented reality. Two-mode target selection (TMTS) was proposed after conclusions were drawn from a study on improving the selection of small virtual targets on handheld touch screens. TMTS was compared with other solutions in terms of practicality, and attempts were made to raise the satisfaction levels of small-touch-screen users under specific target layouts [13]. Suggestions for the future included a further examination of gestures such as scroll and drag to ensure that the task command is easy to interpret. This should be helpful when selecting digital content displayed in museums. Device miniaturization and content enrichment exacerbate the problems of finger occlusion and imprecision in touch-control interaction. Ying proposed a technique that uses a dynamically sized finger probe for on-screen object selection and displays magnification with visualization scaling to solve the above-mentioned problems [14]. Assessments were made on only a single type of operational task, however, and it is hence recommended to include tasks that are more realistic. This may be the approach to solving the problems arising from increased digital content in museums and the constraints of the display size. Yong and Sung investigated the impact of touch-key size and location with one-handed thumb control as a mobile-phone input. Statistics concerning the practicality of touch-key locations were collected and analyzed to confirm the availability of desirable and usable locations [15]. The differences between races and sexes result in variations to the design of touch-key sizes and locations. For 3D heritage interaction, the touch-key locations are defined with a flagpole method, and tasks were presented in portrait form. After studying the results from mobile devices, Nils et al. discovered that text orientation, display size, and font size had an impact on the time required to perform a search. Among these factors, a larger display makes content easier to read [10]. Different approaches to studying the display size can be seen in the above-mentioned literature. The display size should be further discussed with regard to experimental designs in the future.

In recent years, studies on the coordination of hand gestures with 3D immersive heritage have been on the rise. In particular, the development of digital content for museums is a coming trend. In light of this situation, incorporating gesture recognition with such content development involves innovative techniques that facilitate user interaction in the 3D environment. Therefore, the experimental design in this study is used to investigate factors that may affect user control.

@&#METHOD@&#

The objective of this study is to investigate the mental models and operational performance of mobile-device users when they complete 3D object-rotation tasks on a small display using touch gestures—with the aim of discovering a desirable calibration program for touch control. The research method is described as follows:

A total of 30 people participated in this experiment: 15 males and 15 females, aged between 20 and 40years old. They were all right-handed with normal eyesight (vision-corrected eyesight was permitted). Their hands and fingers functioned normally, with no pathological conditions. Prior to the experiment, the research subjects filled out a basic information form, providing their name, sex, age, and whether they had any prior experience using touch-control mobile devices. The survey showed that twenty-nine of them had.

The equipment used in this experiment was a Samsung Galaxy Tab (P1000) with the Android operating system. This device included a 7-in. TFT capacitive touch screen with 1024×600pixels resolution. In order to convert the events of the three-axis gyroscope sensor and the touch screen into the rotations of 3D digital contents, a software application was developed and installed on this device. In addition, through maintaining a log file on time series, the application recorded the position of touch and the angular speeds of the gyroscope sensor during the experiment.

Both 5- and 7-in. displays were used under the same experimental conditions, but the software restricted the display area and touch recognition. Another component to the experimental setup was a SONY HDR-XR350 Full HD hard-disk-drive digital camcorder, which was used for a live recording of the experiment. The recording will be referenced for behavioral analysis (see Fig. 1
                         for the experimental setup).

To prevent external interruptions and to set up the experimental equipment easily for recording clear videos, the experiments were conducted inside research rooms at the school.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

Considering the research objectives, manipulating 3D objects on a 2D display, with the restriction of a small screen size, may lead to disruptions when using touch gestures, resulting in frustration and a deterioration of the operational performance.

This study aims to analyze user performance when manipulating 3D-simulated objects on 2D displays of different sizes with hand gestures in an experimental design. In addition, a quantitative method is adopted to analyze the results, and suggestions are offered to help designers improve the rotational touch gestures for controlling 3D immersive heritage. The 3D models consisted of iconic Chinese antiques and the task was rotational control. According to the mission order from the reasonable framework of antique usage experience, when the user selected Task 1, a figure of a container popped up and a timer was initiated, with the time in seconds and the coordinates displayed. Research subjects were instructed to rotate the figure to its base. When the figure’s position matched the given coordinates, it was instantly locked. If the figure became lost in the space such that the coordinates could not be discerned, clicking the return key would bring it back to its initial position. When Tasks 2 and 3 were completed in the same manner, the timer would stop counting and the experiment ended (see Fig. 2
                         for the experiment’s operational interface).

Regarding the level of difficulty for the hand gestures, three modes—easy, difficult, and normal—were designed based on the size of the experimental object, the obviousness of the characteristics, and the degree of rotation (See Table 1
                        ). An understanding of the research subjects’ satisfaction levels and operational performance was expected during the interaction among tasks.

To attain optimal control with hand gestures, the Industrial Technology Research Institute College explained in a published summary for the development design of the multi-touch man–machine interface, users’ convenience, naturalness, and adaptability were taken under consideration in designing the hand-gesture operation. As a result, the X-axis should be controlled with a gyroscope technique when the angle of view is unobstructed, in order to remain close to the users’ operation habits. See Table 2
                         for the 3D hand gestures and Fig. 3
                         for the correspondence of the X-, Y- and Z-axis with the 3D objects. This experiment adopted a two-factor design of 2 (5-in. and 7-in.)×3 (3 tasks). The touch-gesture tasks assigned to the respective research subjects for the experiment were decided randomly for each subject. During the experiment, the research subjects held a 7-in. mobile device in their hands, and the variable touch-sampling rate for the display was set at 50Hz. The original-design mode would not be assessed with any reminder or feedback. The three tasks were repeated twice (with a 5- and 7-in. display, respectively), generating 540 parameters (from all 30 research subjects) for the experimental hand-gesture execution performance and task completion.

Hand-gesture precision can be classified as either operational precision or precision in orientation, where the difference between the two lies in the hand gestures used for the rotation device and a straight line. An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was conducted and calculations were made to determine the experimental speed, precision in orientation, and every dependent variable. The experiment data were mainly processed using IBM’s statistical analysis software, Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS). An analysis of the variance in every factor was carried out. Factors with significant differences were then processed in Duncan’s multiple-range test to study the differences between the levels.

@&#RESULTS AND ANALYSIS@&#

After summarizing the experimental data and behavioral observations from the 30 research subjects and conducting statistical analysis, the results and discussion were as follows:


                        
                           
                              1.
                              Differences were discovered in comparing the respective completion times for the 5- and 7-in. displays in the tasks (see Fig. 4
                                 ), but the difference between the mean and the standard deviation was not significant (see Table 3
                                 ). Because no significant differences were found respecting the main effect, further comparisons of the 5- and 7-in. displays were not made.

Whereas the multiple-range test showed no significant differences in terms of the display size, it did reveal differences among the tasks (F(2,29)=
                                 F
                                 =4.496, P
                                 =0.015). Moreover, significant differences were found in the relation between the display size and the task interaction (F(2,29)F
                                 =5.540, P
                                 =0.006) (see Table 4
                                 ). Because no significant differences were found in the tasks involving the 5-in. display (see Table 5
                                 ) when comparing the operational performance of the 5- and 7-in. displays in each task, a discussion is unnecessary. On the other hand, significant differences were found in the tasks involving the 7-in. displays (F(2,29)=5.552, P
                                 =0.05) (see Table 6
                                 ). Considerable differences between Task 1 and Task 2 (see Table 7
                                 ) were uncovered in the Tukey HSD post hoc test. With regard to the experimental design, Task 1 is easy and Task 2 is difficult. Hence, the results for the response operational time are as follows: the mean for Task 1 and Task 2 was 13.788404 and 29.376542, respectively.

In the paired-comparison analysis of the tasks, a significant difference resulted when Task 1 was compared with Tasks 2 and 3, but not when Task 2 was compared with Task 3 (see Table 8
                                 ). Task 1 involved rotating the container, which was large in size and had an obvious ring. Hence, it was the easiest task. Task 2 involved rotating the container’s neck, which was small in size and had no obvious characteristics. Hence, it was the most difficult task. Task 3 involved rotating the container cover, which had obvious bird decorations but was small in size. Therefore, it took longer to complete Task 3 than it did to complete Task 1. The 7-in. display resulted in a better performance for Task 1, while the 5-in. display resulted in a better performance for Tasks 2 and 3. When the two interact, the 7-in. display resulted in better operational performance for the easiest task, but the 5-in. display performed better as the tasks became more difficult (see Fig. 5
                                 ).

The number of touch clicks using the 5- and 7-in. displays were compared. The average number of touch clicks with the 5-in. display was 25.93 and the average for the 7-in. display was 24.94, falling within the margin of error. Therefore, further comparisons were not made for each task. This also indicates that the display size had no significant impact on the number of touch clicks.

The subjective statistics for the nine-tier scale data show no significant differences in the mean and standard deviation respecting the level of difficulty for each task (see Table 9
                        ). Most research subjects had experience using touch controls on mobile devices, and as a result they did not have definite feelings regarding the level of operational difficulty for the tasks. Hence, the relevant issues will be discussed in future studies.

Prior to initiating each task, the research designers explained the experiment to every research subject in person, and the research subjects completed two basic exercises with geometric figures. The exercises were conducive to increasing the effectiveness of the subjective mental workload in the operation of the actual tasks.

From the video recording, the research subjects tapped or rotated with their thumb, index finger, or by rotating the device intuitively when given the 5- and 7-in. displays. Therefore, the concept of the gyroscope was introduced in order for the research subjects to operate the tasks more naturally.

The rotational gestures from the gyroscope were more user friendly. However, rotation in the opposite direction is required whenever the target area is exceeded, which delays the task-completion time. This shows that more time is required to learn a new hand gesture.

Some research subjects expressed the opinion that a larger display was easier to control, because objects on a smaller display were often blocked by the user’s fingers and because it was easy to exceed the touch-control area. However, overreliance on the coordinates when operating the tasks adversely affected the operational performance.

Furthermore, some research subjects believed that the 5-in. display was easier to control than the 7-in. display because the rotation speed was higher, and consequently the tasks could be completed in a shorter time and distance. These results are reflected in the experimental data.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The above-mentioned observations and statistics revealed the findings as follows. First, the display size and the task-completion time were inversely related. Controlling a smaller display resulted in a shorter completion time (the average task-completion time with the three tasks using the 5-in. display was 76.9s), whereas controlling a larger display resulted in a longer completion time (the average task-completion time with the three tasks using the 7-in. display was 79.5s). These results differed from initial expectations. Nils’ research [10] demonstrated that with mobile devices, the search-time performance was influenced by the orientation of the text, the size of the display, and the font size. Of these factors, a larger display facilitated reading best, bolstering the subjective assumption that larger displays led to better operational performance. In fact, the larger displays merely resulted in an improved performance for easy tasks. As tasks became more difficult, smaller displays resulted in better operational performance (see Table 5).

Second, tasks with obvious characteristics on the 3D objects required a shorter time to complete (the average task-completion time with the 5- and 7-in. displays for Task 1, which was easy and involves objects with obvious characteristics, is 26.4 and 13.7s, respectively), but those with no obvious characteristics took longer (the average task-completion time with the 5- and 7-in. displays for Task 2, which carried no obvious characteristics, is 29.2 and 36.5s, respectively). These results conformed to the initial expectations, because locating the orientation and alignment diagrams were easier tasks when the antiques carried obvious characteristics. On the other hand, locating the orientation and alignment diagrams was more difficult when the antiques carried no obvious characteristics, and a longer completion time was required for such tasks.

Third, using familiar hand gestures led to a shorter task-completion time, whereas using gyroscope hand gestures resulted in a longer completion time. By studying the research subjects’ behavior with the camcorder footage, it was clear that they were familiar with tasks involving the manipulation of objects with their fingers by touching a display. They had better control of where their fingers stopped and released to halt the rotation of the 3D objects. Although manipulating the rotation of the objects with the gyroscope gestures was more intuitive, over-rotation and difficulty halting the rotation contributed to a longer modification time. Therefore, the introduction of new hand gestures requires users to learn and adapt.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

It was assumed from the literature review that completing the tasks with a larger display would be easier than with a smaller display. In fact, the experimental results showed that the control performance with the 5-in. display was better than with a 7-in. display when 3D objects had obvious characteristics and as the level of difficulty of the tasks increased. An analysis of the Control–Display ratio is important because the Control–Display ratio for a 5-in. display is higher than that of the 7-in. display when rotating the same distance, and thus the completion time with a smaller display will be shorter than with a larger display under this condition. As a result, the operational performance of the 5-in. display was better than that of the 7-in. display (see Fig. 6
                        ). The Control–Display ratio in this paper was defined as the variance ratio calculated with the rotational distance of the hand gesture.

The display size for mobile devices is increasing. In addition to a clearer view of text and figures, larger displays provide an easier way to complete rotation tasks. The higher gain value in larger displays makes such tasks easier than displays with a lower gain value.

Furthermore, tasks containing larger objects with characteristics were easier to complete than those containing smaller objects without characteristics. The zooming-in and -out gestures might solve part of the problem. Coloring or marking objects without obvious characteristics to facilitate guidance may be one plausible solution, but this would require further research.

The development of hand-gesture interaction in the future will be more diverse. Not only will it include tapping the display, it will apply the gyroscope. The goal for future development will be to customize hand gestures and motions, a feature that continues to call for our attention and research.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

