@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Optimized electro-optical properties of polymer-stabilized vertical-aligned liquid crystal displays driven by an in-plane field

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The proposed polymer cells have the stable molecular structure at high voltages.


                        
                        
                           
                           The turn-off response is improved by TA-9164 polymers with stronger anchoring.


                        
                        
                           
                           2wt% polymer concentration is the optimum selection for TA-9164 VA-IPS cells.


                        
                        
                           
                           The fast turn-on response at the low operating voltage (⩽12V) is demonstrated.


                        
                        
                           
                           The superior gray-level response with an improvement of ∼30% is achieved.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Polymer networks

Vertical-aligned liquid crystal

Molecular reorientation

In-plane switching

Strong anchoring

Responses

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Polymer networks are employed in vertical-aligned liquid crystal (LC) cells to stabilize the LC molecular configuration under the in-plane field driving. Two different polymer morphologies, respectively produced by the monofunctional and bifunctional acrylate monomers, are assembled on the glass-substrate surface. The enhanced electro-optical performance is observed on the LC cell with bifunctional acrylate polymer networks, and the appropriate display cell is developed at an optimum concentration of 2wt%. This type of polymer-LC cell shows the fast turn-off and turn-on responses at the low driving voltage, which are attributed to the strong anchoring and the stable LC reorientations, respectively. Furthermore, around 30% improvement in the gray-level response on the 2-wt%-TA-9164-polymer-LC cell is successfully achieved, as compared to the pure LC cells.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Liquid crystal displays (LCDs) have been widely used since they possess many attractive properties such as their low operating voltage, low power consumption, and thinness. However, the slow response of liquid crystal (LC) molecules is regarded as the major drawback of LCDs in dynamic display applications [1,2]. In the various advanced display modes, in-plane switching (IPS) [3,4], multi-domain vertical alignment (MVA) [5], and patterned vertical alignment (PVA) [6] display modes are dominant technologies in the current LCD industry because they provide a superior wide viewing angle. The conventional IPS display mode usually involves the rubbing process to effectively govern the arrangement of the LC molecules during cell fabrication [7]. After long-term driving in the IPS mode, an irreversible director deviation of LC molecules from surface polyimide alignment causes a reduction in the quality of the contrast ratio (CR) [8]. The VA-type LCDs without the rubbing process exhibit a high CR because the LC molecules are vertically aligned against the substrates with an excellent dark state, but such an alignment of negative dielectric anisotropy LC (negative LC) leads to a longer response time [9]. The turn-on time (τ
                     r) can be reduced by applying high voltage via the overdriving method [10], but sophisticated driving schemes must be employed. The turn-off time (τ
                     d) is only related to the cell gap thickness and material parameters of the negative LC, such as rotational viscosity and the bend elastic constant [9] (although the gray-level τ
                     d responses can be improved by an under-shooting driving method). The negative LC, which usually has higher viscosity, is disadvantageous to the τ
                     d and more expensive than the positive LC. To eliminate the drawbacks of VA-type LCDs, the VA-IPS display mode using the positive LC has been proposed in order to realize good electro-optical properties and fast response times [11–13].

Polymers have been employed in forming the surface pretilt direction of LCs to improve the turn-on time τ
                     r in the MVA, PVA, and VA-IPS modes [14–18]. However, the polymer stabilized pretilt angle may deteriorate the turn-off response time τ
                     d and cause light leakage in the dark state, which will sacrifice the high CR. Recently, Lee et al. produced a 3D polymer network in a VA cell during the process of polymerization [19]. The volume polymer anchoring reduced τ
                     d, but a very high driving voltage (∼80V) is required to obtain a fast τ
                     r. Generally, the in-cell polymer networks form the anchoring with respect to the substrate surface in order to improve the switching process of the LC cell, while the adverse effect on the electro-optical properties such as the transmittance, threshold voltage (V
                     th), and on-state voltage may be revealed [20]. This indicates that the electro-optical properties of the LC cell with polymers require optimizing.

In this paper, to realize superior electro-optical characteristics for information display devices, VA-IPS LC cells with polymer networks are fabricated. The polymer networks used here enhance the anchoring effect on the LC molecular reorientation, and thus provide satisfactory electro-optical performance for this display mode due to the well-controlled concentration of the selected monomer. The higher concentration doping can significantly enhance the response time, but it also gives rise to the sacrificed transmittance and increased on-state voltage. Thus trade-offs between the monomer concentration and electro-optical properties are needed to improve the performance of VA-IPS LCDs.

In this study, VA-IPS LC cells were driven by indium-tin-oxide (ITO) interdigital electrodes, which were processed on the bottom glass-substrate surface. The electrode width (w) was 4μm and the period was 12μm. Both the top and bottom glass substrates were coated with the VA polyimide (AL60101L) and heated at 200°C for 1h. After that, 4-μm glass spacers were used to control the cell gap (d) of the assembled substrates. The LC E7 (Δn
                     =0.2179, and Δε
                     =+14.5, from Merck) and monomers (UCL002 with monofunctional acrylate from DIC Corp. and TA-9164 with bifunctional acrylate from Tatung University) were mixed and then injected into the assembled cell by capillary action. The mixed concentration, which is defined as the ratio of monomer weight to the sum of monomer and LC weight, is approximately 2wt%. In addition, higher mixed concentrations of 4wt% and 5wt% were only produced using the TA-9164 monomer in order to further investigate the electro-optical properties of cell. These cells were illuminated with ultraviolet (UV) light (365nm, 16mW/cm2) for 30min to form the polymers on the substrate surface. The cell structures before and after the UV illumination are respectively illustrated in Fig. 1
                     (a) and (b). In the electro-optical measurement, the laser light with a 650-nm wavelength and ac voltage with 1kHz square waveform were applied to the cells, sandwiched at 45o (strip-electrode direction) between two crossed polarizers.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                     Fig. 2
                      shows the field-emission scanning electron microscope top-view images of the bifunctional acrylate (TA-9164) and monofunctional acrylate (UCL002) polymers on the ITO-patterned substrate surface. In Fig. 2(a), the TA-9164 polymers exhibit cross-linking morphology and connect with their neighbors. This cross-linking ability will generate high-density polymers and have a strong anchoring effect on the surrounding LC molecules. An enlarged image of the TA-9164 polymers on the local area is shown in Fig. 2(b) to clearly observe the linking morphology which is more remarkable on the cell with high polymer concentration. In contrast, the linear-linking UCL002 polymers are clustered and prone to having a spherical formation, as shown in Fig. 2(c). This structure could not strongly interact with the LC molecules, as compared with the TA-9164 polymers. The effect of the polymer structure on the electro-optical characteristics of VA-IPS cells will be demonstrated and described in detail later.

Before inspecting the polymer-LC device performance, we firstly show the LC molecular alignments of the conventional VA-IPS cell subject to the in-plane electric field in Fig. 3
                     . When the cell is driven by a small electric field, the LC molecules near the IPS-electrode edge start tilting toward the substrate surface, whereas the LC molecules, located in the center of the spacing area (s area) between the IPS electrodes, are still perpendicular to the substrate surface, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Such a discontinuous LC molecular configuration observed under the crossed polarizers shows a central “dark line” in the s area due to no phase retardation being created. In contrast, when a large electric field is applied to the cell, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b), the LC molecules near the IPS-electrode edge will more closely tilt to the substrate surface. Those in the center of the s area will be reoriented to form a parallel alignment, attributed to the minimized total free energy of the LC system with the elastic free energy and electrical free energy. This leads to the “dark line” vanishing and a continuous LC molecular configuration, formed in the s area.


                     Fig. 4
                     (a)–(o) shows the voltage-dependent images observed by polarized optical microscopy (POM) for the pure E7 LC, UCL002 polymer, and the TA-9164 polymer cells, respectively. The driven voltage, labeled as V
                     IPS, was applied to these three kinds of cells. At the initial state, when the V
                     IPS is equal to 2V (<V
                     th), the three kinds of cells are all dark due to the LC molecular director normal to the substrate surface, as shown in Fig. 4(a), (f), and (k). The E7 LC cell with TA-9164 cross-linking polymers has better vertical alignment than the pure E7 LC cell [21], leading to the improvement in light leakage in the dark state and CR. Such results can be confirmed and proved from the POM image. When the polymer concentration is increased (>2wt%), the quality of the vertical alignment of the LCs, due to the stronger cross-linking ability and stronger anchoring effect on the LC molecules, will be much better, indicating that the CR of the cell can be further enhanced.

With the V
                     IPS increased to less than 10V, the IPS-electrode edge becomes bright and the central “dark line” is observed on these three types of cells. The brightness of the pure E7 LC cell in Fig. 4(b) and (c) is superior to that of the others (Fig. 4(g) and (h) for the UCL002 polymer cell, and Fig. 4(l) and (m) for the TA-9164 polymer cell), which is attributed to the fact that polymer networks, introducing the additional anchoring effect, can affect the LC molecular reorientation. The average brightness of the TA-9164 polymer cell in Fig. 4(l) and (m) is relatively lower than that of the other two sets, indicating that TA-9164 polymers possess stronger anchoring, suppressing the rotation of the LC molecules, especially near the IPS-electrode edge. When the V
                     IPS is sufficiently increased, the alignment of the LC molecules between the IPS electrodes will become parallel to the substrate surface for the pure E7 LC cell, which will make the central “dark line” disappear. The change in molecular alignment, labeled by the red arrow in Fig. 4(c), is observed at ∼10V, indicating that the LC molecules have started rotating. Such an alignment transformation will appear in more areas when the V
                     IPS is more than 10V, as revealed in Fig. 4(d) and (e), and will affect the cell response, as will be shown later. However, this transformation is not observed on the polymer cells, even at the higher V
                     IPS (⩾20V). In addition, due to the stronger anchoring effect that suppresses the reorientation of the LC molecules and the deformation of the LC configuration of the polymer cell, the phase retardation of the polymer cells is smaller than that of the pure E7 LC cell at the same V
                     IPS. The colors of the polymer cells shown in Fig. 4(i), (j), (n), and (o) are different from those of the pure E7 LC cell shown in Fig. 4(d) and (e). Based on the above statements, the polymer-LC cells exhibit more stable molecular configuration than the pure E7 LC cell, as the large electric field is applied. This would advantage the polymer-LC cells to utilize the overdriving method rather than the pure LC cells. It is worth noting that if a lower polymer concentration (⩽1wt%) is employed in the LC cell, the alignment transformation will still be revealed. Therefore, to eliminate this phenomenon, we use the polymer concentration of at least 2wt% in this experiment.

In order to study the influence of the anchoring energy (W
                     an) on the molecular configuration of LCs, the LC alignment simulation based on the free energy principle was performed on two kinds of cells with different magnitudes of W
                     an, i.e., the E7 LC cell with weak W
                     an (= 10−5
                     J/m2) and the E7 LC cell with strong W
                     an (= 10−3
                     J/m2). The free energy density of VA-IPS LC directors including elastic and electric free energy densities can be expressed in Q-tensor form [22]. The molecular configuration at minimum free energy is determined by using commercial software LCD Master (from Shintech). Fig. 5
                     (a) and (b) present the simulated LC configuration of cell with W
                     an
                     =10−5
                     J/m2, corresponding to the V
                     IPS
                     =1.1
                     V
                     th (= 3.85V) and V
                     IPS
                     =2.3
                     V
                     th (= 8.05V), respectively. It can be seen that the LC molecular directors near the IPS-electrode edges are tilted as the V
                     IPS
                     =1.1
                     V
                     th is applied. When the V
                     IPS is increased around to 8V, the LC molecular directors within the s area are parallel to the substrate surface. Such a configuration will make obvious alignment transformation once the applied V
                     IPS is more than 10V (as exhibited in Fig. 4(c)–(e)), and will change the phase retardation and light transmittance of cell (as will be clearly demonstrated later). Fig. 5(c) and (d) separately show the molecular configurations of cell with W
                     an
                     =10−3
                     J/m2 at V
                     IPS
                     =1.1
                     V
                     th (= 3.85V) and V
                     IPS
                     =2.3
                     V
                     th (= 8.05V). As compared to the cell with weak W
                     an, the cell with strong W
                     an makes the LC molecules in the center of s area always perpendicular to the substrate surface, independent of the applied V
                     IPS. Although this configuration leads to the dark line occurrence at the crossed polarizers, the strong anchoring effect on the LC molecules makes the cell have a stable LC configuration without the alignment transformation, as exhibited in Fig. 4(m)–(o). Such a type of cell will be expected to have a more stable and superior electro-optical performance, which will be shown as follows.


                     Fig. 6
                      shows the transmittance-voltage (T-V) curves for the different types of VA-IPS cells. Due to the light scattering from the interface between LCs and polymers, the maximum transmittance (T
                     max) of each polymer cell is lower than that of the pure LC cell. At the same polymer concentration of 2%, the reduction of T
                     max associated with the polymer morphology is 4% for the TA-9164 and 11% for the UCL-002 polymer cells. It is found that the behavior of the threshold voltage (V
                     th), determined by the maximum tangent line’s slope, is also related to the type of polymer and its concentration. Among the various VA-IPS cells, the cross-linking TA-9164 polymer cell shows higher V
                     th (3.9V), and the 5wt% cell has the highest V
                     th (5.9V). This is attributed to the stronger polymer anchoring energy (W
                     an) effect on the LC molecular orientation, making the T-V curve shift right, leading to the additional electric potential energy needed to drive the LC molecules (V
                     th
                     ∝
                     W
                     an
                     1/2) [23]. Also, it is indicated that the TA-9164 polymer cell requires higher T
                     max voltage (V
                     Tmax) to have the cell with the T
                     max. In contrast, the V
                     th of the UCL002 cell is slightly smaller than that of the pure E7 LC cell, suggesting that the spherical polymers formed on the substrate surface could slightly disorder the original molecular configuration. This makes the LC molecules relatively simply driven [24–26], and results in a smaller V
                     Tmax for T
                     max. Moreover, with V
                     IPS of more than 10.5V, the LC alignment in the s area will become parallel for the pure E7 LC cell, causing phase retardation beyond the optimum phase retardation (0.5π) and greatly reducing the light transmittance. However, as the cell is mixed with polymers, the LC molecular reorientation is relatively restricted at the electrode edge, and those in the s area still keep vertical. This stable molecular configuration in the polymer-LC cell makes the light transmittance decrease moderately at a higher V
                     IPS (>V
                     Tmax). When the V
                     IPS is more than 20V, the light transmittance of the cell with a higher polymer concentration of 4 or 5wt% will finally reach a constant level due to the stronger polymer anchoring effect, suppressing further LC molecular reorientation. Some electro-optical characteristics for these VA-IPS cells are summarized in Table 1
                     .

The normalized optical responses shown in Fig. 7
                     . are measured on the pure E7 and polymer-LC cells, switching between the black state at 0V and the white state at the respective V
                     Tmax. In Fig. 7(a), the TA-9164 polymer cells exhibit faster turn-on response τ
                     r in comparison with the pure E7 LC and the UCL002 polymer cells, and the cell with TA-9164 monomer concentration of 5wt% has the shortest τ
                     r. This is attributed to the larger V
                     IPS applied to the TA-9164 polymer cells (τ
                     r
                     ∝((V
                     IPS/V
                     th)2
                     −1)−
                     1; V
                     IPS
                     =
                     V
                     Tmax) [9]. It is noticeable that although the V
                     Tmax of the UCL002 polymer cell is smaller than that of the pure E7 LC cell, τ
                     r of the UCL002 cell is slightly shorter, suggesting that the τ
                     r is not only associated with V
                     Tmax, but also with molecular alignment quality affecting the LC molecular reaction [21]. Furthermore, in Fig. 7(b), once the overdriving voltage (12V), which is the same as the V
                     Tmax of the TA-9164 polymer cell with 2wt%, is applied to the pure E7 LC cell. It is found that the τ
                     r of the pure E7 LC cell (6.5ms) is still significantly longer than that of the 2wt% TA-9164 polymer cell (3.6ms), even if the pure E7 LC cell has a weaker anchoring energy effect. The reason is that the alignment transformation appearing in the pure E7 LC cell at the higher V
                     IPS (>V
                     Tmax) results in a slow τ
                     r response. In contrast, the TA-9164 polymer cell with the stable molecular reorientation can be operated even at high driving voltage. In Fig. 7(c), the TA-9164 cell has the faster turn-off response τ
                     d, especially for the cells with a high concentration of monomer (4wt% and 5wt%). The strong anchoring energy will result in the strong recovered energy to make the driven LC molecules rapidly return to their original configuration (τ
                     d
                     ∝1/W
                     an) [9]. However, for the UCL002 cell, τ
                     d is almost the same as for the pure E7 LC cell. This is related to the spherical structure, assembled on the substrate surface and making the cell gap shrink (τ
                     d
                     ∝
                     d) [9]. Thus the slightly disorderly alignment effect on τ
                     d will be compensated for by the thickness effect. The response performances, including τ
                     r, τ
                     d, and total response time (τ) equal to the sum of τ
                     r and τ
                     d, are listed in Table 1. Although the increment of the mixed TA-9164 monomer concentration can significantly enhance the response of the cell, a very large V
                     Tmax is required to drive the LC reorientation. An optimum choice is the TA-9164 monomer of 2wt% concentration used in the LC cell that demonstrates improved response at a low driving voltage V
                     Tmax, as compared to the pure LC cell. In addition, the gray-level responses for the pure E7 LC cell and TA-9164 cell with 2wt% are respectively shown in Fig. 8
                     (a) and (b), which are equally divided into eight levels by each T
                     max. The adjacent-level response of TA-9164 cell is faster than that of pure E7 cell, which shows around 30% improvement.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The cells of VA LCs incorporating polymer networks and an in-plane switching field are fabricated, and their electro-optical characteristics are investigated in detail. Different morphologies of ULC002 and TA-9164 polymer networks are formed on the substrate surface. The alignment transformation is not observed in the polymer-LC cells, suggesting the stable molecular reorientation, even at high driving voltage. Compared with the pure LC cell, the TA-9164 polymer cell with cross-linking polymer formation improves the turn-off response of the LC molecules, resulting from the stronger anchoring effect on the LC configuration. TA-9164 polymer of 2% concentration is the optimum selection for the polymer-LC cell that has stable molecular reorientation, yielding fast turn-on response at a low driving voltage. Moreover, this type of polymer-LC cell exhibits a 30% improvement in the gray-level response. Although the high concentration of monomer mixed with E7 LC can further enhance the response performance, V
                     th and V
                     Tmax are also increased due to the polymer anchoring effect. This study demonstrates that the suitable monomer and concentration employed to the cell are very significant.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to thank the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan for financially supporting this research under Grant No. MOST 101–2221–E–027–114–MY2.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

