@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Electroluminescent properties of poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine] doped with 1,3,5-Tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)benzene

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Excimer emission is observed in the solid doped and un-doped poly-TPD film.


                        
                        
                           
                           Monomer, excimer and electromer emission are obtained in the devices with single-layer poly-TPD or bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi.


                        
                        
                           
                           Single electromer emission is acquired in TPBi doped poly-TPD OLEDs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Electromer emission is increased under high TPBi contentation and electric field.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Excimer

Electromer

Electroluminescence

poly-TPD

TPBi

OLED

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The effect of 1,3,5-Tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBi) doping on electroluminescent properties of poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine] (poly-TPD) was investigated. A series of organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs) integrated with (i) single-layer poly-TPD, (ii) blended single-layer poly-TPD:TPBi or (iii) bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi were fabricated and characterized. An excimer emission band at 500nm was found in the poly-TPD film, poly-TPD:TPBi (1:1) blend film, and poly-TPD/TPBi bilayer film. It was observed that the planar geometry of poly-TPD was related to the formation of excimers. The electromer emission, which was absent in photoluminescence, was investigated by applying an external electrical field to devices with non-doped and TPBi-doped poly-TPD. Only the electromer emission was observed in the devices with TPBi-doped poly-TPD, due to the impeded intrinsic and excimer emissions. The planar geometry of poly-TPD molecules may be destroyed due to the longer inter-ion distance with the doping of TPBi.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Recently, extensive studies have been reported on the electroluminescence (EL) spectra of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), which are substantially different from the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the OLEDs’ component materials [1–4]. The long-wavelength emission bands have often been observed in the EL spectra of OLEDs, which is mainly attributed to the emission of photons resulting from the direct irradiative recombination of holes and electrons residing in two adjacent molecules. If the two molecules are the same, it may lead to the formation of excimers or electromers [5]. On the other hand, when the two molecules are different, the recombination may result in the formation of exciplexes or electroplexes [6]. The formation of electromers is mainly attributed to the cross-electron transition from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of a molecule to the positively-charged highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the nearest neighbor or a nearby molecule within a close intermolecular range [5,7]. However, the direct LUMO–LUMO electron transition may lead to a singlet-localized molecular or excimer state in an EL process. The cross-electron transition probability is comparable to or greater than the direct-electron transition probability of a localized state molecule when the e–h pair lifetime increases. A higher cross-electron transition probability will impede the effective intermolecular transfer of carriers, so an intermolecular ion pair with longer separation distance may be more favorable to form the electromer. On the contrary, an intermolecular ion pair with shorter separation distance may facilitate excimer formation [5]. The studies outlined in this article seek to examine the formation of these excimer and electromer states.

As we know, poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)-benzidine] (poly-TPD) has been widely used as the material that transfers holes in bilayer and multilayer OLEDs. Due to its good solubility and film-forming property [8–11], poly-TPD is often used to fabricate effective quantum dot light-emitting devices (QD-LEDs) and white-light OLEDs. N-N′-biphenyl-N,N′-(bis(3-methyl phenyl)-1,1-biphenyl-4,4-diamine), also commonly known as TPD (Fig. 1
                     ), is an organic compound with a structure very similar to that of the biphenyl-containing repeat unit of poly-TPD (Note: As can be seen in Fig. 1, there are two methyl substituents in TPD, while two n-butyl substituents in the biphenyl-containing repeat unit of poly-TPD). Since both TPD and poly-TPD are tri-phenyl amine (TPA) derivatives, they have similar HOMO and LUMO energy levels. The HOMO and LUMO levels of TPD are 5.4eV and 2.3eV [3], respectively, and those of poly-TPD are 5.2eV and 2.3eV [10]. Therefore, similar optical properties, such as the formation of exciplexes with other molecules [9], are expected.

As an effective hole transporting material in multilayer OLEDs [12], TPD has been well studied both experimentally and theoretically [7,13,14]. It is especially easy for TPD to form the exciplexes when TPD is brought into contact with electron-transporting-layer (ETL) molecules, such as 2-4-biphenyl-5-(4-tert-butylphenyl)1,3,4-oxadiazole (PBD) [7,15] and 2,5-bis (5-tert-butyl-2-benzoxazolyl) thiophene (BBOT) [3] to fabricate OLED devices with the bilayer TPD/PBD or TPD/BBOT. However, the optical properties of TPD are not often investigated in devices with single-layer TPD, due to the poor EL efficiency with the transport imbalance of holes and electrons. Recently, Nayak et al. have reported interesting EL performance of the OLED device with single-layer TPD [16]. In their studies, all of the emissions from monomers, excimers and electromers were observed in the device. Hong et al. [6] have also reported that the OLED device with single-layer doped-TPD has a different emission spectrum from the device with non-doped TPD. However, there are very few reports on the emission performance of the OLED devices with doped or non-doped single-layer poly-TPD.

It is well known that an exciplex would be formed when poly-TPD is brought into contact with other molecules, especially electron transfer materials [17,18]. In this paper, we investigated the optical properties of poly-TPD when it comes in contact with 1,3,5-Tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimida-zol-2-yl) benzene (TPBi, which is an excellent hole-blocking and electron transfer material). In order to get more insights into the nature of the emitting states of poly-TPD under the influence of an external electric field, OLED devices integrated with single-layer poly-TPD, bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi, or single-layer blended poly-TPD:TPBi were fabricated. Poly-TPD was used as an emissive layer for all of these devices. As a result, the different emission properties of poly-TPD in different local environments were obtained from the EL spectra. Clearer excimer emission peaks were observed in the device with bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi. In addition, it was also found that the intensity of electromer emission was higher for the device with TPBi-doped poly-TPD than non-doped poly-TPD. Both the origin of the optical phenomena and the effect of the doping ratio of TPBi on device performance were investigated.

To investigate the origin of the optical phenomena and the effect of the doping ratio of TPBi on device performance, the following materials were used: poly-TPD (CAS: 472960-35-3) from HanFeng Chemical, TPBi (CAS: 192198-85-9) from Luminescence Chemical Engineering Technology Ltd, and poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly (styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (CAS: 155090-83-8) from Heraeus. All organic materials were used without further purification. The poly-TPD solution (concentration: 15mg/ml) was prepared by dissolving poly-TPD in chloroform. The solutions of poly-TPD:TPBi blends with different weight ratios were also prepared using chloroform as the solvent. The ITO-coated glass substrates (with a sheet resistance of 15Ω/square) were cleaned with acetone, ethanol and de-ionized water in an ultrasonic bath and then treated with UV-ozone for 10min. The PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated onto the pre-cleaned ITO-coated glass substrates and baked at 150°C in a vacuum oven for 10min to form a film with a thickness of 40nm. The poly-TPD and poly-TPD:TPBi blend solutions were spun on top of the PEDOT:PSS layer and annealed at 110°C in a vacuum oven for 1h to form 40nm thick films, respectively.

For the bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi device, TPBi film was deposited by thermal evaporation at a rate of 0.2nm/s under a pressure of 2×10−4
                     Pa, because the poly-TPD film would be destroyed if the TPBi film was formed by spin-coating using the same solution. Finally, a 100-nm thick Al electrode was deposited at a rate of 1nm/s under a pressure of 3×10−3
                     Pa. The thicknesses and deposition rates of the deposited materials were measured in situ by quartz-crystal oscillator monitors. The effective area of the device was about 9mm2. The molecular structures of poly-TPD and TPBi are shown in Fig. 1. The structures of OLEDs used for this work are:
                        
                           Device Type 1: ITO/poly-TPD (15mg/ml-40nm)/Al (100nm).

Device Type 2: ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40nm)/poly-TPD (15mg/ml-40nm)/TPBi (40nm)/Al (100nm).

Device Type 3: ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40nm)/poly-TPD:TPBi (15mg/ml-40nm)/Al (100nm), using Poly-TPD:TPBi solutions with different weight ratios (1:1; 1.5:1; 2:1).

Absorption spectra were measured with a Shimadzu-3101PC UV–Vis scanning spectrophotometer. Photoluminescence spectra were measured with Steady State and Transient State Fluorescence Spectrometer (LS-55). Electroluminescence spectra were measured with a charge-coupled device (CCD)-spectrometer (LPS-045, Lab sphere). All the measurements were carried out in air at room temperature without encapsulation.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                     Fig. 2
                      shows the absorption (Abs) and PL spectra of various films. From Fig. 2, the absorption peaks of TPBi and poly-TPD are 303nm and 368nm, respectively. However, the Abs spectrum of the poly-TPD:TPBi (1:1) blend thin film shows two absorption peaks at 312nm and 374nm. The absorption peaks of the composite film exhibit a red shift compared to that of TPBi film and poly-TPD film, which is attributed to the change of solid state environment due to the mixing of two types of molecules [19]. Nonetheless, the Abs spectrum of the composite film is still similar to the superposition of the poly-TPD and TPBi electronic signatures from the absorption spectra of TPBi film and poly-TPD film, indicating that no new complex is formed in the mixture of poly-TPD and TPBi molecules. From Fig. 2 the emission band at 380nm originating from TPBi excited by 260nm UV-light is observed. There is an overlap between the PL spectrum of TPBi and the Abs spectrum of poly-TPD at 374nm, so there may be Förster energy transfer between poly-TPD and TPBi when it is excited. The short donor–acceptor distance can improve the probability of Förster energy transfer. As more interfaces are introduced, the energy transfer in poly-TPD:TPBi blend film is more effective than that in bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi film. Compared with the PL spectra of un-doped single layer poly-TPD film and single-layer TPBi film, there is no fluorescence of TPBi in the poly-TPD:TPBi blend film or in the bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi film at the same 350nm excitation wavelength. This confirmed the presence of Förster energy transfer from excited TPBi molecules to adjacent poly-TPD molecules.

Next, the difference in PL spectra of the un-doped single-layer poly-TPD film and the poly-TPD:TPBi blend film is discussed. Some studies [20–22] have concluded that the long wavelength emission band of TPD is not due to the formation of a new chemical species, but rather is due to the excimer emission induced by “conformational defects” with a continuous distribution of energies in the solid film. From Fig. 2, there are two main emission bands located at λ
                     1
                     =430nm and λ
                     2
                     =450nm, and a very small shoulder at 490nm in the un-doped single-layer poly-TPD film. These wavelengths (λ
                     1 and λ
                     2) may originate from the monomer emission [4] of poly-TPD. The shoulder emission may be an excimer emission because the excitation spectrum for the emission at 490nm is the same as that at 430nm. The emission at 490nm is enhanced in the poly-TPD/TPBi bilayer film compared with the single-layer poly-TPD film. However, the emission spectrum changes dramatically when TPBi is doped in poly-TPD. From Fig. 2 the emission intensity of the shoulder has been greatly increased in the poly-TPD:TPBi blend film compared to the poly-TPD thin film and the bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi film. The biphenyl core in poly-TPD are formed by covalent bonding between two benzene rings (as shown in Fig. 1), and there are two TPA units around the biphenyl core structure. Vragovic et al. have reported that the biphenyl core geometry of TPD is more planar in the excited state than in the ground state, and the optical properties of TPD are mainly related to the state of the biphenyl core and two nitrogen atoms [23]. The planar geometry has a slightly higher energy than that of the twisted geometry, which is useful for the formation of excimers in the solid film. Although the emissions of monomer and excimer strongly compete with each other in the excited state of poly-TPD, the formation of excimers may be easier because of the more planar geometry.

Owing to the fact that the formation of excimers is easier in metastable states than that of monomer in the solid film, there is more energy transfer due to the shorter intermolecular distance and more interfaces in the blended poly-TPD:TPBi film than in the bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi film. The excimer emission has been strengthened with respect to the intrinsic emission. From Fig. 2, it can be seen that the emission at 490nm is comparable with that at 430nm in the blended poly-TPD:TPBi film, and the entire emission spectrum is broadened. However, in the longer wavelength region there is no new emission peak, i.e. the new excited species and the fluorescent quenching of poly-TPD is not observed in the composite film. That is, the exciplex is not found in the poly-TPD:TPBi film excited by 350nm UV-light. There is only a 0.4eV difference between the LUMO of poly-TPD (∼2.3eV) and TPBi (∼2.7eV) [22], so the effective energy transference and electron transport may be provided by TPBi.

In the EL study, the situation is different. Fig. 3
                     a shows that the EL spectra of OLED with the structure of ITO/poly-TPD (15mg/ml)/Al (100nm) (Device Type 1) at different applied voltages. Interestingly, all of the EL spectra have a broad emission band in the short wavelength region and a broad red emission band at 610nm. The EL emission intensity of the device with single-layer poly-TPD is very weak due to the high charge carrier injection barrier (especially for electrons at the poly-TPD/Al contact interface). From Fig. 3a, the ratio of the luminous intensities at 425nm and 610nm (I
                     425
                     nm/I
                     610
                     nm) is slightly decreasing with increasing applied voltage. For example, the ratio is 0.55 at 10V and 0.43 at 16V. It may be attributed to the higher degree of enhancement in the electromer emission than the intrinsic and excimer emissions under high electric fields. To more effectively analyze the EL emission of the device with single-layer poly-TPD, the EL spectrum was deconvoluted into six Gaussian emission bands located at λ
                     1
                     =425nm, λ
                     2
                     =450nm, λ
                     3
                     =490nm, λ
                     4
                     =530nm, λ
                     5
                     =610nm and λ
                     6
                     =660nm, as shown in Fig. 3b. The EL peaks (λ
                     1, λ
                     2) are assigned to the emitting local states created by electron-hole (e–h) recombination of poly-TPD. The bands at 490nm and at 530nm most probably belong to the excimer emission. Surprisingly, the red emission bands (λ
                     5, λ
                     6), which are very important in EL, are completely absent in PL and only appear when the device is driven by the electric field. They may be from the electromer emission, which have two emission peaks at 610nm and 660nm according to Gaussian fitting, and they may be attributed to the direct recombination of energetically localized electrons and holes [22]. The electromer emission under the electric field was then investigated.

The electromer emission is mainly from the direct irradiative recombination of holes and electrons residing at two neighboring molecules, or from two molecules within some appropriate close distance [5]. This is analogous to the electroplex emission. The excited state is formed by a donor molecule which localizes holes (“hole-rich”) and an acceptor molecule which localizes electrons (“electron-rich”) in a donor–acceptor molecular system [24]. Now, the electromer emission is discussed. Devices Type 2 and Type 3 were fabricated with the structures of ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40nm)/poly-TPD (15mg/ml-40nm)/TPBi (40nm)/Al (100nm) (bilayer device), and ITO/PEDOT:PSS (40nm)/poly-TPD:TPBi (1:1, 15mg/ml-40nm)/Al (100nm) (blended device), respectively. Fig. 4
                      shows the normalized EL spectra of Devices Type 1, Type 2 and Type 3 under applied voltage of 16V. It is observed that the PL and EL spectra are different. The EL spectra of all the devices have a new red emission band at 610nm which is absent from the PL spectra in the same structure. However, the relative emission intensities of the short wavelength band and the long wavelength band are very different in different devices. Compared to the device with single-layer blended poly-TPD:TPBi, which shows a weak blue emission band from 425nm to 530nm, there is a relatively strong short wavelength emission band in the devices with single-layer poly-TPD or bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi from Fig. 4. All of the spectra exhibit a strong red emission band at 610nm, which can be assigned to the electromer emission. Kalinowski et al. [5] have reported that since the electromer of anthracene ion pairs will be affected by the inter-ion distance, a longer inter-ion separation distance may be required for the formation of electromer emission. It is observed that the red emission peak of the device with blended poly-TPD:TPBi is slightly red-shifted compared with the device with single-layer poly-TPD or bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi. For example, the emission peak is 623nm in the doped poly-TPD device, and 610nm in the un-doped single-layer poly-TPD device from the EL spectra. Due to the doping of TPBi in the device with single-layer poly-TPD, the inter-ion distance of poly-TPD is longer than that in un-doped single-layer poly-TPD or bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi devices [5], and the complexity of the macromolecules is increased. Therefore, the electromer emission peak shifts toward the long wavelengths.

As discussed above, the short wavelength emission is mainly composed of the monomer and excimer emissions; however, the luminous intensities of blue emission band are clearly different in three types of devices from Fig. 4. In the devices with single-layer poly-TPD (Device Type 1) or bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi (Device Type 2), the ratio of luminous intensities at 425nm and 610nm (I
                     425
                     nm/I
                     610
                     nm) is bigger than that in the device with blended poly-TPD:TPBi (Device Type 3). For instance, the ratio (i.e. I
                     425
                     nm/I
                     623
                     nm) is 0.43 in Device Type 1, 0.41 in Device Type 2, and 0.05 in Device Type 3, respectively. The luminescence of the short wavelength band is very weak compared with that of the long wavelength band in the device with blended poly-TPD:TPBi, but in two other devices the luminescence of the short wavelength band are increased. The same trend is reflected in the excimer emission at the band of 490–530nm among all the devices.

The observed conspicuous decrease of the luminous intensity in the short wavelength band of the device with blended poly-TPD:TPBi can be explained by the interactions between poly-TPD and TPBi. According to the mechanism of monomer, excimer and electromer emissions, the monomer emission is attributed to the direct recombination of electrons in the LUMO with holes in the HOMO of poly-TPD. The formation of excimer emission in TPD has been shown to be an instantaneous process [22], and only if the excited state molecule finds an adjacent molecule in the ground state possessing planar geometry, which has slightly higher energy than that of the twisted geometry [16], the formation of excimers is favored. However, the electromer formation results from the direct transition of excess electrons (cross-electron transition) from LUMO to the positively charged HOMO of either the nearest neighbor, or the molecules within some appropriate close distance which favors the formation of electromers rather than excimers. The three emission pathways strongly compete with each other in the presence of an external electric field. In the devices with single-layer poly-TPD or bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi, the inter-ion distance is almost identical to those of poly-TPD solid films, so the conspicuous monomer and excimer emissions were found. Owing to the participation of TPBi, which is the good electron transport material, the electron injection is greatly increased in the device with bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi, the emission from monomers and excimers is more pronounced than that in the device with single-layer poly-TPD. However, in the device with blended poly-TPD:TPBi, the most prominent part of the EL spectrum is from the electromer emission. The high doping concentration of TPBi in the poly-TPD chloroform solution will favor the formation of reticular structures in the blend films of the fabricated devices, which may then enhance charge injection and charge transport. The injected electrons and holes are accumulated at the interfaces between TPBi and poly-TPD, and at the same time the planar conformation of TPA molecules may be destroyed due to the longer inter-ion distance and the participation of TPBi. Therefore, the formation of the molecular exciton and localized excimer has been strongly impeded. Consequently, the electromer emission is the major part in the EL spectrum of the device with blended poly-TPD:TPBi.

The emission spectrum shape of the film with TPBi-doped poly-TPD may depend upon how close the adjacent poly-TPD molecules are, and how many contacted interfaces are found in the blended poly-TPD:TPBi film. One would expect the monomolecular and localized excimer emission to be eliminated if the intermolecular distances were large enough and the π orbital overlaps were reduced as much as possible. In order to check this hypothesis, different amounts of TPBi were added to the poly-TPD chloroform solution and the EL spectra of the devices with TPBi-doped poly-TPD were examined. Fig. 5
                     a shows the normalized EL spectrum of the devices with different mass ratios (2:1, 1.5:1 and 1:1) of poly-TPD and TPBi under the same bias of 22V. The inset of Fig. 5a is the enlarged EL spectrum around the short wavelength emission band from 400nm to 500nm. The EL mainly comes from the electromer emissions, and there is no obvious shift of the emission peak with different mass doping ratios. From the inset, it can be seen that the monomer and excimer emissions are decreasing as the TPBi mass ratio increases. The more damaged planar geometry and the longer inter-ion distance, along with the participation of the small TPBi molecules, impede the formation of monomer and excimer states. The simple electromer emission is obtained when the mass ratio was 1:1 of poly-TPD and TPBi. Fig. 5b shows the normalized EL spectrum of the device with the mass ratio of 1:1 under different applied voltages from 18V to 28V. The short-wave band luminous intensity was observed to decrease with increasing applied voltage, and the stable emission peaks at the long wavelength band were obtained. The accumulation of electrons and holes were enhanced at the organic contact interfaces in the presence of high electric field, so the electromer emission is enhanced, and the emissions from monomer and excimer are impeded. As the applied voltage is increased, the EL wavelength of the device was observed to shift slightly toward longer wavelengths from 625nm at 18V to 631nm at 28V. This red-shift of the EL peaks may be attributed to local heat development under the application of an electric field, which can change the structural conformations of the chains and alter the electronic band structure [25].

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The EL spectra with multi-emission band of the poly-TPD-based OLEDs have been presented. The excimer emission in the short wavelength band at 500nm and the electromer in the long wavelength band at 610nm, which can be comparable to the monomer emission at 425nm, were found in the device with single-layer poly-TPD. The monomer and excimer emissions of poly-TPD were accurately identified in the devices with un-doped single-layer poly-TPD or bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi under the application of an electric field. However, these emissions were suppressed in the device with blended poly-TPD:TPBi, because of the longer inter-ion distance with the incorporation of TPBi and the destroyed planar conformations of TPA molecules, the monomer and excimer emissions would be impeded. The exciplex was not found at the poly-TPD/TPBi interface in the devices with poly-TPD/TPBi bilayer films or TPBi-doped poly-TPD blend films. The electromer emissions were observed in the presence of electric fields, and the relative emission intensity of electromer was very different in the devices with doped and un-doped poly-TPD. The longer inter-ion distance of poly-TPD molecules was useful to form electromers, and the devices with TPBi-doped poly-TPD have more salient electromer emissions than the devices with un-doped single-layer poly-TPD or bilayer poly-TPD/TPBi. The electromer emissions were strengthened when either the TPBi content, or the electric field, were increased in the device with blended poly-TPD:TPBi, and when the mass ratio was 1:1 of poly-TPD and TPBi, the simple electromer emission was obtained.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This project was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 61274063, 61125505, 61007021, 11204067 and 10874053), Beijing Technology and Business University Young Teachers Scientific Research Foundation (QNJJ2011-45), Science and Technology Research Project of Henan province (Grant No. 092102210242, 092300410215). All the experiments in this Letter were done in the Institute of Optoelectronic Technology at Beijing Jiaotong University.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

