@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Small molecules with pyridine backbone modified with carbazole, fluorine and bromine for white light-emitting diode applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Molecules with pyridine as the backbone and modified by carbazoles were synthesized.


                        
                        
                           
                           The molecules exhibit sharp blue fluorescence and excimer orange emission.


                        
                        
                           
                           Structurally, bromo was identified as a crucial factor to generate excimer emission.


                        
                        
                           
                           The molecules were made into simple structured OLED devices and emit white emission.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Pyridine

Carbazole

Bromo

Excimer

Orange

White

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Seven compounds with pyridine as the backbone modified by carbazole moiety, bromine atom and fluorine atom were synthesized. Compounds 1, 2, 3 with bromo substitution at the 2-position and carbazole modification at the 5-position of pyridine emit not only a sharp blue singlet fluorescence but also a wide banded excimer-based orange emission. The two colors coming from a single molecule can be used to fabricate a simplified white light emitting device. The electroluminescence based on 1 and 2 exhibits white-light emission with CIE coordinates of x
                     =0.25 and y
                     =0.30 for 1 and x
                     =0.33 and y
                     =0.37 for 2 at high current densities, very close to pure white emission. In addition, the role of bromo-substitution at pyridine is concluded to be essential to generate molecular interaction thus an excimer emission.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) have received significant attention over the past two decades, demonstrating their great potential in full-color flat-panel displays and solid-state white-lighting [1]. Considerable achievements in efficiency and life-time as monochromatic emission have led to the development of devices with broad band white emission [2]. One common approach to obtain white emission is to fabricate multi-emission-layer devices, in which each layer emits a primary color [3]. Another strategy is via a single layer structure in which dyes emitting different colors are doped in a host [4] and mixing molecular emission (usually blue) or exciplex emission (usually orange) are obtained [5]. White organic light-emitting diodes (WOLEDs) based on a single emitter have advantages, such as improved color stability and device stability, better reproducibility, and simpler fabrication [6].

For real-world application in optoelectronic devices, light emitters usually have to be fabricated into thin solid films. However, the concentration quenching effect caused by the strong intermolecular π–π interaction or intermolecular hydrogen bonding between neighboring fluorophores in the solid state generally debases or quenches the emission [7]. Nevertheless, aggregation-induced enhanced emission (AIEE) [8] or excimer emission [9] is welcome. The excimer exhibits characteristic featureless, red-shifted emission spectra as compared to their monomer counterparts. The excimer emission plus the monomer emission usually make up a white light emission and becomes useful in white lighting. Because few materials are known to emit “pure” white light as a single-emitting component [10], the search for new organic light-emitting materials based on excimers for use in single-emitting-component WOLEDs is of obvious interest and importance.

In this paper, we report on the synthesis, photoluminescence and electroluminescence properties of several molecular compounds modified on the pyridine backbone. Of the seven materials synthesized, 1, 2, 3 emit sharp blue singlet fluorescence and wide band excimer-based orange emission and can act as white light emitting materials. The device based on 1 and 2 exhibits white-light emission very close to the international standard.

1,4-Dibromobenzene, 1-bromo-4-fluorobenzene, iodobenzene, CuI, carbazole, n-BuLi, B(OCH3)3, 1-bromo-4-methylbenzene, 4-bromo-1,1′-biphenyl, 1-bromo-4-fluorobenzene, 2,5-dibromopyridine, 1,10-Phenanthroline, Pd(PPh3)4 and NBS were bought from Alfa Aesar. 9-phenyl-9H-carbazole (a′′), 9-(p-fluorophenyl)-9H-carbazole (b′′) and 9-(p-bromophenyl)-9H-carbazole (c′) were synthesized by Ullmann reaction, a procedure that can be commonly found in the literature [11]. A series of different substrate pydrine/carbazole-based bipolar compounds 1–7 were synthesized by suzuki reaction (Scheme 1
                        ) [12]. All solvents used in the reaction were purified by routine procedures. Other reagents were used as received from commercial sources, unless otherwise stated.


                        1H NMR was collected by a Bruker 400MHz spectrometer. Elemental analysis was carried out on a Vario III elemental analyzer. UV–vis absorption spectra were recorded on a Perkin–Elmer Lambda-35 spectrometer. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were obtained using a Hitachi F-4500 florescence spectrophotometer.

Fabrication of light-emitting devices: The OLEDs were prepared by vacuum deposition system. Organic functional layers were fabricated on a clean glass substrate pre-coated with a 150nm thick, ∼15Ω/sq indium tin oxide layer (emitting area was 2×2mm2). Prior to usage, the substrate was degreased in an ultrasonic bath by the following sequence: in detergent, de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropanol, and then cleaned in a UV–ozone chamber for 10min. Hole injection layer (HIL), emitting layer (EML) and electron transport layer (ETL) were subsequently evaporated in high vacuum (∼10−4
                        mbar). The devices were measured with a current voltage source/measure unit (Keithley 2400) and a PR-650 luminance color meter. The color meter was placed on the bottom of the test device to measure the front luminance.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The chemical structure and the synthetic procedure for the target compounds1–7are illustrated inScheme 1.Detailed synthetic procedure and characterization can be found in the supplementary material.


                     Fig. 1
                      shows the absorption spectra of 1–7 in CH2Cl2. The strong absorption peaks around the high energy 270–310nm region correspond to the spin-allowed, π–π
                     ∗ absorption of the conjugated phenyl rings. The lower energy, weaker bands around 310–360nm are attributed to the forbidden n–π
                     ∗ absorption localized at the N atoms.


                     Fig. 2
                      shows the emission spectrum of 1–7 in dilute dichloromethane. Compound 1–7 emit violet-blue with peak wavelength around 370–390nm.


                     Fig. 3
                      shows the emission spectrum of 1–7 as solid powders. Compounds 1, 2, 3 in solid state show a completely new wide-banded orange emission besides the sharp blue emission as compared to the emission in CH2Cl2 (Fig. 2). This wide-banded red-shifted orange emission is attributed to an excimer emission, originated from the aggregated intermolecular actions. We can make a potential-energy analysis of the excimer formation as follows. Two molecules form a ground state pair and the energy of the pair varies as a function of their internuclear separation. At large distances of separation (∼10Å), the intermolecular interaction is weak and the energy of the pairs is constant. At short separation distances (∼4Å), which is close to the equilibrium separation of the excimer, the energy of ground state molecular pair rises rapidly due to occupied π orbital repulsions and result in structureless, broad banded red-shifted excimer emission. The emission is to an unstable dissociative state (the molecule dissociates before it can complete a vibrational cycle and too few molecules are in a collision complex at a close enough distance for significant amounts of Frank-Condon excitation of the excimer to occur) [13]. It should be noticed that in 3, in addition to the 550nm excimer emission, an emission around 600nm is also observed. This may be assigned as a triplet excimer or excimer phosphorescence [13].


                     Fig. 4
                      is demonstration of how the intensity of excimer emission varies according to the intermolecular distances. As the concentration of 1 increases, the excimer appears. However, at a higher concentration (A
                     =0.8), the excimer emission did not increase accordingly. This may be caused by concentration quenching. Similar concentration enhanced excimer emission was also observed in samples 2 and 3.

The origin of excimer formation can be revealed from the structural analysis of the compounds. For 1, 2, 3 the excimer emission is obvious contrast to the unobservable excimer emission in 4, 5, 6, 7. The only difference between 1, 2, 3 and 4, 5, 6, 7 is that of bromo for 1, 2, 3 and fluorine or H for 4, 5, 6, 7. Even if we separate bromine atom and the pyridine in 3 by inserting a phenyl ring in between. An explanation for this “BROMO” effect may be given by consulting Ref. [14]. It is a combination of “heavy atom effect” and “halogen-bonding effect”. The heavy atom effect can promote spin–orbit coupling and improve phosphorescence. The halogen-bonding effect may join the two molecules together in a non-covalent interaction through Br–Br bond. The ease of Br–Br bonding formation can be easily understood by consulting common organic chemistry knowledge that both Br+ and Br− can be easily created from Br2.

The materials exhibit good film-deposition characteristics and thermal stability. At room temperature, the roughness of mean surface (RMS) is only 0.163nm. After being thermally treated at the degree of 100, the RMS increased to 0.392nm. The film began to crystallize at the treatment temperature of 200, its RMS reached 0.579nm. Fig. 5
                     a–c are the atomic force microscopy image of the thin films of 1 under different temperatures. Fig. 5d is the thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA). The T
                     d (decomposition temperature, defined as the temperature at which the sample loses its 5% weight) reaches as high as 320°C and 370°C for 1 and 2 respectively.

To investigate the electroluminescence (EL) properties of 1 and 2, devices with the structure of ITO/NPB(40nm)/CBP: 1/2(2.5%)(30nm)/TPBI(40nm)/LiF/Al (device 1 and 2) were fabricated. Where 4,4′-bis[N-(1-naphthyl)-N-phenylamino]biphenyl (NPB) is the hole-transporting layer (HTL); 4,4′-bis(car-bazol-9-yl) triphenylamine (CBP) is the host; 2,2′,2′′-(benzene-1,3,5-triyl)-tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazole) (TPBI) is the electron- transporting layer (ETL). Fig. 6
                     a shows the EL spectra of device 1 at different current densities. The EL spectra of device 1 exhibit double emissions at 390nm and 450nm at low current density. Under high current densities, the 390nm emission disappears and the 450nm emission moves to 480nm and become a single wide banded emission. The turn-on voltage of the device, defined as the voltage for a luminance of 1cdm−2, is recorded as 7V. For device 2, the performance appears to be very similar to that of 1. Fig. 6b shows the EL spectra of device 2 at different current densities. Also, it exhibits a single wide banded emission peaking at around 490nm. The electronic-generated emissions for both devices move bathochromicly (red-shifted∼25nm) under higher current densities. The CIE coordinates for device 1 is x
                     =0.25 and y
                     =0.30 at a high current density of 165mA/cm2 and for device 2, x
                     =0.33 and y
                     =0.37 at a high current density of 150mA/cm2. These are very close to the international standard for pure-white light emission (0.33, 0.33). Fig. 6c and d shows the current efficiency and luminance versus current density curve of the device based on 1 and 2 respectively. Compared to the reports in literature where phosphorescent materials and multi-layered devices were employed [15], the performance of our single-layer devices was relatively low. Fig. 7
                      shows the CIE coordinates for device 1and 2 at both low and high current densities, all of which locate in the white emission zone. The luminance for device and 2 reaches about 1000cdm−2 with current efficiency ∼1cdA−1.

Why the EL spectrum is different from its PL spectrum? We all know that materials have dipole moments. Under high current densities, materials might be attracted by the opposite electric field so that their intermolecular distances reach a medium level in between the monomer and excimer. Fig. 8
                      shows a potential-energy surface description of the EL emission. Molecules are labeled as donor (D) and acceptor (A) since most exciplexes appear to be stabilized mainly by charge-transfer interactions. At a large separation, the emission spectrum is that of the monomer. As D and A approach under high current densities, the bonding between them may increase due to charge transfer or excitation exchange interactions. This will cause a minimum to occur in the potential-energy curve and if this enthalpy decrease is not offset by an entropy increase, an excited state complex – an exciplex will form and emit in between the monomer and excimer emission.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In summary, compounds with pyridine as the backbone modified by carbazoles, bromine and fluorine atom were synthesized. Compounds 1, 2, 3 emit not only a sharp blue singlet fluorescence but also a wide banded excimer-based orange emission, and can act as white light emitting materials. The bromo atom is essential for generating excimer emission. Electro-generated devices based on 1 and 2 exhibit white-light emission with CIE coordinates of x
                     =0.25 and y
                     =0.30 at a high current density for 1 and x
                     =0.33 and y
                     =0.37 for 2. These are close to pure white emission.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (60868001).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2013.06.002.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 1
                           
                              Synthesis of the intermediates and materials.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

