@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Dielectric characterization and voltage holding ratio of blue-phase cells

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Phase behaviors of BP are studied by temperature-dependent dielectric spectroscopy.


                        
                        
                           
                           Phase transition temperatures are identified with derivatives of the permittivity.


                        
                        
                           
                           A circuit design with 30-V data-line voltage is proposed to evaluate VHR of a PSBP.


                        
                        
                           
                           The VHR of a PSBP cell is primarily determined by the nematic host used.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Blue phase liquid crystals

Dielectric spectroscopy

Voltage holding ratio

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The phase behaviors of a blue-phase (BP) liquid crystal in a planar-aligned cell were investigated by means of temperature-dependent dielectric spectroscopy. With auxiliary observations of optical transmission spectra and birefringent textures, we found that the transition temperatures of two adjacent mesophases, including the cholesteric-to-BPI, the BPI-to-BPII, and the BPII-to-isotropic, can clearly be distinguished by the first and second derivatives of the real-part dielectric permittivity function to the temperature at a specific frequency. Furthermore, an attempt to evaluate the device performance of a polymer-stabilized BP, derived from the photopolymerization of two monomers (RM257 and TMPTA), was achieved with a new circuital design for the voltage-holding-ratio (VHR) measurement. Preliminary results of the VHRs of samples at 180Hz and their temperature dependence were obtained accordingly.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Blue phases (BPs) are liquid–crystal (LC) mesophases, existing between chiral nematic and isotropic liquid phases. According to the structural feature of self-assembly of three-dimensional cubic lattices and double-twisted cylinders (DTCs) separated by disclinations, three types of BPs, designated BP-III with isotropic symmetry, BP-II with simple cubic symmetry and BP-I with body-centered cubic symmetry, can sequentially be found on cooling from the isotropic phase [1–3]. Owing to the frustrated-phase limitations, the temperature range of BPs is quiet narrow, typically 1–2°C. The detailed phase behaviors of BPs thus play a critical role for carrying out BP-related research. Even when the temperature range of BPs can readily be widened by the polymer stabilization (PS) [4,5], a simple and precise examination on the phase behaviors of a PSBP system is helpful to enhance the reliability and the yield for the photopolymerization process for specific BPs. In this regard, some well-known techniques, such as the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) [6] and the polarizing optical microscopy (POM), measurements of the Kössel diagrams [7], transmission/reflection spectra [8], and image processing [9], have been proposed to characterize the temperature regime as well as the type of BPs. Moreover, because the material properties of LCs are generally dependent of the temperature, the recognition of the phase diagram of BPLCs has been also reported based on the temperature dependence of the refractive index [10] or dielectric constant [11].

BPLCs with intriguing structural and optical features reveal several advantages such as no need of alignment layers, excellent dark appearance in the field-off state, wide viewing angle, insensitivity of driving voltage to the cell gap, and sub-microsecond gray-to-gray response time. These benefits allow BPLCs to hold promise for realizing next-generation displays. Consequentially, most of researchers from both academia and industry pay much attention to the development of BPLC materials and displays. As thus, some alluring approaches for solving fatal drawbacks, especially the narrow temperature range [4,5] and the high operating voltage [12–16], have successively been proposed to boost the commercialization. On the other hand, when a BPLC cell is treated with surface alignment, the uniformity of BP morphologies can considerably be promoted owing to the presence of surface anchoring force and thus the induction of pinning effect on the BP platelets. Moreover, improvement on the operating voltage, hysteresis, response time, and the profile of reflection band of planar-aligned BPLC cells have recently been established in comparison with a conventional BPLC cell without surface treatment [17–20]. Apart from aforementioned approaches for the development of BPLC devices, the measurement of voltage holding ratio (VHR) for BPLC displays stemming from the point of view of prospective consideration is essential in that the VHR of a LC display is one of reliable parameters for evaluating the strength of ionic effect and thus the display performance as well as image qualities [21,22]. Ideally, the VHR is defined as the fraction of the residual voltage after a certain duration in open circuit to the initially applied voltage. Sufficiently high VHR indicates high reliability of image quality with uniform contrast ratio and stable image without flicking. In view of currently available instruments for VHR measurements, the voltage of data-line signal supplied for the charging process in a LC cell is typically 10V, which is much smaller than the operating voltage of BPLC cells. Nevertheless, various circuit designs, enabling the maximum voltage across the BPLC cell up to 30V, have been demonstrated very recently [23–25]. These innovations could be regarded as pathways for the development of new driving circuits with high data-line voltage to measure the VHR of BPLCs.

In this study, we extended our previous work on LC phase behaviors [11], presenting a feasible and reliable approach for phase identification based on temperature-dependent dielectric spectroscopy. By subjecting a BPLC mixture into planar-aligned cells, the accuracy and reliability for the examination of transition temperatures between two adjacent phases are clarified according to the first-order and second-order derivatives of the real-part dielectric permittivity with respect to the temperature. Moreover, in considering the prospect for the development of next-generation displays in the LC industry, we proposed a VHR circuit enabling the supply of data-line voltage up to 40V and frame rate of 180Hz that attempts to investigate the VHR of various PSBP cells. The comparison of VHR between the PSBP and its host LC counterpart is presented. The behavior of temperature-dependent VHR of both cells is briefly clarified in a given temperature regime.

The BPLC mixture used is composed of a nematic LC host (HDE) doped with a right-handed chiral additive (R5011) at a weight ratio of 3.2wt%. The specifications of HDE, including birefringence Δn, dielectric anisotropy Δε and the clearing point T
                     NI, are Δn
                     =0.204 (HCCH datasheet) at the wavelength of 589nm and temperature of 20°C, Δε
                     =60.64 (measured from a 15-μm-thick planar cell at 40V and 0V in this laboratory) at the frequency of 1kHz and temperature of 25°C and T
                     NI
                     =97°C. In addition, a BPLC/monomer mixture was prepared by mixing two kinds of ultraviolet (UV)-curable monomers (RM257 and TMPTA) and a photoinitiator (Irgacure184) with the BPLC. The weight ratios of RM257, TMPTA and Irgacure184 to the BPLC are 4.6, 3.1 and 0.3wt%, respectively. In this study, the BPLC was injected into planar-aligned cells with an electrode area (A) of 0.25cm2 and cell gap (d) of 15±0.5μm for dielectric investigations whereas the BPLC/monomer mixture and the pristine nematic LC (HDE) counterpart were individually subjected into non-aligned (i.e., without polyimide) and planar-aligned (i.e., with polyimide) cells with A
                     =1.0cm2 and d
                     =4.5±0.5μm for comparison of their VHR data. To fabricate PSBP samples from the BPLC/monomer mixture, each BPLC/monomer cell was cooled slowly from the isotropic to the BPI phase with a cooling rate of 0.1°C/min using a temperature controller (Linkam T95-PE). When reaching the temperature where the cell exhibited the BPI phase, the photopolymerization process was performed by using a UV lamp with wavelength of 365nm. The UV intensity and the exposure time were 2mW/cm2 and 30min, respectively.

The temperature of all investigated cells for measurements was controlled using Linkam T95-PE, too. Here, both the cooling and heating rates were 0.1°C/min. Because the cell is set in a nearly airtight stage of the temperature controller, the moisture and ions from the air [26], enabling the deterioration of BPLC material, can considerably be blocked. Moreover, according to a relevant paper concerning the time-varying ionic properties of a LC cell [27], cells for the measurement of VHR were kept undisturbed for one day after the LC injection. The frequency (f) dependence of the complex dielectric function, defined as ε
                     ∗(f)=
                     ε′(f)–iε″(f), where ε′ is the real-part and ε″ the imaginary-part dielectric permittivity, was acquired in the frequency regime between 20Hz to 2×106
                     Hz using a LCR meter (Agilent E4980A). The probe voltage was as small as 0.05 V
                     rms in the sinusoidal waveform to avoid the contribution of field-induced molecular reorientation to the dielectric data. To manifest the phase diagram of the BPLC cell derived from dielectric data, auxiliary approaches, including the observation of texture images and measurement of transmission spectra, were employed. The optical textures at given temperatures were obtained by means of a polarizing optical microscope (Olympus BX51). Note that the rubbing direction of the planar-aligned BPLC cell was set parallel to the transmission axis of the polarizer. The transmission spectra of BPLC cells in the wavelength range between 400 and 700nm were acquired with a high-speed fiber-optic spectrometer (Ocean Optics HR2000+) in conjunction with a halogen light source (Ocean Optics HL2000). In regard to the measurement of the VHR, Fig. 1
                      illustrates a newly designed circuit specifically tailored for simulating the charging and discharging behaviors of a PSBP cell. Compared with currently available commercial instruments for the VHR measurement, the maximum voltage of the data-line signal in our circuit is promoted to +40V, which is more applicable to the driving of a typical BPLC or PSBP cell. However, since a commercially available field-effect-transistor instead of an integrated circuit is used as the element to provide high enough voltage for the charging behavior of the BPLC sample, the generation of data-line voltage is limited to direct-current signals. This could lead to the accumulation of ionic impurities on the substrates and thus reduce the effective voltage across in the BPLC cell when measuring the VHR. Consequently, it should be emphasized here that the VHR measured based on the proposed circuit is a relative value containing errors contributed by the system-generated ionic effect. The scan line was 5V with an offset of 2.5V in the square waveform with a frame time of 5.56ms (corresponding to a frequency of 180Hz) and the pulse width of the scan line (t
                     1) was 5.14 μs at 180Hz. The data-line and scan-line signals were supplied by an arbitrary function generator (Tektronix AFG-3022B) and a power supply (GW INSTEK GPS-3303), respectively. According to the resulting VHR curve obtained with an oscilloscope (Agilent Technologies DSO5054A), the VHR can be defined as [28]:
                        
                           (1)
                           
                              
                                 VHR
                                 
                                 (
                                 %
                                 )
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             A
                                          
                                          
                                             t
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             A
                                          
                                          
                                             i
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 ×
                                 100
                                 %
                                 ,
                              
                           
                        
                     where Ai
                      and At
                      represent the areas under the ideal and actual voltage curves during a frame time, respectively. Note that the total period of time for a VHR measurement is ∼10s. This means that the sample is driven by hundreds of frames and the VHR obtained is an average value.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                     Fig. 2
                      shows the transmission spectra and the corresponding POM images of a planar-aligned BPLC cell at various temperatures. At temperature T
                     =94.0°C, the cell remains in the isotropic phase where the transmission spectrum exhibits no reflection band in the wavelength regime between 400 and 700nm and the texture presents a complete dark appearance under crossed polarizers, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Upon cooling from the isotropic phase, the transmission spectra of the cell, featuring reflection bands with central wavelengths of ∼478nm at T
                     =92.0°C (Fig. 2(b)) and ∼542.5nm at T
                     =90.0°C (Fig. 2(c)), respectively, indicate the presence of the BPII phase with lattice direction of [100] and the BPI phase with lattice direction of [110] [4]. Noticeably, compared with a conventional BPLC cell without alignment layers and surface treatment, mono-domain alignments with blue color for the BPII at T
                     =92.0°C and green color for the BPI at T
                     =90.0°C are both realized in the planar-aligned BPLC cell. Such uniform BP morphologies without platelet domains are a result of strong anchoring force provided by the surface treatment, which have well been confirmed in some relevant studies [17–20]. The colors obtained in BPs seem to be of dependence of the chiral concentration, in which it gets blue-shifted with increasing content of chiral dopants [29]. In this work, the chiral concentration of the cell is 3.2wt%. As the average refractive index of the LC host is 1.63 and the helical twisting power of the chiral dopant to the host material is ∼135μm−1, the calculated central wavelength in the CLC phase is about 380nm. Therefore, the reflection band in the transmission spectrum of the cell in the CLC phase at T
                     =88.0°C is nearly outside the measured wavelength range (i.e., 400–700nm), as shown in Fig. 2(d). According to the aforementioned results, the phase sequence of the planar-aligned BPLC sample, as identified preliminarily based on the temperature-dependent transmission spectra and POM images, is designated: Iso-93.3°C–BPII-90.3°C–BPI-88.9°C–CLC.

On the other hand, we have proposed a feasible approach for the phase examination of BPLC materials by means of temperature-dependent dielectric spectroscopy [11]. We found that the transition temperature between two phases in a BPLC cell without any surface treatment can be distinguished by performing second-order derivatives of the real-part dielectric permittivity at a specific frequency with respect to the temperature. In this study, the suggested dielectric technique is extended to investigate the phase behaviors of the BPLC cell with anti-parallel planar alignment. Fig. 3
                      displays the complex dielectric spectrum of the planar-aligned BPLC cell at an arbitrary temperature of 90°C. Dielectric spectroscopy as a versatile approach has widely been employed to interpret the relaxation and polarization behaviors of a dielectric substance, attributable to the orientation of dipoles and the electrical conductivity, in a given frequency regime. Accordingly, the distinct behaviors of the frequency-dependent complex dielectric function shown in Fig. 3 can be monitored in specific frequency regimes. In the case of frequencies ranging from 103 and 104
                     Hz, the variation in ε′ and ε″ as f
                     −3/2 and f
                     −1, respectively, are attributable to the space-charge as well as electrode polarizations. The dielectric behavior in this frequency regime has well been exploited to clarify the ionic effect in a LC cell in terms of the ionic density, diffusivity, and conductivity [28,30]. When the frequency increases, the real part ε′(f) in the frequency range between 104 and 106
                     Hz becomes nearly invariant, suggesting that the mobile ions in such a high-frequency regime can hardly respond to the probe electric field and ε′(f) is thus primarily dominated by the dipolar orientation of LC molecules. Because the molecular ordering is generally a function of the temperature and it constitutes one of the crucial factors for the discrimination of LC mesophases, the tendency of ε′(T) is thus meaningful to briefly draw the phase diagram of a LC material. To minimize the contribution of the electrical conductivity, ε′(T) at f
                     =317kHz, where the corresponding dielectric loss shows the minimum value, is defined as the static dielectric permittivity ε
                     s and is established for the phase examination of the planar-aligned BPLC in this work.


                     Fig. 4
                      depicts ε
                     s(T) as well as its first-order (dε
                     s/dT) and second-order (d2
                     ε
                     s/dT
                     2) derivations of the planar-aligned BPLC cell in the temperature range between 80 and 105°C. Since the molecular ordering and thus the physical properties of LC phases reveal distinctive dependencies of the temperature, one can briefly identify the transition temperature between two adjacent phases in accordance with the discontinuous variation in ε
                     s(T), as shown in Fig. 4(a). When considering the thermodynamic effect induced by the applied probe electric field, the change in entropy in a cell is directly related to the value of dε
                     s/dT 
                     [31]. It has been demonstrated that the temperature-dependent dε
                     s/dT curve of a LC material is analogous to the specific heat data obtained by the DSC [32]. Consequently, the peak and step-function signals revealed in the T-dε
                     s/dT curve are adaptable to denoting the weakly first-order and second-order phase transitional behaviors in a LC cell, respectively. According to the type of phase transition for a BPLC cell with a known phase sequence of Iso–BPII–BPI–CLC, it is worth mentioning from Fig. 4(b) that the intense and feeble peak signals with local maxima at T
                     =88.4°C and 90.8°C are transition temperatures of the weakly first-order BPI-to-CLC and BPII-to-BPI phase transitions, respectively. Moreover, the step-function signal at the temperatures ranging from 92.0 to 96.0°C is the result of the second-order Iso-to-BPII phase transition. Subsequently, the transition temperature between the isotropic and BPII can further be attained by performing the second-order temperature derivative of the static permittivity (d2
                     ε
                     s/dT
                     2). As shown in Fig. 4(c), a peak signal with local maximum at T
                     =93.4°C corresponding to the Iso-to-BPII phase transition temperature in the temperature regime between 92.0°C and 96.0°C can be obtained. As a result, the phase diagram of the planar-aligned BPLC cell, referring to the results of Fig. 4, can be identified as Iso–93.4°C–BPII–90.8°C–BPI–88.4°C–CLC, which is very close to that identified by the POM images as well as the transmission spectra. This indicates that the temperature-dependent dielectric spectroscopy can be considered as a new pathway for the precise examination of temperature range of each blue phase. In comparison with mechanisms of the three approaches used for phase examination in this study, the proposed dielectric technique reveals relatively less dependence of cell area to influence the accuracy of the detected phase behavior. Moreover, the dielectric technique is more applicable to inspect the phase sequence of PSBPs in that the measurement can be carried out in darkroom to prevent the unexpected post-photopolymerization by the normal lights.

To inspect the reliability of the proposed dielectric technique for the phase identification of BPLCs, four test rounds of temperature-dependent dielectric measurements, sequentially from round 1 to round 4, were accomplished for an identical planar-aligned BPLC cell. Note that each round contains a temperature-cooling process, followed by a temperature-heating process. Fig. 5
                      displays the four rounds of the temperature-dependent ε
                     s at f
                     =317kHz of a planar-aligned BPLC cell. It can clearly be seen that the temperature dependence of ε
                     s of the planar-aligned BPLC cell in each round gives rise to a ε
                     s(T) hysteresis between the cooling and heating courses. The maximum width of the hysteresis (W) among the four rounds is 0.90°C found in round 3. The resulting hysteresis in each round is presumably due to the residual phase upon heating from the CLC to the BPI phase. By calculating the first-order derivative dε
                     s/dT and second-order derivative d2
                     ε
                     s/dT
                     2 based on the data shown in Fig. 5, the transition temperatures of Iso-to-BPII, BPII-to-BPI, and BPI-to-CLC of the planar-aligned cell in each round are listed in Table 1
                     . For each phase transition, T
                     cooling and T
                     heating denote the transition temperatures acquired in the cooling and heating processes, respectively. ΔT
                     PT represents the difference between the two transition-temperature values, T
                     heating–T
                     cooling. It is worth mentioning that the values of ΔT
                     PT
                     ∼1°C for the BPI-to-CLC phase transition in the four rounds are all positive. This suggests the delay of phase transition during the heating process, owing to the type of first-order phase transition. Furthermore, according to the data shown in Table 1, the percent error (E%), estimated to evaluate the reliability and accuracy of the dielectric technique for measuring phase transition temperatures, is defined as:
                        
                           (2)
                           
                              
                                 E
                                 %
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                〈
                                                
                                                   
                                                      T
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      PT
                                                   
                                                
                                                〉
                                                -
                                                
                                                   
                                                      T
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      PT
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                〈
                                                
                                                   
                                                      T
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      PT
                                                   
                                                
                                                〉
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 ×
                                 100
                                 %
                                 ,
                              
                           
                        
                     where T
                     PT is the phase transition temperature obtained in each round and 
                        
                           〈
                           
                              
                                 T
                              
                              
                                 PT
                              
                           
                           〉
                        
                      is the average temperature acquired by averaging the temperatures of the four test rounds. In the case of the Iso–BPII phase transition, which is identified in accordance with the data of d2
                     ε
                     s/dT
                     2, the maximum value of E% (∼0.21%) is found in the heating process. Regarding the weakly first-order phase transitions, the maximum values of E% are 0.42% for the BPII-to-BPI and 0.13% for the BPI-to-CLC. The larger E% of the BPII-to-BPI transition temperature, compared with that of the BPI–CLC, can be understood because of the weak peak signal that can readily be affected by the systematic noise as well as the temperature variation. As a result, the proposed dielectric technique with E%<1% is highly reliable for the phase examination of the BPLC with surface treatment.


                     Fig. 6
                      reveals the time-dependent voltage curves of a PSBP cell and a pristine HDE counterpart driven by the data-line voltage Vi
                     
                     =+30V at the temperature of T
                     =25°C. It has been ascertained that the BPI phase in the PSBP cell used in this study can be realized in the temperature range from 70°C down to at least −35°C. Note that the operating voltage to induce maximum transmission of the PSBP cell is 32V and above. As calculated by following Eq. (1), Fig. 6 discloses that the VHR of the PSBP cell is 72.1%, which is comparable to that of the LC host (VHR=74.5%). This implies that the VHR of a BPLC is dominated primarily by the host LC material. Alternatively, since the VHR simulates the charging and discharging behaviors in a LC cell, this result also connotes that the additives (including the chiral agent and monomers) incorporated into LC do not significantly affect the ionic behavior inside the PSBP cell. However, the VHR of ∼72% of the PSBP shown in this work does not reach the criterion for applications to the modern-day display. Since the LC material with large dielectric anisotropy typically contains cyano groups, the possible reason for the PSBP with such a low VHR originates from the used LC host with cyano groups, showing strong dipole moment and high conductivity to interact readily with ions. It has been reported that the VHR of cyano-based LCs is lower than that of fluorinated-LCs [33]. According to aforementioned results, using a TFT-grade LC material with high resistivity as the host material in the PSBP is expected to yield high VHR, comparable to that of currently used LC displays. Furthermore, Fig. 7
                      shows the temperature-dependent VHR data of the PSBP and the host HDE cells within the temperature range between −30 and 60°C driven by Vi
                     
                     =+30V. The behavior of VHR as a function of the temperature in both cells can be divided into two temperature regions. In the temperature regime between −30 and 10°C, the VHR of both cells decreases with decreasing temperature. This finding is presumably due to the change in dielectric permittivity, elastic constants and viscosity with temperature; thus, elevating the operating voltage of a cell. On the other hand, in the temperature regime between 11 and 60°C, the VHR of the nematic cell preserves nearly as a constant presumably due to Vi
                      (=30V) to be way beyond the operating voltage needed whereas it decreases with increasing temperature in the PSBP cell. The temperature-dependent behavior of VHR in the PSBP cell in this temperature regime can be attributed to the more vigorous ionic transport at higher temperatures, leading to the more severe ion effect [28] for the PSBP cell.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In conclusion, the phase behaviors of a BPLC cell with rubbed planar-alignment layers have been investigated by means of temperature-dependent dielectric spectroscopy. By calculating the first (dε
                     s/dT) and second (d2
                     ε
                     s/dT
                     2) derivatives of the static permittivity ε
                     s at a specific frequency, where the value of ε
                     s is primarily dominated by the orientation of LC molecules, we observed that the first-order and second-order phase transition temperatures of the planar-aligned BPLC cell can be precisely obtained in accordance with the peak signals in the T-dε
                     s/dT and T-d2
                     ε
                     s/dT
                     2 curves, respectively. In addition, the phase sequence of the BPLC, derived from the proposed dielectric technique, is in good agreement with that identified by the observation of POM images. Apart from the phase examination, this work has succeeded in designing a new circuital system for measuring VHR of a LC cell with data-line voltage up to +40V and frame rate of 180Hz. Based on this design, we have shown the temperature-dependent VHR of a PSBP cell and made comparisons with that of its host LC counterpart. We found that the VHR of both the LC host and the PSBP cells reached a maximum value at ∼10°C. Particularly, the experimental data suggest that the VHR of a PSBP cell depends strongly on the host LC used. In considering the application of PSBPs to displays, it is expectable to obtain a PSBP cell with high VHR when using TFT-grade LCs instead of the LC used in this study (HDE). As a result, the present work opens a pathway for evaluating the performance of PSBPs in next-generation display applications. Further innovation on the proposed VHR circuit will be directed to the data-line signal, enabling the generation of high voltage in the alternative-current form to promote the accuracy of the obtained VHR.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This research is financially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, under Grant no. 104-2112-M-009-008-MY3.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

