@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Investigation of starburst phenomenon using ray tracing for touch screen panels

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examine the effect of metal meshes on the starburst phenomenon of touch panels.


                        
                        
                           
                           The gentle slope of the patterned edges generates the starburst patterns.


                        
                        
                           
                           The starburst patterns were suppressed substantially by a light-absorbing material.


                        
                        
                           
                           A random metal grid shows many but weakened threadlike beams.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Starburst

Metal mesh

Touch screen panel (TSP)

Ray tracing

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  We investigate the effect of the metal pattern shape (i.e., square, hexagonal, and random grids) on the starburst phenomenon of touch screen panels (TSPs) based on opaque metallic grids. It is demonstrated that a standalone random metal grid can suppress the starburst phenomenon to a great extent. By way of ray tracing simulation, we have found that specular reflection of light on the gentle slope of the patterned edges of metallic grids contributes to the generation of starburst patterns. It is also addressed that employing a light-absorbing material and increasing metal grid spacing can reduce the intensity of starburst patterns.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

For touch screen panels (TSPs), high-transparency indium-tin-oxide (ITO) has been widely used as a sensing electrode [1,2]. In recent years, however, metal films such as silver (Ag) and copper (Cu) exhibiting lower price, higher electrical conductivity, and superior durability attract much attention for medium and large TSPs [3]. To ensure high optical transmittance, those metals must be patterned with the width of less than 10μm. Using a printing process, however, it is difficult to fabricate metal mesh having the grid width of less than 5μm. In the case where the width of metal mesh is large, there arises an interference between the metal mesh of a TSP and the black matrix (BM) in displays, the phenomenon known as the moiré effect [4,5,6,7]. In addition, the starburst phenomenon is inevitably generated owing to specular reflection, diffraction, and interference of light by the metal mesh. The metal mesh used for TSPs is a kind of reflective diffraction grid. Such a grid induces specular reflection and diffraction of incident light. Due to diffraction of light, the diffraction pattern appears when a wave encounters a slit (i.e., metal mesh). There appears constructive and destructive interference of light on the diffraction pattern. Because of specular reflection of light, the reflection pattern also appears when there exists a gentle slope near the patterned metallic grid. Such diffraction and reflection effects result in the appearance of “starburst” patterns when a touch position-sensing panel is subject to bright ambient light. Both of them are troublesome issues in the field of visible displays because it may disturb users upon emergence. The moiré effect is known to be suppressed substantially by adjusting the crossing angle between a TSP and display screen [7], reducing the metal grid width down to 1μm, and employing a random metal grid. To our best knowledge, however, no report on the effective way of suppressing the starburst phenomenon is available in the open literature. In this paper, we investigate the effect of metal grids on the starburst phenomenon and provide useful guidelines for the design of starburst-free metal meshes for TSP applications. By way of experiment, it is demonstrated that a standalone random metal grid can suppress the starburst phenomenon to a great extent. By way of ray tracing simulation [8], we have found that specular reflection of light on the gentle slope of the patterned edges of metallic grids contributes to the generation of starburst patterns. The intensity of starburst patterns is also shown to be suppressed by employing a light-absorbing material and increasing metal grid spacing.

@&#METHOD@&#

For TSP applications, Cu and Ag metal meshes were fabricated on a glass substrate. Fig. 1
                         shows the square Cu grid and hexagonal Ag grid measured by optical microscope (VK-9000, Keyence Corp.) and their optical transmittance measured by UV/VIS spectrometer (T70+by PG Instruments Ltd.). The width, height, and spacing of the square Cu grid are measured to be 10μm, 250nm, and 160μm, respectively. The corresponding optical transmittance and sheet resistance are 81.7% at 520nm (when air was taken as a reference) and 1.07Ω/□, respectively. Meanwhile, the width, height, and spacing of regular hexagonal Ag grid are measured to be 2.5μm, 200nm, and 420μm, respectively. The length of a side is 245μm. The corresponding optical transmittance and sheet resistance are 91% at 520nm (air reference) and 13.3Ω/□, respectively. Since the hexagonal Ag grid has higher aperture ratio, it exhibits higher optical transmittance, yet its electrical conductivity is lower. To observe the starburst phenomenon, we shed a laser beam (red light emitted from a laser pointer) on the single-layered TSP films and then take a picture of a starburst image appeared on a white paper at a distance in a dark room.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Shown in Fig. 2
                         is the measured image of starburst patterns. It is observed that the square Cu grid generates a cross-shaped starburst, whereas the hexagonal Ag grid brings in an asterisk-shaped starburst. It is obvious from this result that the four sides of the Cu square give rise to the four threadlike patterns (starburst patterns). Similarly, the six sides of the Ag hexagon cause the six threadlike patterns. As such, the shape of starburst patterns is highly related with the configuration of metal mesh. One can also see constructive and destructive interference of light on the starburst patterns. Therefore, it is apparent that such starburst patterns are caused by specular reflection, diffraction, and interference of light by the metal mesh.

With attempt to find out the cause for the starburst phenomenon, we have observed the etched patterns of metal meshes using scanning electron microscope (SEM, CX-100 by Coxem Ltd.). From the SEM images in Fig. 3
                        , both metal meshes are shown to exhibit a gentle slope near the patterned edges due to isotropic etching (non-directional removal of metals). The total slope length of the Cu grid is measured to be about 2μm, whereas it is about 1μm for the Ag grid. As depicted in Fig. 4
                        , the flat surface of metal films would just reflect rays, thereby forming the central (spot) beam as in Fig. 2. However, the gentle slopes near the patterned edges of metal grids may reflect and disperse rays at a certain angle, possibly generating the threadlike beams (i.e., starburst patterns induced by specular reflection). To suppress it, therefore, a patterning process that can reduce the slope length of patterned metallic grids would be required. We shall return to this point later with simulation results.

@&#METHOD@&#

For simulations, the same configuration of metal meshes (Cu and Ag) as in Fig. 1 is drawn in the model in order to capture the starburst patterns. A number of rays are emitted from the ray source in the model and the reflected and dispersed rays are detected by the receiver. The diameter (2mm) of the source is chosen to be almost the same as that of the laser beam. The computational area is selected to be 3mm×3mm to capture those starburst patterns without heavy computational efforts. The number of rays we used for simulations is 50million. The rays emitted from the source are highly directional (i.e., the direction of rays is perpendicular to the metal surface). The receiver area (3cm×3cm) is divided into 500×500 cells (bins), each of which detects the incident rays and displays brightness and darkness depending on the number of detected rays. Namely, white color is displayed when the number of detected rays is large. Otherwise, brown color is displayed.

It is noted that the ray tracing model [8] we used for the analysis of the starburst pattern is incapable of capturing diffraction and interference of light since rays emitted from the source have no information of phase. Instead, the ray tracing model can capture specular reflection of light caused by the gentle slope of metallic grids. Fig. 5
                         shows the starburst patterns obtained by ray tracing simulations. One can see that the simulated starburst patterns are very similar to those in Fig. 2. This result indicates that specular reflection of light on the gentle slope of the patterned edges of metallic grids contributes to the generation of starburst patterns. Though the shapes of starburst patterns are similar, yet their intensities would be different because the simulated one is caused purely by specular reflection of light on the gentle slope of metallic grids, whereas the experimentally observed one is caused by not only specular reflection but also diffraction and interference of light by the metal mesh. As such, no constructive and destructive interference is observed in the starburst patterns simulated by the ray tracing model.

It is also observed that when only Cu grids (i.e., square and hexagonal Cu grids) are considered, the intensity of the asterisk-shaped starburst is slightly lower than that of the cross-shaped starburst. It is due to the fact that the detected rays on a receiver plane are dispersed every 60° for the hexagonal Cu grid, whereas they are dispersed every 90° for the square one. As such, the number of sides of metal mesh is desired to be high to avoid strong starburst patterns by specular reflection. It is also observed by way of both experiment and simulation that if the TSP is rotated (i.e., the sloping sides are rotated), the threadlike beams or rather the starburst patterns are also rotated accordingly. This also supports our conclusion made earlier that specular reflection of light on the gentle slope of the patterned edges of metallic grids contributes to the generation of starburst patterns.

The simplest way to suppress such a starburst phenomenon would be to cover metal mesh with a light absorber having high absorbance (e.g., a blackbody absorber). To demonstrate it, we have performed simulations of the square Cu grid in Fig. 1(a) covered with a light-absorbing material by varying its optical absorptance. Fig. 6
                         shows the simulation result of the normalized flux along the horizontal axis (i.e., extracted from the horizontal starburst pattern) for different optical absorptance. It is clearly seen that as the absorbance of a metal covering material is increased, the light flux of the cross-shaped starburst is reduced not only near the central beam but also over the threadlike beams, similar behaviors also observed from the Ag metal grid in Fig. 1(b). Though this scheme enables us to suppress the starburst phenomenon substantially, yet it requires additional coating and patterning process for a light absorber. Moreover, it may bring in a reduction of the aperture ratio, possibly reducing the optical transmittance.

As discussed earlier, specular reflection of light on the gentle slope of the patterned edges of metallic grids contributes to the generation of starburst patterns. Therefore, it is desirable to make an investigation of the effect of the slope length on the starburst patterns by ray tracing simulation. To this end, we have increased the slope length of the square Cu grid to 2μm (total slope length=4μm) and made simulations of starburst patterns and ray distribution along the horizontal direction. As seen in Fig. 7
                        , the intensity of the central beam is boosted as the slope length is increased, whereas the intensity of the threadlike beam is decreased. Namely, more rays are concentrated on the central beam since the sloping sides that are gentler reflect rays toward the central region. Though it may suppress the starburst phenomenon, yet it is not preferred considering the optical transmittance of TSPs. Furthermore, it is extremely difficult to control the slope length of metallic grids through an etching process.

Within the framework of the minimization of the starburst phenomenon, the metal grid spacing (i.e., touch sensor size) would be one of key design parameters. Therefore, an investigation of the effect of the metal grid spacing on the starburst phenomenon deserves to be made. To this end, we have varied the Cu grid spacing from 100μm to 220μm (by 60μm) with the width (10μm) fixed and simulated the ray distribution along the horizontal axis (i.e., extracted from the horizontal starburst pattern). It is apparent from Fig. 8
                         that the starburst patterns are getting weak as the grid spacing is increased, similar results also observed from the Ag metal grid in Fig. 1(b). It is attributed that the aperture ratio is increased or rather the metal coverage is reduced with increasing grid spacing, the light dispersion by which is reduced. Though this scheme is also one of ways to suppress it, yet it should be carefully designed considering the touch performance. Namely, if the grid spacing is chosen to be relatively large, then the touch performance would be degraded.

As mentioned earlier, the number of sides of metal mesh is desired to be high to avoid strong starburst patterns. In this context, a random metal mesh would bring in a reduction of the starburst phenomenon because the randomly oriented sides of metal mesh may disperse rays omnidirectionally. To demonstrate it, we have fabricated a random Ag metal grid. The random metal mesh in Fig. 9
                        (a) was generated based on the Voronoi diagram [9]. The Ag metallic grid with the width of 5μm exhibits the optical transmittance of 85% at 520nm (air reference). As evident in Fig. 9(b), many but weakened starburst patterns appear. For a comparative analysis, we have performed ray tracing simulations by drawing the same metal mesh in Fig. 9(a) in the model. Such a random structure requires a lot of computational efforts. To avoid it, we have selected the computational area as small as 2.1mm×2.1mm, wherein starburst patterns are still visible. As seen in Fig. 9(c), the simulated starburst pattern is very similar to the experiment one in Fig. 9(b). It is clearly seen that the threadlike beams appeared in Figs. 2 and 5 are swept out by the random grid. Fig. 9(d) shows the simulation result of ray distribution extracted along the horizontal direction for different metal grid shapes. It is obvious that the number of detected rays increases near the central beam, while it decreases steeply near the threadlike beams by virtue of the random grid. Therefore, it can be concluded that employing a random metal mesh for TSPs is also one of the most effective ways to eliminate the starburst patterns.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

We have demonstrated by way of ray tracing simulation that specular reflection of light on the gentle slope of the patterned edges of metallic grids contributes to the generation of starburst patterns. It is found that the starburst patterns can be suppressed to a great extent by employing a light absorber covering the metal mesh or a standalone random metal grid. Though increasing the metal grid spacing brings in a reduction of the intensity of starburst patterns, yet it may not be desirable considering the touch performance.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This research was financially supported by the “Sensitivity touch platform development and new industrialization support program” through the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) and Korea Institute for Advancement of Technology (KIAT).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

