@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of stereoscopic movies: The positions of stereoscopic objects and the viewing conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined the effects of positions of stereoscopic objects and seat location on the viewers.


                        
                        
                           
                           People feel more dizziness in ‘Near (to viewers)’ condition with sitting on the sides.


                        
                        
                           
                           People feel more dizziness in ‘Far (from viewers)’ condition with sitting on the middle.


                        
                        
                           
                           People feel more arousal and satisfaction in ‘Both’ condition.


                        
                        
                           
                           Wearing stereoscopic glasses or having prior experiences effects on the viewer.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Stereoscopic

Movie

Seat location

Viewing condition

Viewing experience

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The present study investigates the effects of relative positions of stereoscopic objects (PSO) (‘Far’ (from viewers) vs. ‘Near’ (to viewers) vs. ‘Both’) and seat location on viewers’ psychological responses. People who watched a movie with ‘Both’ conditions reported more arousal and satisfaction compared to people who watched a movie with either the ‘Far’ or ‘Near’ condition. More importantly, interaction effects were reported such as more dizziness (a) with the ‘Near’ condition if sitting on the left or right side in the cinema and (b) with the ‘Far’ condition if sitting in the middle of the cinema. Additionally, people who wore glasses felt more eye fatigue than those who did not. Secondly, people felt less presence, sensation of depth, and arousal if they had prior experience viewing stereoscopic movies. The results indicate that viewing experience with different PSOs and/or seat locations can influence psychological response.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

After the enormous success of the stereoscopic movie, Avatar, there has been increasing interest in stereoscopic content and technologies. Major Hollywood studios market stereoscopic movies heavily in the hope that they can increase box office revenues. Studios argue that the differences between normal and stereoscopic movies are as big as those between black-and-white (B&W) and color pictures [1]. Despite the recent industry hype of stereoscopic content and technologies, however, little is known about viewers’ perceptual, cognitive, and social responses to stereoscopic stimuli. Most studies on stereoscopic content and technologies are engineering-based, and focused primarily on technical factors (e.g., fidelity of stereoscopic objects, synchronization of two cameras, reduction of unnatural stereoscopic syntheses, etc.) while ignoring viewers’ psychological responses.

After excluding purely engineering-based stereoscopic studies, we can find less than ten studies on viewers’ psychological responses to stereoscopic images (see Table 1
                     ) [1–8]. These studies, however, do not address the range of psychological variables important to the stereoscopic experience, because they have predominantly focused on assessment or the inconvenience. In addition, the above studies do not impact the movie industry in any significant manner given the lack of generalizability of the findings. For example, stereoscopic stimuli used in those studies are abnormal in that they are either still images or very short movie clips less than 2min in duration. Consequently, those stimuli lack the story lines and the characters that are the major reasons for watching movies. Findings from such studies cannot be easily applied to our understanding of normal media stimuli with stories and characters. Second, none of the above studies were conducted in a movie theater. The lack of ecological validity makes predicting audience responses to stereoscopic stimuli in a movie theater very difficult. Finally, as with many laboratory-based experiments, the small number of participants in these studies again limits the generalizability of the findings. Moreover, the small number of participants makes it difficult to analyze possible individual factors (e.g., prior exposure to stereoscopic technologies, wearing glasses, age, gender, etc.) that might influence each individual’s stereoscopic viewing experiences.

To address the above shortcomings, the current study investigates a full range of viewers’ psychological responses to stereoscopic movies in a movie theater. More specifically, we measure viewers’ feelings of presence, arousal. Feeling of presence is defined as a psychological state in which virtual (para-authentic or artificial) objects are experienced as actual objects in either sensory or non-sensory ways [9]. Arousal is one of the major effects of presence. Lombard and Ditton (1997) explain that “people use television viewing to increase or decrease their arousal levels and it seems likely that the range of this manipulation is expanded with media that evoke presence” [10]. In addition, we measure sensation of depth, overall satisfaction, dizziness and eye fatigue as common inconveniences. To increase the generalizability of the current study, we invited 188 participants to a real movie theater and let them watch a 15-min stereoscopic movie specifically made for the current experiment. Unlike previous studies, we also measured possible individual factors – prior exposure to stereoscopic technologies, wearing glasses – that might influence viewers’ stereoscopic experience along with standard demographics such as age and gender. We expect that the current study will have a major impact on the stereoscopic industry, especially the stereoscopic movie industry. The current study also provides new information to the scientific community about viewers’ stereoscopic experiences.

Usually, stereoscopic images are produced by a stereoscopic camera, which uses a combination of two separate monoscopic cameras arranged either horizontally or vertically. By adjusting the distance or angle of these two monoscopic cameras, either convergent or divergent stereoscopic images can be made. As a result, viewers can see an object in a spatial place, not on a plane screen. Even though the underlying technological mechanism is simple, producing realistic stereoscopic images requires very careful stereoscopic camera maneuvering [11]. Even small errors in camera configuration and convergence distance calculation can result in significant image distortion and general viewing discomfort [7]. To minimize viewing discomfort, movie directors and camera technicians set up a safety zone, called the ‘safety depth range’ for image convergence and divergence. Too much convergence or divergence of two monoscopic images makes objects get out of the safety zone, resulting in placement of the objects that is either too near or too far. If objects are placed on a space either too near or too far from viewers, significant viewing discomfort occurs.

In general, the range of the safety zone is narrower when objects are near to viewers (i.e., ‘Near’ condition) than when objects are far from viewers (i.e., ‘Far’ condition) [5] (see Fig. 1
                     ). That is, objects in the ‘Near’ condition have a higher probability of causing viewing discomfort than objects in the ‘Far’ condition. That is why James Francis Cameron avoided placing objects and characters near the viewers in his stereoscopic film, Avatar. At the same time, however, a ‘Near’ condition has a higher potential to cause stronger emotional effects than a ‘Far’ condition, because people feel more aroused when they are physically closer to objects. That is the reason why Timothy William Burton frequently placed objects and characters near to the viewers in his stereoscopic movie, Alice in Wonderland. While there are many casual and anecdotal evaluations of which movie is a better stereoscopic viewing experience, there has been no empirical comparison of the effects of the relative positions of stereoscopic objects on viewers’ psychological responses. In the current study, therefore, we attempt to provide one of the first scientific answers to the following research question by comparing three possible locations of stereoscopic objects—‘Near’ vs. ‘Far’ vs. ‘Both’ (‘Near’ and ‘Far’).


                     Research Question (RQ) 1: What are the effects of relative positions of stereoscopic objects (‘Near’ vs. ‘Far’ vs. ‘Both’) during a stereoscopic viewing experience?
                  

In addition to the position of stereoscopic objects, seat location in a movie theater has been regarded as an important factor in determining viewers’ stereoscopic experience. There are two main reasons why the industry and policy makers are interested in the effects of seat location in a stereoscopic movie theater. First, the box office industry believes that possible differences in stereoscopic viewing experiences caused by different seat locations can be used as a logical excuse to adjust admission prices. Second, policy makers and health professionals worry that watching stereoscopic images primarily on either the left or right side of the screen might cause dizziness or eye fatigue. In fact, the Japanese Stereoscopic Consortium Safety Guidelines [12] recommend that viewers should watch stereoscopic images in seats located on a vertically and horizontally middle line from the screen in order to prevent possible negative side effects. Chiba (2010) claims that viewers can experience significant physical and psychological discomfort when they watch stereoscopic images from the extreme sides of a theater, because the angle of each monoscopic image projected to each viewer’s eye can be distorted from this side viewing perspective. Chiba’s argument is based on the calculation of image angle distortion, and does not provide results from actual field trials. As a result, both policy makers and the movie industry do not have empirical grounds for imposing health regulations and price discrimination. Therefore in the current study, we test psychological and physical effects of seat location (left vs. center vs. right) on stereoscopic experience in a movie theater.


                        RQ 2: What are the effects of seat location (Left vs. Middle vs. Right) during a stereoscopic viewing experience?
                     

We believe that there might be complicated interactions between an object’s position on the stereoscopic screen and viewers’ seat location, because both factors affect the viewing angles of the stereoscopic images and the length of stereoscopic safety zones. For example, possible main effects of a stereoscopic object’s position on a screen can be either strengthened or weakened by the location of the viewer’s. That is, stereoscopic objects positioned either far from or near to viewers can be experienced as even more far or near depending on the viewer’s position. Therefore, the current study employs a full-factorial design to test possible interaction effects between these two main factors.


                        RQ 3: What are the interaction effects of objects’ positions in stereoscopic images (‘Near’ vs. ‘Far’ vs. ‘Both’) and viewers’ seat locations (Left vs. Middle vs. Right) during a stereoscopic viewing experience?
                     

Viewers usually have to wear polarized or shutter glasses to watch stereoscopic movies because non-glasses systems are costly and still have many technological limitations. Wearing two sets of glasses (i.e., for viewing stereoscopic images and for vision correction) to watch stereoscopic images results in a significantly different stereoscopic viewing experience. One reason for this is that glasses for vision correction project distorted images onto the retina of the eyes even before wearing stereoscopic glasses. As a result, viewers with corrective glasses need to go through two steps of adjustments to watch stereoscopic images comfortably; one to adjust for retina disparity caused by new eyesight [13] and the other to adjust for stereoscopic disparity caused by two monoscopic images. Even long-time corrective glasses wearers who have fully corrected vision experience additional discomfort when wearing shutter or polarized glasses for stereoscopic images, because the stereoscopic glasses distorts their adjusted vision systems [12]. The second and perhaps most obvious reason is that wearing two sets of glasses is simply very uncomfortable and inconvenient. Viewers who already wear corrective glasses, thus, will have a more negative stereoscopic viewing experience. Therefore, in our study we measured and statistically controlled for participants’ wearing of corrective glasses. In addition, we also investigated possible negative effects of wearing corrective glasses during a stereoscopic viewing experience.


                        RQ 4: What are the effects of wearing corrective glasses during a stereoscopic viewing experience?
                     

When new technologies are introduced, people usually get excited and show positive affective responses given the strong tendency to like novel technologies such as new humanoid robots, new tablet PC systems, and so on [14]. Some people even argue that human beings are hardwired to seek novelty in their everyday lives [15]. The initial liking of novel things and new gadgets, however, is not durable and fades away as the novel things become familiar [14]. Even infants show similar patterns of behaviors. With an increasing number of exposures to familiar stimuli, infants adjust their preference from a familiar to a novel stimulus [16]. We expect similar novelty effects in people’s psychological responses to stereoscopic images. We expect that affective responses such as arousal and liking may decrease if people have multiple prior stereoscopic movie viewing experiences.


                        RQ 5: What are the effects of prior exposures to stereoscopic movies during a stereoscopic viewing experience?
                     

@&#METHODS@&#

The current study adopted a three (Positions of stereoscopic objects: ‘Near’ vs. ‘Far’ vs. ‘Both’) by three (Seat Location: Left vs. Middle vs. Right) full factorial, between-subjects design. To manipulate the first factor, we produced three versions of the same stereoscopic movie (Title: Nail)
                           
                              1
                           
                           In a study of images, the angles and shots of the stimulus are important factors. Especially in a stereoscopic study, the dynamic range of the stimulus images is an important variable. Therefore, we share the stereoscopic images (side by side) which were used in the current study at the following web address: http://webhard.skku.edu:8081/api.link/3d_baLoLHrjHQvkO_sPo.wmv
                        
                        
                           1
                         specifically made for the current experiment. The cost to film the movie (approximately $100,000) was funded by the Korean Film Council, Korea’s national R&D organization for the film industry. The movie (length: 15min) is about the reconciliation between a boy who is deaf and his grandfather after the death of the boy’s father. This scenario was chosen because of the minimal dialogue between the boy and his grandfather minimizes the possible effects of audio stimuli, and thus can maximize the effects of our manipulation.

To manipulate the second factor, we reserved a movie theater for three days. The width of a screen in the movie theater was 10m. Ninety-five seats among the total of 206 seats in the theater were selected to manipulate the seat location variable (Left vs. Middle vs. Right) (see Fig. 2
                        , a seat format). Fifty-one seats were located on the left side, 87 were located in the middle, and 50 were located on the right side.

Participants (n
                        =188; 95 males and 93 females) were recruited from various online communities in S. Korea. The range of participant age was 18 to 46years (Overall mean=23.84, SD
                        =5.68; Male mean=25.62, SD
                        =6.48; female mean=22.03, SD=
                        4.02).

Participants were randomly assigned to one of the nine conditions in a three (PSO: ‘Near’ vs. ‘Far’ vs. ‘Both’) by three (seat location: left vs. middle vs. right) full factorial between-subjects design. Participants were asked to indicate their current state of eye fatigue before and after watching the movie. For the final measure of eye fatigue, we used the difference between pre- and post-watching scores. After participants indicated their current state of eye fatigue, they were escorted to designated seats in the theater. The movie was shown after all participants were seated at their designated locations. After watching the 15-min movie, study personnel distributed self-report questionnaires to all participants. The questionnaire, which took about 20min to complete, has a series of questions that measure current state of dizziness [3,4,6], feelings of presence, which were defined as feelings of being a part of a mediated environment [17], sensation of depth, arousal, and satisfaction. After completing the questionnaire, participants were thanked and received $10 gift certificates.

Eye fatigue: Eye fatigue was measured by combining five items reflecting general eye discomfort including headache, which is a symptom of eye discomfort. The following five items measured eye fatigue on a 7-point scale—1 being “not all” and 7 being “absolutely”: (a) “My eyes feel tired”; (b) “I have a headache”; (c) “My eyes are dry”; (d) “I have difficulty adjusting my visual focus”; and (e) “My vision is blurred” (α
                        =.86). As explained before, eye fatigue was measured twice (before and after watching movie) and we used the difference between the two (pre- to post-) for the final score.

Dizziness: Following the methods of Sun and Holliman (2009), we used the following single item with a 100-point scale—1 being “not all” and 100 being “absolutely”: “I feel dizziness”.

Feelings of presence: The feeling of presence was measured using the following five items with 7-point scales—1 being “not all” and 7 being “absolutely”: (a) “When the broadcast ended, I felt like I came back to the ‘real world’ after a journey”; (b) “The television came to me and created a new world for me, and the world suddenly disappeared when the broadcast ended”; (c) “During the broadcast, I felt I was in the world the television created”; (d) “During the broadcast, my body was in the room, but my mind was inside the world created by television.”; (e) “During the broadcast, the television-generated world was more real or present for me compared to the “real world” (α
                        =.81).

Sensation of depth: The sensation of depth was measured by the following question on a 100-point scale—1 being “not all” and 100 being “very much”: “How much did you feel a sensation of depth while watching the movie?”

Arousal: Arousal was measured by the following question with a 100-point scale—1 being “not all” and 100 being “very much”: “How much were you aroused while watching the movie?”

Satisfaction: Satisfaction with the movie was measured with an item reflecting general satisfaction toward the movie. The following question with a 100-point scale—1 being “not all” and 100 being “very much” was used: “How much were you satisfied with the movie?”.

Demographics: Standard demographic factors such as age and gender were measured.

Covariates: Participants’ stereoscopic movie watching experience during the last three months (excluding the current movie used for the experiment) and their intention to wear glasses while watching the current movie were measured before they watched the current movie.

@&#RESULTS@&#

All analyses are based on a full-factorial 3 (PSO)×3 (seat location) multivariate analysis of covariance (MANCOVA) using “wears glasses” and “prior experience with stereoscopic movies” as covariates (see Table 2
                     , for MANCOVA).

RQ 1 is about the effects of relative PSO on the stereoscopic experience. The main effect of PSO is statistically significant on arousal, F(2, 152)=4.69, p
                     <.05, η
                     2
                     =.06, with viewers of the ‘Both’ condition reporting higher levels of arousal than viewers of the ‘Far’ condition (see Table 3
                      for detailed ANCOVA results). There is also a significant main effect of PSO on satisfaction, F(2, 152)=4.29, p
                     <.05, η
                     2
                     =.05, with viewers of the ‘Both’ condition reporting higher levels of satisfaction than viewers of the ‘Near’ and ‘Far’ conditions (see Table 3). There are no significant main effects of PSO on dizziness, eye fatigue, feelings of presence, or sensation of depth.

RQ 2 is about the effects of seat location on stereoscopic viewing experience. No significant main effect is found.

With regard to RQ3, we find a significant crossover interaction between PSO and seat location on dizziness, F(4, 152)=3.10, p
                     <.05, η
                     2
                     =.08 (see Fig. 3
                      for the pattern of the interaction). When PSO is near, participants who sat on either the left or the right sides experienced more dizziness than participants in the middle. In contrast, when PSO is far, participants on either the left or right sides experienced less dizziness than participants in the middle. There are no significant interaction effect on eye fatigue, feelings of presence, sensation of depth, arousal, and satisfaction.

With regard to RQ4, we find significant covariate effects of wearing corrective glasses on eye fatigue, Pearson’s r
                     =.15, p
                     <.05. Participants who wore glasses experienced more eye fatigue than those who did not wear glasses.

With regard to RQ5, we find significant covariate effects of prior experience with viewing stereoscopic movies on feelings of presence, Pearson’s r
                     =−.19, p
                     <.05, sensation of depth, Pearson’s r
                     =−.21, p
                     <.01, and arousal, Pearson’s r
                     =−.32, p
                     <.00. Reflecting possible novelty effects, participants with less prior experience watching 3D movies reported feeling more presence, sensation of depth, and arousal than those having more 3D viewing experiences.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Based on the results of the current study, we can draw the following four conclusions: (a) people are more aroused by and satisfied with stereoscopic movies in which the locations of objects are manipulated on both the front and the back sides; (b) feelings of dizziness while watching stereoscopic movies are influenced by the interaction between PSO and viewers’ seat locations; (c) wearing corrective glasses (in addition to 3D glasses) increases viewers’ eye fatigue; and (d) prior experience watching stereoscopic movies reduces viewers’ feelings of presence, sensation of depth, and arousal. Below, we discuss the implications of each conclusion.

First, with regard to PSO, viewers in the ‘Both’ condition felt more arousal and satisfaction than those in the ‘Near’ or ‘Far’ conditions. There is, however, no significant difference between the ‘Near’ and the ‘Far’ conditions. So far, directors of stereoscopic movies have chosen either the near or the far location to increase 3D effects (and ultimately viewer satisfaction). For example, directors like Timothy W. Burton heavily relied on the manipulation of near objects to induce strong 3D effects, whereas directors like James F. Cameron manipulated mainly the objects located on the far side to create 3D effects. While both methods have positive and negative attributes, the current study shows that manipulating both the near and far locations of objects is the best way to increase viewers’ arousal and satisfaction. We believe that manipulating both locations can induce surprising pop-up effects for 3D objects when using near and stable depth cues. Filmmakers, therefore, should adopt a mix-and-match approach and manipulate both near popping objects and stable 3D background objects or environments. Depth ranges in stereoscopic movies should be maximized as long as they are within the safety zone for 3D visual perception.

Second, the interaction effect between PSO and seat location on viewers’ dizziness has many theoretical and practical implications. In general, there have been almost no previous studies investigating possible interactions between seat locations and large scale stereoscopic visual stimuli. The current study shows that movie watching conditions such as viewers’ seat locations do not have unidirectional effects on viewers’ dizziness. Unlike the widespread yet untested assumption that stereoscopic stimuli are best perceived when viewers watch them from the middle of the theater, the current results vividly indicate that viewers’ seat locations do not have unidirectional influence on the 3D viewing experience. Instead, a more nuanced understanding of the currently observed interaction can provide many practical guidelines for the industry. For example, the movie industry tries to charge different ticket prices for different seat locations for stereoscopic movies. The industry believes that they can charge higher prices for middle front seats as musicals and live shows do, because the front middle seats will provide the best viewing experience for stereoscopic movies. However, current results indicate that middle seats can provide the worst viewing experience depending on how stereoscopic objects are manipulated. For instance, participants in the ‘Far’ condition felt more dizziness when they watched the movie from middle seats than when they sat in side seats. In contrast, participants in the ‘Near’ condition felt more dizziness when they sat on the sides than when they sat in the middle. The cross-over interactions observed in the current study call for more scientific investigations of why such patterns happen for the ‘Near’ and the ‘Far’ conditions, and not in the ‘Both’ condition. Medical experts on the interlinking process between the eyes and the semicircular canal—an organ of the body related to physical movement—may provide more scientific insight regarding this interaction for future research. Given that dizziness is a product of inconsistency between visual sensation and working memory of similarly experienced situations [18], close collaboration between media psychologists and medical doctors will be crucial for future investigations.

Third, participants who wore corrective glasses felt eye fatigue significantly more than those who did not wear glasses while watching stereoscopic movies. We believe this is due to the reflective lenses in corrective glasses. People who wear glasses already see the world in somewhat of a distorted way, therefore any slight distortion of three dimensional depth cues in stereoscopic movies will be magnified more for these individuals than for those who do not wear glasses. The current results call for additional optometric guidelines for stereoscopic movie viewers that wear glasses.

Finally, the novelty effect found in the current study is consistent with results from previous studies on technology adoption [14,16]. In general, people who have repeated exposures to a given technology are less aroused by the technology than people who use the technology for the first time. In a similar vein, participants who watched 3D movies frequently felt a smaller degree of presence, less sensation of depth, and less arousal than those who had no or very few experiences with watching 3D movies. What is interesting, however, is that previous exposure did not influence the level of viewer satisfaction. Unlike some dependent variables that are heavily related to physiological arousal, the level of satisfaction is not influenced much by novelty effects. We believe this is a good counter argument against the criticism that stereoscopic movies are mainly based on the novelty effect and that stereoscopic movies are a fad that will fade after viewers are exposed to stereoscopic movies multiple times. The current results clearly indicate that while some physiological experiences may follow their predictions, psychological experience such as the level of satisfaction will not be influenced by the novelty effect. People will still be satisfied even if they do not feel any novelty from stereoscopic movies.

As a final remark, we would like to provide some suggestions for future studies on stereoscopic images. While the current study focuses on stereoscopic movies in the context of movie theaters, future studies should consider the effects of stereoscopic images in TV sets. About 30years ago, the TV industry tried to provide on-air stereoscopic content. The attempt was futile due to technical and financial limitations. With rapid developments in 3D technologies, 3D TV sets may become everyday household items. However, we are not sure whether these new technologies will have results similar to the transition to color TV technology from black and white. Future studies should thoroughly investigate the possible effects of stereoscopic stimuli on our everyday TV watching experience. Another interesting area of investigation involves the possible effects of stereoscopic technologies on video gaming experiences. Given that video games can be easily converted into 3D, many experts believe that games will be the killer application area for stereoscopic technologies. Given the interactive nature of video games, the possible added value of 3D stimuli on gamers’ psychological and physiological experiences warrants investigation. Possible factorial comparisons of 3D stimuli in interactive and non-interactive situations will be an interesting extension of the current study. Overall, we believe that this study is an important first step toward a comprehensive understanding of stereoscopic stimuli in our everyday lives.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was supported by WCU (World Class University) program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (Grant No. R31-2008-000-10062-0) and the KOFIC (Korean Film Council).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

