@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Selection of character/background colour combinations for onscreen searching tasks: An eye movement, subjective and performance approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Physiological, subjective and performance measures were effective for the study.


                        
                        
                           
                           Eye movement parameters play significant role in interpreting the results.


                        
                        
                           
                           Black background should be used cautiously in display design.


                        
                        
                           
                           Combination of two colours with close luminance value should be avoided.


                        
                        
                           
                           Designing with blue (either as background or as character) is always advantageous.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Character/background colour combination

Eye movement variables

Mental workload

Legibility rating

Searching time

Performance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The aim of the study was to investigate the effect of various character and background colour combinations on cognitive performance during onscreen searching tasks and to identify the best combinations with a multimodal approach of physiological (eye movement recording), subjective and performance data collection. In the absence of proper character and background colour combination the optimum performance for a cognitive task is greatly affected which in turn affects the productivity of the individual worker or communications among the operators working under the same network through information sharing. This study was designed by selecting six colours, i.e., white, black, yellow, red, blue, and green and subsequently combining them to 16 character and background colour combinations for a searching task. Right and left headed arrows were used as the character for the searching maneuver. Forty-four (N
                     =44) volunteers participated in the experiments. Various eye movement variables, legibility rating scale, NASA-TLX questionnaire, searching time and percentage of error were recorded. Subjects performed better wherever a good contrast was there because of a high legibility. A poorly contrasted display affected the physiological variables as well as subjective responses to negative directions. Among the combinations of dark character/light background, blue and red character on white background is highly recommended; and while that for light character/dark background, white is found to be the best character on blue and green backgrounds.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Visual search is an effective tool in everyday life to find faces, objects and information of interest. Our purpose of visual search varies as per situation. Operation in the air traffic control (ATC) panel and tacking harsh situations in the battle field demand much higher cognitive resources as per the frequently changing current need. Military workstations are high density workstations in terms of higher mental demand under various critical conditions. These critical conditions are depicted in the C4ISR loop, i.e., command, control, communication, computer, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance. Each action of this loop is having their specific cognitive characteristics. Moreover, these operations are being performed in a digital environment where information is displayed with various character and background colour combinations. It has been shown that proper trade-off between the application of good display principles and well recognized limit of human cognitive processing offers a better situational awareness and proper decision making [1].

In this context it is important to mention that physical characters like display type, character/background colour combination, shape, size of the font, speed of dynamic display, illumination level, viewing distance, etc. play a critical role in legibility and thus determining the subjects’ performance [1–5].

Careful selection of colours in the designing of visuals on display is of critical importance for optimum performance [2–5]. Use of colour is always purposive, e.g., red colour is always used to display some caution messages like in traffic signal to stop the cars, and a black font printed on a white background for regular reading activities. Use of proper colour combination ensures an enhanced effectiveness of the display that may ultimately lead to faster performance rate [6,7]. On the other hand poorly chosen colour leads to decreased performance and probably increases the risk of visual fatigue [8,9]. Many researchers outlined that the overuse of colour may elicit various psychological responses which will eventually affect the performance [10,11]. However, Pastoor [12] mentioned that colour combination has no effect on the search time. Hence, colours must be chosen not only by considering the experimenters or users preference but also by considering the cognitive constraints of the users [2]. Empirical evidences showed that primary colours-red, green and blue offer a higher level of accuracy in performance than other non-primary colours. Matthews et al. [13] suggested that red and blue both can be used as stimuli either alone or in combination for better performance. Kwallek and Lewis [14], Stone [15] have recommended that red is preferable compared to blue or green during cognitive task performance. Other researchers have proposed the opposite [16,17]. In another important study Mehta and Zhu [18] conducted a series of six experiments and concluded that blue is recommended as background for any creative work and with red background some vigilant work can be performed. Greco et al. [4] found that best legibility can be achieved by displaying information on bright background with dark font (black and dark blue) on computer screen as well as on projectors. Other researchers like Legge et al. [19]; Shieh and Lin [20] reported that white/black background/text combination as the best. Greco et al. [4] stated that among the combinations of light font on the dark background, green, brown, black and blue were the best background, whereas red is the worst. On those background white was the preferred font colour.

Most of studies related to the choice of proper character and background colour combinations have drawn their interpretation depending upon the subjective response by applying various questionnaire methods, rating scales, or by recording the performance and error in identifying the targets. Evidences for interpretations based on various eye movement variables are least documented till date. Recording of eye movement variables during a cognitive task performance will help to assess the cognitive demand of the respective task. Eye movement activities like changes in pupil diameter, blink frequency, fixation, fixation frequency, saccadic behaviour are known as good predictor of searching efficiency as well as imposed cognitive load. Considering the above scenario a study was designed for the selection of proper character and background colour combinations for onscreen searching task which impose least cognitive load with improved performance.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Forty-four young Indian adults (Age −26.2±4.3years, height −164.26±9.37 and weight 64.0±12kg) were the volunteers of the experiment. They were all post graduate researchers and young scientists. The present study was conducted in accordance with the ethical principle expressed in the declaration of Helsinki and all the participants provided informed, written consent before their participation in the experiment. A thorough description about the purpose and protocol of the experiment was given to the subjects. All the subjects were having normal or corrected-to-normal vision with a visual acuity of 6/6 and chosen for not being colour blind using Ishihara 1–17 colour plates. The candidates who had problems to identify the numbers in most of the colour plates were not included for the experiments. All the experiments were carried out at the first half of the working hours between 0930h to 1300h. Each subject invested about 40–50min for the whole experimental protocol.

All the experiments were carried out in a laboratory which is specifically dedicated for the eye tracking system. The room temperature and relative humidity were maintained at 26°C and 50% respectively [21] and was measured by a thermo-hygrometer (HTC-1, China). Room illumination level was maintained between 450 and 500 lux [22] and was measured by digital lux meter (HTC, LX 103). Horizontal distance from the screen to the seated eye position were kept between 60 and 70cm considering compatibility between the subjects’ body dimension and proper viewing of the displayed information on the screen. The room was made noise attenuated to provide a calm and quiet environment to the subjects so that they can perform the task with concentration. As the eye-tracker functions in the near infrared light spectrum few important precautions were taken such as, blocking the entry of natural light by covering the windows, avoiding the usage of incandescent bulbs, halogen bulbs and by using fluorescent bulbs. The furniture, equipment made up with iron, steel, copper, aluminum were discarded from the experimental room as these metals are known to create artifact in the magnetic field of magnetic head tracker. Only wooden chairs were provided for the sitting purpose.

A binocular eye tracker [Model No. HS-BN6.1, M/s Applied Scientific Laboratories (ASL) USA] with head mounted optics and magnetic head tracker (ascension flock of birds processor with transmitter and receiver unit) was used to record the eye movements. The eye-tracking system was calibrated for each subject before starting the recording session. A set of numbers from 1 to 9, arranged in 3×3 array were displayed in the computer screen with 1 at the top left of the screen and 9 at the bottom right of the screen. The subjects were asked to fix each numbers sequentially form 1–9 by gazing at the respective number. By doing this a scene plane boundary was constructed within which all the eye movement activities were recorded. Any activity outside this boundary was automatically excluded. The data were sampled at 120Hz. Data recorded from the left eye were considered for further analysis. The scene plane calibration and experimental stimulus delivery were both carried out on a HP LP2465 24in. TFT monitor with a viewing angle of 178°H/178°V and resolution of 1920×1200 pixel (aspect ratio 16:10).

Six colours, namely white, black, red, blue, green and yellow were chosen from Microsoft® PowerPoint® colour palette for the present study. These colours were chosen because of their frequent usage in every aspect of life. Black and white combination is popular reading medium and red, green, blue, and yellow are the fundamental colour sense which cannot be represented as mixture of two or more colours [23,24]. Jacobs and Suess [25] described that red, green, blue and yellow are four psychological primary colours to evoke the anxiety state and this finding is well agreed with the physiological studies attempted by Jacobs and Hustmyer [26] and Gerard [27]. The hue, saturation and luminance (HSL) value of these colours are given in Table 1
                        .

All the colours were alternatively used to generate background and character. In the first set of stimuli delivery matrix white was served as the background colour and remaining other colours were served as the character. In the second set black was background and remaining other colours were served as the character. In the last two sets white and black were served as characters on the background of other colours. Only the combinations between black and white were excluded as these were studied extensively in the past four decades. The actual sequence of the combinations by which stimuli were displayed is mentioned in Table 2
                         along with their luminance contrast value as per Peli’s formula [28] [Luminance contrast (LC) between character luminance (LT
                        ) and background luminance (LB
                        ): |LC
                        =
                        LT
                        
                        –
                        LB
                        /LT
                        
                        +
                        LB
                        |]. The LT
                         and LB
                         was taken from Microsoft® PowerPoint® colour palette mentioned in Table 1. Subjective responses were collected from few subjects (these subjects did not participate in the main experiment) about the preferred sequence (as mentioned in Table 2) of combination for the present study and then such a sequence was constructed. The whole arrangements were made in the Microsoft® PowerPoint® and stimuli were presented during slide show mode.

A searching task was assigned to the subjects on the background of various colours. Arrow was used as the searching character. Selection of arrow as the searching character has been inspired by the following reasons: (a) arrow is simple form of graphical symbol and frequently used in our daily life to point or indicate direction, (b) arrows offer various spatial forms in creating the visual flank during searching task [29–31] and (c) according to the principle of Eriksen Flanker task [32] arrows are typically used as the experimental stimuli. Since the time of Eriksen and till today various researchers have frequently used arrows as experimental stimuli. A total number of 63 arrows, comprising of both right and left headed, were presented in the alternative colours as searching character (Fig. 1
                        ). These arrows were arranged in a 7 (row)×9 (column) array for all the combinations. All those arrows were regularly spaced from each other considering the horizontal and vertical orientation in the two dimensional environment. A complete diagrammatic representation has given in Fig. 2
                         considering different dimensional measurement of the arrows and the way they were separated from each other. This kind of detailed description of the searching matrix is always important as the shape, size, orientation of the character and number of character to be displayed play very critical role during the process of perception, information processing and cognition. We noticed that the present arrangement was accepted by all the participants for viewing from 60 to 70cm distances. The arrows subtended visual angle of 1.63–1.91° for 60–70cm distance. All the subjects were shown to a blank slide with a black dot on a white background before the presentation of each matrix. The subjects’ job was to count total number of left headed arrows from the matrix. In each slide the number of left headed arrow varied around 17, 18, or 19. Duration of one minute was given for each slide to search total number of left headed arrow. If any subject failed to count within one minute the next searching matrix was displayed by pressing the ‘spacebar’ button on the key board. The subjects were not imposed for any specific searching direction and allowed them to act naturally. Every individual has their intrinsic searching direction with which they are most comfortable and perform efficiently with less error. By specifying a fixed searching direction some participants may perform better than the others and the results of the experiment would be biased. The possible reason behind is that those who perform better their intrinsic searching strategy is matching with the experimenter’s specified direction and those who perform poorly they just try to accustom with experimenter’s specified direction forcefully, which is just the opposite to their intrinsic direction. On the above context we did not control the direction of searching as it would affect their natural performance. During searching the subjects were fitted with a head mounted optics system for the recording of eye movement variables. It was presumed that these matrixes offered a moderate cognitive load as the task demanded the recognition of colour, dimension, direction as well as the counting within a time constraint.

All the subjects performed their searching on 16 matrixes. Thus, a total number of 16×44=704 experiments were carried out. Actually, total 16 combinations were divided into 4×4 arrangements where each of the 4 set had another 4 subsets. The head mounted optics was removed after the completion of each set. An interval of at least 7min was provided in between the sets to get rid of the effect of the previous combination and also it was meant for relaxation of the pupil. During this interval the subjects were also provided by NASA-TLX questionnaire and a subjective rating scale to reflect their own responses about different demand of the task and the legibility of the combinations respectively. The errors in counting the targets were also noted down. Searching time of all the subjects were noted those who have completed exactly at 1min or within 1min.

Eye movement variables like pupil diameter, mean fixation duration, fixation frequency were recorded during searching task by EYE –TRAC 6 User Interface and the recorded raw data were further analysed in EyeNal software analysis package. Searching time was recorded with the help of a stopwatch. The subjective responses were also considered by assessing the mental workload by applying NASA-TLX questionnaire [33]; and by legibility rating [4]. Overall mental workload scores were obtained by standard procedure considering all the components (mental demand, physical demand, temporal demand, performance, effort and frustration) of NASA-TLX questionnaire for each combination. Percentage of error was also calculated for each combination.

The study had a repeated measure design. The independent variables were various combinations of font character colour and background colours. The dependent variables were pupil diameter, mean fixation duration, fixation frequency, searching time and mental workload. Mean (SD) values of all the dependent variables are given in Table 3
                        . Normal distributions of these dependent variables are represented by box plot (Fig. 3
                        ). In the box plot sample minimum, lower quartile, median, upper quartile and sample maximum values are represented. One way repeated measure ANOVA was used to find out the overall significance across the combinations. Followed by significance of the ANOVA a Bonferroni post hoc test was applied to compare the groups pair wise. The level of significance was considered at P
                        <0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Results of the one-way repeated measure ANOVA has given in Table 4
                         considering all eye movement related variables and searching time and mental workload.

Different character colours on white background did not show any significant effect on the pupil diameter [F (3, 129)=2.14, P
                           >0.05]. On the contrary, different character colours on black background showed significant effect on pupil diameter [F (1.81, 78.22)=59.92, P
                           <0.05]. Post-hoc analysis using Bonferroni test revealed that there were significant relation in changes in pupil diameter (P
                           <0.05) among all the combinations on black background. A uniform trend was found for pupil diameter on black background (Fig. 3b). Significant changes were found in pupil diameter for both white character [F (3, 129)=55.45, P
                           <0.05] and black character [F (1.98, 85.49)=149.25, P
                           <0.05] on other backgrounds. Bonferroni post hoc test showed significant (P
                           <0.05) changes in pupil diameter for each individual pair wise comparison for both black and white character on other background colour, except the WBL–WG combination.

Mean fixation duration changed significantly [F (2.11, 90.85)=11.91, P
                           <0.05] across all black backgrounds and other character colour combinations. Post-hoc analysis showed significant (P
                           <0.05) relation among all the individual pair except the BLB–GB pair. Whereas, changes in mean fixation duration with white background and other character colour combination [F (3, 129)=1.98, P
                           >0.05]; white character and other background colour combinations [F (3, 129)=2.07, P
                           >0.05]; black character and other background colour combination [F (3, 129)=3.43, P
                           >0.05] were not significant.

Fixation frequency showed significant changes [F (1.49, 64.20)=6.52, P
                           <0.05] with black background and other character colour combination, post hoc analysis revealed that only YB–BLB pair showed a significant (P
                           <0.05) relation. No significant changes was noted with white background and other character colour combination [F (3, 129)=0.85, P
                           >0.05], white character and other background colour combinations [F (3, 129)=0.84, P
                           >0.05], black character and other background colour combinations [F (3, 129)=4.21, P
                           >0.05].

Mental workload showed significant changes with other character/white background colour combinations [F (2.42, 104.31)=57.15, P
                           <0.05] and white character/other background colour combinations [F (1.38, 59.47)=66.7, P
                           <0.05]. Post-hoc analysis revealed significant (P
                           <0.05) relation for YW–RW, YW–BLW, YW–GW pairs; and for WY–WR, WY–WBL, WY–WG, WR–WBL pairs. No significant changes was observed with other character/black background colour combination [F (3, 129)=0.29, P
                           >0.05] and black character/other background colour combinations [F (3, 129)=0.48, P
                           >0.05].

Legibility ratings were recorded for each combination under unsatisfactory, passable and excellent category and results are tabulated in Table 5
                            as percentage of total population reported each legibility category. On white background combinations we observed that 56.82% of population expressed unsatisfactory legibility for YW combination and only 6.82% subject reported excellent legibility. For RW and BLW combination 63.64% and 75.00% subjects rated excellent category legibility respectively. The GW combination got almost equal subjective responses, 47.73% and 50.00%, respectively for passable and excellent category. On black background combination majority of the population reported the passable legibility, which were 43.18%, 56.82%, 47.73% and 43.18% respectively for YW, RB, BLB and GB combinations. Among white character/other background combination WY was reported by 86.36% subject as unsatisfactory. WR combination received highest subjective responses (59.09%) as passable. The WBL combination received 63.64% subjective response for excellent category. On other background/black character combination 50% of population reported passable legibility for BY, BR and BG combination. The BBL combination received 47.73% subjective response as unsatisfactory legibility.

Searching time (Table 4) showed significant changes with different character/white background colour combinations [F (2.36, 101.69)=4.66, P
                           <0.05] and white character/other background colour combination [F (2.32, 100.15)=3.52, P
                           <0.05]. Post-hoc analysis revealed significant (P
                           <0.05) relation for YW–GW pair among all other character/white background colour combination; and for WY–WBL pair among all white character/other background colour combinations. Searching time did not show any significant changes with other character/black background colour combination [F (3, 129)=2.00, P
                           >0.05] and black character/other background colour combination [F (3, 129)=1.65, P
                           >0.05].


                           Fig. 4
                            represents the percentage of error. Highest percentage of error (14.11%) was recorded for YW combination and for other combinations the percentage of error was within 7–13%.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The present study has aimed towards the selection of proper character/background colour combinations for onscreen searching tasks. In this process we attempted an integrated approach with various measurement techniques i.e., eye movement recording, subjective assessment by applying questionnaire and legibility scale; and performance data by recording the searching time and percentage of error.

Importance of eye movement studies in predicting information processing during reading and searching task investigated since last 20years [34]. The recording of eye movement variables in the presence of different character/background colour combinations in searching task is seldom used by researchers. In the present study it was observed that eye movement variables like pupil diameter, mean fixation duration and fixation frequency showed significant changes with the different character/background colour combinations.

Pupil diameter is an important indicator of imposed cognitive workload. Many authors recorded and analysed the pupil diameter during a broad variety of tasks: arithmetic [35] forced-choice [36], language [37], perception [38,39], attention [40,41] and digit-span recall [42]. However, till date there is no documentation of pupil diameter available for the experiments with different character/background colour combinations. Empirical evidences showed that larger the diameter of the pupil the higher is the cognitive effort [42–45]. On the contrary, the sensitivity of the pupil size is affected due to the physical agents like, the ambient illuminations levels [46]. In the present study we have used normal level of illumination for regular office work assuming that it will not alter the eye movement behaviours significantly. Any sort of changes in the pupil size occurred in this study was brought about by changing luminance contrast value of various character/background colour combinations. In the present study we noticed that pupil diameter changed significantly across all the combinations except for other character/white background colour combination (Table 4). Bonferroni post hoc pair wise analysis revealed that the changes in pupil diameter were also significant for each individual pair except WBL–WG combination (Table 4). The luminance contrast of a combination is the key factor affecting the diameter of the pupil [47]. The combinations, offering optimum legibility, also ensure a suitable pupil size sufficient enough to extract information within reasonable time without having much difficulty in searching the targets. The former explanation was related to immediate effect of light on the pupil diameter emitted by a particular colour combination. The degree of legibility ultimately affects the searching process of the targets by interfering with perception and cognitive workload. A brighter display causes pupil to constrict thus restricting the amount of light entering the retina and a dimmer display causes pupil to dialate to allow more light to enter the retina for proper visualization of the displayed information. In the present study it was noticed that in the presence of combinations with black and other colour pupil diameter increased uniformly compared to white and other colour combinations. However, it is not clear whether the increase in pupil diameter in the presence of black combinations was due to exposure of eye to lower illumination levels or due to the increased cognitive effort. In this connection it is mentionable that pupil diameter has effects on the depth of field and the magnitude of spherical aberrations [47]. The findings of Taptagaporn and Saito [48] and the present study showed the smaller pupil diameter with positive polarity (e.g., other character colours on white background) than in negative polarity (e.g., other character colours on black background). These findings explain that positive polarity offers a greater depth of field and less spherical aberration and consequently ensures a higher quality of retinal image than negative polarity displays [47]. Negative polarity displays result in the frequent changes in retinal adaptation and pupil diameter and thus results in fatigue [48].

Fixation duration is associated with mental workload for searching task [49]. It varies from 100 to 300ms. However, Bojko [50], Palmer [51], Rayner [34] have stated that fixation duration ranges from ∼50 to ∼500ms. Fixation duration is linked to the processing time of an object which is being fixed [52]. A longer fixation indicates difficulty in extracting information and the display being more attention capturing [49]. Fixation duration is closely related to fixation frequency. Fixation frequency is approximately the inverse of the mean fixation duration [53]. In the present study it was noticed that mean fixation duration for all the character/background combinations were within the normal limits [34,50,51]. It is noticeable from Table 4 that mean fixation duration and fixation frequency reflected same pattern of results. Significant changes observed in the mean fixation duration only for other character/black background colour combination. Post-hoc pair wise comparison revealed significant changes with black background except BLB–GB pair. Higher the number of fixations the lesser is the searching efficiency which may be attributed to the suboptimal design layout of the displays [54]. Number of fixations varies across the subjects for the same task as every subject has their own searching strategies. It may happen that the subjects with similar performance rate have varying number of fixations. In an encoding task higher fixation frequency on a particular area is indicating that the area is highly interesting such as a photograph in newspaper [53]. In this aspect, Jacob and Karn [53] have noticed that the above observations may be reversed in a searching task as a higher number of single fixations or clusters of fixations can be predictive of greater uncertainty in recognizing a target item. Similar was observed in the present study for comparison between YB and BLB combinations. This indicates that the encoding of searching target is difficult with black background [52]. Hence, the use of black as background colour must be limited critically during designing the displays for searching task.

In the present study the YW and WY combinations received highest mental workload ratings (49.78 and 49.37 respectively) and the changes are significant. All other combinations received a comparatively lower mental workload rating. The lowest mental workload rating was observed for WBL combination (22.62). This was followed by WG combination (23.43) and BLW combination (24.79). Probably the bright background with higher luminance value sufficiently illuminates the character of searching interest and therefore offers smooth performance. Sufficient level of luminance contrast is always required for proper detection and identification of visual stimuli. However, under certain occupational conditions, e.g., military operations, the negative polarity and positive contrast displays (bright character on dark background) is often being preferred [1]. Because soldiers are required to perform under low illumination condition to operate safely. Our eyes show different level of sensitivity to various wavelengths of lights. Each wave length evokes the sensation of specific colour in our brain after being received by small, medium and large cone cells in the retina. Moreover, the combinations of various colours also have specific effects on brain [55,56]. Performance of any cognitive task, i.e., searching task under the presence of various combinations will utilize the cognitive resources of our brain up to varied degree and generates various levels of cognitive load. This ultimately results in the alteration of performance.

In our study subjects were instructed to complete the searching tasks within one minute. Searching time is related to searching efficiency; lower the searching time higher is the searching efficiency. Searching time for different combinations was found to be almost same, with minimum 21.13s for WBL and maximum 29.14s for YW combination. An overall significance was observed when white was used either as background or as character colour with other colour. Searching time varied across the combinations due to the fact that, firstly subjects had to interact with different luminance contrast of the specific combination and thus various levels of legibility; and secondly, there was every time discretion between targets and distractors. It appeared that the subjects comprehend the majority of combinations of searching target at ease with equal merit expect for WBL and YW combinations.

Legibility of the character/background combinations plays a central role in the subjective performance. The colour usage research lab of NASA AMES research centre [57] has critically discussed various aspects of colour usage in designing the visuals in the display. The legibility issues are concerned with users’ ability to read and discriminate the shapes of the symbols in the displays. When the choice of colour is concerned with legibility, then luminance contrast is the central issue. The optimum visual responses correspond to the luminance contrast and are linked with the brightness difference between the objects and their backgrounds. An object with the same luminance value as its background will offer illegible displays. In the present study white and yellow are having luminance value of 255 and 128 respectively and considered to be the bright colour and combination of these colours, e.g., YW and WY, offered a poor legibility due to lower background and object luminance difference. Also, the combination of the blue and green with black offered poor legibility due to lower background and object luminance difference. In the present study BLW, RW and WBL combinations were found to be maximum legible and preferred by most of the participants.

The present study is limited to the use of four primary colours only. A combination of sixteen character/background colour was used. The observations of the study are limited to the present context/task with the characteristics of the population group used. The result of the present study has been concluded on the observations of one experiment only. Further, studies are required with various sheds of the primary colour to validate the present model. In addressing these issues more precisely electroencephalogram (EEG) and fMRI techniques may be used as effective tools along with eye movement variables to identify the brain cortical regions involved in the cognitive behaviour during the perception of onscreen character/background colour combination.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Working with different character/background colour combinations in designing visuals in the onscreen searching tasks in displays imposes critical challenges to the cognitive ergonomists. It is quite difficult to explore a finding in the same direction supported by both eye movement study and subjective responses. In the present study performance on some of the colour combinations have been supported by the eye movement variables, subjective responses and performance data. The advantage of using the multiple data collection approach has been found to be beneficial in our study. It was found that the dark backgrounds (i.e., black, blue, green, etc.) are not beneficial for use in the similar searching task as used in the present study. As dark background interferes with accommodation and retinal image formation and should be used carefully. However, either dark or light background does not confer a big issue as luminance contrast between background and object demands an upper hand in this regard. Although light backgrounds (i.e., white, yellow, etc.) are preferred by the subjects in the present study yet their role become useless when combined with light object colour as it is observed for the YW and WY combinations. Present study observed that among the combinations of light character/dark background, blue and green are the best background with white is the best character. Combination of yellow character/black background and white character/red background are also acceptable. Blue was found to be advantageous either as background or as character and is evident by excellent legibility ratings, lower cognitive load, lesser searching time, minimum error and optimum eye movement activities. Combinations like white and yellow, black and blue, black and green must be avoided as these combinations are having lower luminance contrast and consequently offer a poor legibility.

The above findings will be of immense assistance for the use of onscreen searching tasks in military working environment where various complex operations are being performed through information displays with high cognitive demand.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors wish to thank all the volunteers who participated whole heartedly and spent their valuable time in the study. The authors are grateful to all the staff of Ergonomics laboratory who have contributed and cooperated in the study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

