@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Characteristics of polycrystalline Si TFTs fabricated on glass substrates by excimer laser annealing with nickel-sputtered amorphous Si films

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Poly-Si TFTs were fabricated by ELA process using Ni-sputtered a-Si films.


                        
                        
                           
                           The content of Ni was a key parameter for the performance of poly-Si TFTs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Relationship between the characteristics of TFTs and grain was obtained.


                        
                        
                           
                           We present the Ni-content needed for the optimized performance of poly-Si TFT.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Thin film transistors (TFTs)

Excimer Laser Annealing (ELA)

Poly-Si TFTs

Amorphous Si crystallization

Large sized displays

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  We have fabricated two kinds of thin film transistors (TFTs) on the glass substrates using polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si) thin films with small and large grain sizes processed by Excimer Laser Annealing (ELA) and carried out a comparative analysis. The grain size was controlled by nickel atom content in amorphous silicon (a-Si) thin films. With increasing grain size of poly-Si thin films, the carrier mobility increased from 40.8 to 54.4cm2/Vs and the absolute value of threshold voltage reduced from 2.1 to 1.5V. The observed improvements in the electrical characteristics of poly-Si TFTs are attributed mainly to the reduction of defect density rendered by large grain size. These observations indicate that the sputtered nickel atom content in a-Si layer is a key parameter in determining the characteristics of ELA processed TFTs fabricated on the glass substrates.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Poly-Si TFTs have been attracting an increasing interest due to their potential application in large-area display electronics. Typically, poly-Si thin films can be obtained either via direct deposition of poly-Si thin films using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or crystallization of a-Si thin film by thermal or laser annealing. Among these various methods to crystallize a-Si, ELA process has attracted much research interest as an alternative fabrication method because of its advantageous characteristics such as low temperature process above all and also its simplicity. Moreover, it has been reported that the ELA process produces highly-qualified poly-Si thin films, resulting in a significant improvement in the electrical characteristics of TFTs [1–4].

In this work, we sputtered nickel atoms on the a-Si layer and have studied the correlation between the grain size of poly-Si layer which was controllable by nickel atom density and electrical characteristics of TFTs fabricated by ELA process. Contrary to the previous reports which used conventional heat treatment methods to crystallize nickel sputtered a-Si [5–8], ELA process was employed in this study to utilize its advantages, explained above. The reaction of nickel-silicide on Si(100) substrate [9] and simultaneous nickel silicidation and silicon crystallization [10] on plastic substrate by ELA procedure have been reported. At here, we used glass as a substrate of which demand is increasing consistently for large sized display electronics. The grain size of the poly-Si thin films, synthesized by laser induced crystallization (LIC), was controlled by the content of nickel atoms which were sputtered on a-Si thin films by nickel DC sputtering. With increasing grain size, the electrical characteristics of the poly-Si TFTs are enhanced even with a roughened surface of the poly-Si channels during the ELA process. The observed improvement of the poly-Si TFTs are attributed to the lowered defect density, originates from the increased grain size of the poly-Si channels by an appropriate nickel sputtering. These results demonstrate that the grain size of the poly-Si channels is controllable by the content of nickel atoms in a-Si layer and plays an important role in determining the electrical characteristics of poly-Si TFTs.

To fabricate TFTs, we used Corning 1737 glasses with an area of 370×400mm as substrates. The overall fabrication procedure of the poly-Si TFTs has been reported in detail in previous [9]. In particular, in this study, an extremely small amount of nickel atoms were sputter deposited on the 500Å thick a-Si film followed by LIC procedure. As shown in Fig. 1
                     , nickel layer with a thickness of sub-angstrom was uniformly deposited at the power of 100W by using nickel DC sputtering system equipped with a nonmagnetic cathode and target scanner (the nickel target with a width of 40mm is scanned in a speed of 5m/min). The working pressure of the deposition chamber and flow rate of Ar gas were 5.5×10−1
                     Torr and 10sccm (sccm denotes cubic centimeter per minute at standard temperature and pressure), respectively.

At here, the nickel concentration in the LIC processed poly-Si thin films is categorized into two groups. For the first, nickel target was scanned 0.5 time during the deposition of nickel layer on the a-Si thin film whereas the repetition of the scan was changed to 3 times for the second; 0.5 time scanned means a single scan of nickel target only in a single direction since 1 time scan signifies the target movement to the forward direction accompanied by a return to the original position. Throughout this paper, we call the poly-Si thin films associated in first and second groups as 0.5-scanned and 3-scanned, respectively. For 0.5-scanned, the resultant nickel content in a-Si film is ∼1.6×1012 for an area of 1cm×1cm while that for 3-scanned is ∼1013. We also added the data of surface morphology and current–voltage characteristics of the poly-Si TFT fabricated without nickel sputtering process (0-scanned) for comparison purpose.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, we focused on the correlation between the electrical characteristics of poly-Si TFTs and the grain size of poly-Si layer which was controlled by nickel atoms content in a-Si layer during LIC process. We experimentally investigated the characteristics of the poly-Si thin films synthesized by ELA process, carried out by using an irradiation with an energy density of 0.3J/cm2. Fig. 2
                     (a), (b), and inset in 2(b) represent SEM images of the obtained 0.5, 3, and 0-scanned poly-Si thin films, respectively. As shown, the grains are entirely of a round shape that is larger than the film thickness. It is well known that the nickel atoms in a-Si layer influence Si crystallization since the sputtered nickel enhances solid phase epitaxy through the heat treatment [5–8]. The reaction of nickel-silicide by ELA was carried out on Si(100) substrate by using laser fluence of 0.45J/cm2 that is in the submelting regime and also modeled with laser fluence ranged from 0.1 to 0.7J/cm2 
                     [9]. Alberti et al. also achieved simultaneous nickel silicidation and silicon crystallization by ELA on plastic substrate with laser fluence of 0.2J/cm2 
                     [10]. They found that the nickel profile in the a-Si layer plays a crucial role to activate submelting Si crystallization. When we consider the higher thermal conductivity of glass substrate (∼1.1Wm−1
                     K−1) than that of plastic (<0.5Wm−1
                     K−1), resulting in less heat confinement in a-Si layer deposited on the glass substrate, and also the already observed submelting nickel-silicide reaction using the laser fluence of 0.45J/cm2 
                     [9], ELA procedure at here with the laser fluence of 0.3J/cm2 is believed to performed in the submelting regime.

During the Si crystallization, the individual grains can grow with the aid of nickel silicides which are initially scattered in the a-Si layer until the adjacent grains collide with one another, resulting in a disk shape. As shown in Fig. 2(b) (3-scanned) and its inset (0-scanned), the 3-scanned poly-Si thin film exhibits similar but slightly larger grain size than that of 0-scanned. However, it should be noted that the grain size of 0.5-scanned poly-Si thin film is enlarged about 2 times compared to that of the 3-scanned. This observed smaller grain size of poly-Si film prepared from the a-Si layer with higher nickel atoms content (3.0-scanned) than that of poly-Si film from the less nickel atoms scattered a-Si (0.5-scanned) is attributed to the higher nickel silicides crystallization seed density. For the nickel silicides aid crystallization, the higher crystallization seed density induce a denser adjacent grain collision, eventually resulting in the smaller grain sized poly-Si layer.

Surface roughness of the poly-Si layer is a significant issue for its TFT applications because of the problems related to surface uniformity. High surface roughness of the poly-Si layer is expected to aggravate the breakdown characteristics of the gate insulator (GI) by creating a local high electric field. In order to analyze the surface roughness of the poly-Si thin film, atomic force microscope (AFM) measurements in contact mode were carried out on the synthesized poly-Si thin films. AFM micrographs of the films are illustrated in Fig. 3
                     (a), (b), and (c) for the 0.5, 3, and 0-scanned poly-Si thin films, respectively. The root-mean-square (rms) roughness values obtained from the AFM data are 88.2Å, 75Å, and 77Å, respectively. These observations are understandable because surface roughness increases with average grain size in general [12].


                     Fig. 4
                      shows the typical transfer characteristics of our TFTs operated at the drain-to-source voltage (Vd
                     ) of −0.1 and −5.1V and the gate-to-source voltage (Vg
                     ) ranging from −15 to 10V. To understand their device performance quantitatively, we derived physical parameters for the TFTs by analyzing the variations in the drain current (Id
                     ) on the applied Vg
                     . The extracted device parameters are summarized in Table 1
                     . Considering these parameter values, it should be noted that all TFTs studied at here which were fabricated from the nickel-sputtered a-Si exhibit an enhanced operating characteristics of p-channel field effect transistor compared to the conventional TFT (0-scanned) without nickel sputtering process.

Generally, poly-Si TFTs suffer from relatively high off-current (Ioff
                     ) and gate leakage current (Ig
                     ) value compared with a-Si TFTs. This is a serious problem of poly-Si TFTs for their application to pixel TFTs since the fundamental principle of active matrix displays is based on static operation without leakage current. To hold the signal level for acceptable image quality of displays, the off-state current has to be as low as 1×10−12
                     A/μm, which is an important criterion of poly-Si TFTs. The gate leakage current of the TFTs with nickel sputtering process, as shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), can be divided into two parts; firstly, an almost flat region І in which Ioff
                      does not change with an increment of Vg
                      and secondly, a gate-bias dependent region ІІ. Ig
                      in the region І is a lowest saturation of the leakage current whereas the increased Ig
                      in the region ІІ indicates a leakage in the junction. This leakage in the current through the junction at high Vg
                      can be explained if we consider the residual a-Si pockets which have not been crystallized into poly-Si during the nickel atoms mediated LIC process [11,13]. As shown, the gate leakage current is significantly lower for the poly-Si TFT fabricated from 0.5-scanned a-Si compared to that of the TFT from 3.0-scanned a-Si due to the lower residual a-Si pockets. In Fig. 4(c), it should be noted that the conventional poly-Si TFT with 0-scanned exhibits higher gate leakage current value (⩾1×10−12
                     A/μm) than those of 0.5 and 3-scanned in the region I at Vd
                     
                     =−0.1V. However, the gate leakage current value for the 0-scanned TFT is independent of Vg
                     .

It is widely accepted that the mobility, threshold voltage, and sub-threshold swing of poly-Si TFTs are strongly influenced by the grain size and surface roughness of poly-Si layer [3,11]. Now, it should be noted that the sub-threshold swing and on-current of the TFTs fabricated using the 0.5-scanned poly-Si thin film (Fig. 4(a)) is steeper and higher, respectively, compared to those of the TFT fabricated using the 3 and 0-scanned poly-Si thin film (Fig. 4(b) and (c)). Despite the increase in surface roughness of the poly-Si layer of 0.5-scanned, the increase in mobility is 33–44% compared to the poly-Si TFT of 0 and 3-scanned. This observation may be a manifestation of the argument that grain size plays an important role in determining the average distance (mean free path) in which a carrier travels in the channel region before it encounters a trapping event. These improved characteristics of the TFTs fabricated using the 0.5-scanned poly-Si thin film may be related to the decrease in the absolute number of grain boundaries (or absolute number of grain-boundary trap states) in the active channel of the device.

To investigate the effects of grain boundaries in the TFTs, the trap state density (Nt
                     ) per unit area was estimated from the activation energy (Ea
                     ) as follows [14–16]. Generally, the temperature dependence of the sub-threshold drain current is given by
                        
                           (1)
                           
                              
                                 
                                    I
                                 
                                 
                                    d
                                 
                              
                              =
                              
                                 
                                    C
                                 
                                 
                                    ox
                                 
                              
                              μ
                              
                                 
                                    W
                                 
                                 
                                    L
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    V
                                 
                                 
                                    d
                                 
                              
                              (
                              
                                 
                                    V
                                 
                                 
                                    g
                                 
                              
                              -
                              
                                 
                                    V
                                 
                                 
                                    th
                                 
                              
                              )
                              exp
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       -
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   qE
                                                
                                                
                                                   a
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   k
                                                
                                                
                                                   B
                                                
                                             
                                             T
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     where Cox
                      is the gate oxide capacitance per unit area, μ is the field effect mobility, W and L are the channel width and length, respectively, Vd
                      is the drain-to-source voltage, Vg
                      is the gate-to-source voltage, Vth
                      is the threshold voltage, and q is the electron charge. The activation energy Ea
                      is given by
                        
                           (2)
                           
                              
                                 
                                    E
                                 
                                 
                                    a
                                 
                              
                              =
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          q
                                       
                                       
                                          3
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          N
                                       
                                       
                                          t
                                       
                                       
                                          2
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          t
                                       
                                       
                                          ch
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    8
                                    
                                       
                                          ε
                                       
                                       
                                          Si
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          C
                                       
                                       
                                          ox
                                       
                                    
                                    (
                                    
                                       
                                          V
                                       
                                       
                                          g
                                       
                                    
                                    -
                                    
                                       
                                          V
                                       
                                       
                                          th
                                       
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     where ε
                     Si is the dielectric constant of silicon, and tch
                      is the inversion layer thickness in channel region. Measurements of the Id
                      versus Vg
                      curves were performed in a linear mode for all devices at each fixed temperature, ranging from 300 to 450K. Then, the Ea
                      was extracted from Arrhenius plots of Id
                     /(Vg
                     –Vth
                     ) at fixed gate voltage. The plot of activation energy Ea
                      versus Vg
                     –Vth
                      is shown in Fig. 5
                     (a). Fig. 5(b) shows the extracted trap state density from the activation energy. As expected from Figs. 1 and 2, the data favor lower defect density as the grain size of the poly-Si layer increases. These observations demonstrate that the TFT characteristics are strongly dependent on the number of grain boundaries present within the channel since the defects in the poly-Si layer which produce trap states are mainly located at the grain boundaries.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In this study, we have studied the correlation between the nickel atoms content and electrical characteristics of TFTs fabricated by ELA process from nickel sputtered a-Si. It has been found that the density of nickel atoms scattered on a-Si determines the grain size of poly-Si after ELA process. For the 0.5-scanned poly-Si TFT with relatively large grain sized poly-Si channel, the carrier mobility enhanced from 40.8 to 54.4cm2/Vs compared to the 3-scanned poly-Si TFT of small grain sized poly-Si channel while the absolute value of threshold voltage (sub-threshold swing) were decreased from 2.1 to 1.5V (from 0.44 to 0.38V/dec). These observed improvements in the electrical characteristics are attributed mainly to the decrease in the absolute number of grain boundaries (or the absolute number of grain-boundary trap states) due to the increased grain size.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The work as a part of this research carried out at Chungnam Nation University was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the NRF funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2012R1A2A2A02013936).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

