@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Formation of high-purity organic thin films by gas flow deposition and the effect of impurities on device characteristics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We developed a gas flow deposition (GFD) system to manufacture large scale OLEDs.


                        
                        
                           
                           High-purity α-NPD thin films are obtained by the GFD system.


                        
                        
                           
                           Impurities in α-NPD thin films affected their OLED performance.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

OLED

Gas flow deposition

α-NPD

High purity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A gas flow deposition (GFD) system was developed to manufacture large-scale organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). A N,N′-di(1-naphthyl)-N,N′-diphenylbenzidine (α-NPD) thin film with a high purity of 99.97% was obtained using the GFD system. The film properties such as morphology, and electrical and optical characteristics were almost the same as those of films made by conventional vacuum thermal evaporation.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The number of products containing organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), mainly smart phones and tablets, has increased significantly recently, and the market is still growing rapidly. For further development of OLED technology, large-area OLEDs need to be manufactured at low cost. Manufacturing equipment aimed at minimizing production cost also have to satisfy some other important requirements including short tact time, high production yield, small footprint, film uniformity over a large area and high material utilization efficiency.

To meet these requirements, we developed a gas-flow deposition (GFD) system [1] to form consecutive multilayer organic thin films with the aim of high throughput OLED panel manufacture. A number of deposition systems using a carrier gas to control organic thin film deposition have been developed [2–5]. These deposition methods were applied to develop OLEDs, organic field effect transistors (OFETs) and organic solar cells (OSCs) toward industrial production with high throughput, large area of substrate and so on [6–8]. GFD offers a higher material utilization efficiency than these other systems and is also readily scalable because it uses linear sources.

A schematic diagram of our GFD system is presented in Fig. 1
                     . The GFD system efficiently transports organic materials as a vapor to a substrate using an inert carrier gas, which allows the deposition rate to be regulated by precisely controlling the mass flow of the carrier gas. Advantages of using a carrier gas include low thermal stress and rapid adjustment of deposition rate compared with conventional deposition systems. Our GFD system allows different organic materials to be mixed and enables control of lower deposition rates with high precision, so it is suitable for host–guest systems. Transport using a carrier gas allows deposition sources to be placed outside the deposition chamber, which prevents cross-contamination from different sources. Carrier gas transport also allows films to form independent of substrate angle. Using this system with aligned sources enables short tact time and small footprint. However, the GFD process does suffer from several drawbacks. Organic molecules may degrade or polymerize because the pressure in the deposition sources is rather high (1–10Pa), and the temperature of the pass-lines transporting organic vapor is same as that of the deposition sources. Thus, in this study, we investigated the degradation of a typical organic molecule, N,N′-di(1-naphthyl)-N,N′-diphenylbenzidine (α-NPD), by characterizing films of α-NPD formed by both a GFD system and conventional vacuum thermal evaporation (VTE).

The conditions used to form α-NPD thin films using GFD and VTE are summarized in Table 1
                        . In the GFD system, α-NPD (∼4g) was loaded into a source made of SUS304 stainless steel. The source temperature was kept at 290°C and the temperature of the pass-line to a nozzle head was maintained above 290°C to minimize deposition inside the pass-line. Ar carrier gas was passed through the source at a rate of 1.5sccm using a mass flow controller. The pressure of the deposition chamber was 1.5×10−2
                        Pa. α-NPD vapor was projected out from a nozzle head onto a moving glass substrate. The deposition rate was measured using a quartz crystal monitor, and maintained at a constant rate of 6.4nm/s. In the VTE process, two typical sources consisting of an aluminum oxide (Al2O3) crucible and a tantalum (Ta) boat and containing approximately 1 and 0.3g of α-NPD, respectively, were used. Film formation from the Al2O3 crucible was performed by heat transfer from an external heater, while that from the Ta boat was achieved by direct electric resistance heating. The temperature in the Al2O3 crucible was set at 290°C, and the film was deposited at a constant rate of 1.8nm/s [denoted VTE (a) in Table 1], whereas the Ta boat was adjusted to a target deposition rate of 0.2nm/s [denoted VTE (b) in Table 1]. Note that the source temperature of the Ta boat was unknown. The pressures of the deposition chamber in VTE (a) and VTE (b) were 2.4×10−4 and 2.1×10−4
                        Pa, respectively.

For the films formed by GFD, α-NPD (∼4g) in a GFD source was heated so that the material flowed constantly from a nozzle head for at least 24h to investigate the thermal stress on α-NPD. In this experiment, α-NPD thin films were formed on glass substrates after 2.5, 21.9 and 24.2h. Similarly, α-NPD (30g) was heated in the GFD system for 48h. α-NPD thin films were formed on glass substrates after 28.5 and 36.0h.

α-NPD thin films with a thickness of about 500nm formed on glass substrates by each process were dissolved in CH2Cl2. Each solution was carefully analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and the purity and impurity ratio of the thin films were evaluated. HPLC was performed using acetonitrile as the mobile phase with a Shimadzu Prominence UFLC equipped with a GL Sciences Inertsil ODS-3 column (4.6×250mm). Films were also characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra, refractive index and extinction coefficient were measured using Shimadzu SPM-9600, JASCO FP-6500 and Horiba UVISEL spectrometers, respectively.

A hole-only device (HOD) was fabricated to clarify the electrical properties of α-NPD thin films formed by GFD. Indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates were washed with deionized water containing a polyvinyl alcohol sponge, ultrasonicated in deionized water for 10min and then dried at 230°C in a nitrogen-filled clean oven for 30min. Substrates were treated with vacuum ultraviolet light-ozone for 10min, and then transported under vacuum. α-NPD thin films (200nm) were formed on substrates after 2.5 and 24.2h of heating. An aluminum cathode was deposited by VTE through a shadow mask. After HODs were fabricated, they were transferred to an adjacent nitrogen-filled glove box and encapsulated with a glass cap and UV-curing epoxy resin together with a desiccant sheet. The current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics of the HODs were measured by an optical characterization system (Otsuka Electronics OLED Optical Characteristic Inspection System). The operational stability of the HODs was evaluated by changing the driving voltage, which was measured by a lifetime evaluation system (Otsuka Electronics OLED Panel Lifetime Evaluation System). The HODs were operated at a constant dc current density of 100mA/cm2
                        . All measurements were carried out at room temperature. To compare the GFD process with a conventional VTE process in OLEDs, we also fabricated OLEDs using the α-NPD thin films formed by GFD and VTE, respectively, with the structure of ITO (100nm)/α-NPD (50nm)/tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminum (Alq3, 50nm)/Lithium Fluoride (LiF, 0.5nm)/Al (80nm). First, an α-NPD layer was formed on a pre-cleaned ITO-coated glass substrate at deposition rate of 0.1nm/s using GFD and VTE, respectively. Then, an Alq3 layer, a LiF/Al layer were deposited by VTE at deposition rate of 0.1nm/s, 0.01nm/s and 0.2nm/s, respectively. The current density (J)–voltage (V)–Luminance (L) characteristics and electroluminescence (EL) spectra of these devices were measured using an external quantum efficiency measurement system utilizing an integrating sphere (HAMAMATSU PHOTONICS K. K. C9920-12) at room temperature.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Chromatograms and the purity of α-NPD thin films formed by VTE (a) and (b) and GFD are summarized in Fig. 2
                     . While impurities with a higher molecular weight than that of α-NPD as observed in the starting material were found in the films formed by VTE, no contamination with high molecular weight impurities was observed in the film formed by GFD, which possessed a high purity of 99.97%. Furthermore, while low molecular weight impurities were found in the films formed by VTE, that formed by GFD did not contain such impurities.


                     Fig. 3
                      compares the morphologies, PL spectra, refractive indices and extinction coefficients of the α-NPD films formed by different techniques. All of the films exhibited almost no difference in their morphology and optical behavior. We observed that insubstantial impurities have insignificant effect on the performance of thin film morphology. Further, the PL spectrum of VTE (b) is slightly wider than those of GFD and VTE (a), suggesting the presence of the aggregated morphology in the film fabricated by VTE (b) [9]. The PL intensity of GFD is about 1.3-fold relatively higher than the PL intensities of both VTE (a) and VTE (b). We consider that impurities in α-NPD thin films acted as a quencher and the increased PL intensity was confirmed in the high purity α-NPD thin film formed by GFD.


                     Fig. 4
                     (a) shows the HPLC results obtained for the α-NPD thin films deposited after different heating times and the residue in the crucibles after heating when 30g of α-NPD was loaded into the source. The impurities in the films are shown in Fig. 4(b). We found that α-NPD thin films formed by GFD maintained high purity even after α-NPD was heated for an extended period before deposition of the film. Moreover, the ratio of impurities in the residue after heating for 48h is almost identical to that of the starting material, indicating that high molecular weight impurities remained in the source. The pressure of the source in GFD was rather high, in the order of 1–10Pa, whereas a low pressure of ∼10−4
                     Pa was maintained in the VTE source. Thus, higher molecular weight impurities remained at the source because of the high pressure of the source in GFD.

HPLC results for α-NPD thin films deposited by GFD after extended heating until the α-NPD was almost used are presented in Fig. 5
                     . The α-NPD thin film contained high molecular weight impurities when the α-NPD deposition rate was reduced just before the crucible was emptied. It is likely that the temperature of the material increased when the crucible contained only a small amount of the source material, which mobilized the high molecular weight impurities.


                     Fig. 6
                     (a) and (b) shows the J–V characteristics and changes in the driving voltage of the HODs composed of high purity and contaminated α-NPD films, respectively. The device containing impurities showed a slight increase of driving voltage in the J–V characteristics and a larger increase of driving voltage under continuous driving than that of the high purity α-NPD thin film. This indicates that the impurities acted as trapping site for charge carriers, reducing the device performance [10]. Here we note that the driving voltages in Fig. 6(b) showed circadian behavior because of temperature changes in the ambient environment.


                     Fig. 7
                      compares the J–V, L–J, external quantum efficiency (η
                     ext)–J characteristics and EL spectra of OLEDs with the α-NPD thin films formed by VTE and GFD, respectively. Although the L–J, the η
                     ext–J characteristics and the EL spectra showed an identical performance, a slight decrease of driving voltage was observed in the GFD device. In a similar manner as in the above HOD, because of the α-NPD thin film with a high purity formed by GFD, the OLED by GFD resulted in the lower driving voltage.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

α-NPD thin films with a high purity of 99.97% were prepared by GFD. There was almost no difference in the morphology of the film surface and optical performance of films formed by GFD and VTE. We confirmed that GFD can produce high purity organic thin films by controlling process conditions.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported in part by the Funding Program for World-Leading Innovative R&D on Science and Technology (FIRST) and the International Institute for Carbon Neutral Energy Research (WPI-I2CNER) sponsored by MEXT. We are grateful to Hiroshi Miyazaki (Nippon Steel & Sumikin Chemical Co., Ltd.) for valuable discussion about the degradation of organic materials. We also acknowledge Hiroyuki Ikuta, Dr. Toyohiro Kamada, Shimon Otsuki and Takafumi Nogami (Tokyo Electron Technology Development Institute, Inc.) for assistance with experiments.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

