@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Red-colored products enhance the attractiveness of women

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Women carried red-colored products can enhance their sexual attractiveness.


                        
                        
                           
                           Women carrying products in red only affected how men, but not women, perceived them.


                        
                        
                           
                           Red-colored products did not affect perceived assertiveness and health level of the women.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Red

Colored products

Attractiveness

Sex appeal

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This research investigated whether carrying red-colored products enhances female sexual attractiveness. In the first experiment, male participants were instructed to observe women carrying laptops in different colors (black, silver, red, or blue). The results indicated that the women who carried red laptops were perceived to possess a significantly higher level of attractiveness and sex appeal than those who carried laptops in other colors; however, the red laptop did not affect men’s perceptions of the assertiveness and health level of the women. In the second experiment, the initial experiment was repeated but female participants observed the women; laptop color did not influence how the participants perceived the women’s attractiveness, sex appeal, assertiveness, and level of health. In other words, women carrying products in red only affected how men, but not women, perceived them; thus, women using red products are more attractive and sexually appealing to men.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Among the colors in the visible spectrum, red is symbolic of anger, hostility, and danger. For example, when in anger, the blood flow in the human body increases, which reddens the skin [1,2]. In vehicle color studies, red vehicles blocking the traffic as the traffic light turns from red to green were subjected to honking or flashes from headlights much earlier than blue, green, black, and white vehicles were. This indicates that red vehicles are prone to inducing aggressive responses in drivers of trailing vehicles [3].

Regarding test performance, participants who were shown the color red underperformed on IQ tests compared with those who were shown other colors [4,5]. Concerning job applications, red also affects other people’s impression of an applicant as well as their judgment of the applicant’s abilities. For example, people tend to perceive that applicants wearing red shirts are less intelligent than those with green shirts, and that those wearing red ties lack leadership potential and are less capable of generating profits for the company as opposed to those wearing blue ties. Compared with applicants wearing green ties, those wearing red ties were rated less likely to be hired [6].

Although the color red generates a number of negative effects, it also exerts positive effects. In Olympic competitions, such as boxing, taekwondo, and wrestling, contestants in red outfits are much more likely to win than are those wearing blue outfits [7]. Red also enhances job performance; for example, when proofreading in either a red, green, or white office environment, those working in a red office environment are less likely to err than those working in a white office environment. However, studies have also shown that participants situated in a red office environment are more easily distracted than those working in a white office environment [8]. Red also reduces a person’s snack food and soft drink consumption; for example, people drink less from a red-labeled cup than from a blue-labeled cup, and eat less snack food from a red plate than from a white or blue plate [9,10], indicating that red decreases food and drink intake because the color triggers avoidance motivation.

Red is frequently linked to sex. When approaching ovulation, a reddening of the chest, genitals, perineum, or face of female non-primates is observed [11,12]. This is caused by an increase in estrogen, which increases blood flow, turning the skin red. Waitt et al. [13] found that male rhesus macaques spend a significantly longer time gazing at the hindquarters of female rhesus macaques that have turned red than at those that have not. Therefore, the reddening of the skin is a sexual signal that attracts the attention of the opposite sex.

To humans, red is also a sex signal. For example, when sending flowers to a desirable partner, red roses are generally chosen; sex trade areas are occasionally referred to as red-light districts. Previous studies have shown that red changes the responses from the opposite sex. When women hitchhike, male drivers tend to pull over for a woman wearing a red T-shirt than for those dressed in other colors (e.g., black, white, blue, green, or yellow). By contrast, the T-shirt color of female hitchhikers did not influence female drivers [14]. Similar results were obtained in a restaurant tipping context; among female waitresses who wore the same T-shirt but in different colors (black, white, red, blue, green, or yellow), those who wore red T-shirts received more tips from male patrons than did those who wore other colors. No differences based on T-shirt color were observed in the tips provided by female patrons [15]. In a study concerning lipstick color and tips, female waitresses who wore lipstick, particularly in red, received more tips from male patrons than did those who wore no lipsticks. However, such an occurrence was not observed among female patrons [16]. Furthermore, women who are dressed in red in their profile picture on a networking Web site receive are contacted more by male users compared with those who are wearing other colors in their profile picture [17].

In addition to those wearing red dresses, do women standing before a red background elicit similar responses from men? Elliot and Niesta [18, see also 19] alternately placed women in front of a red or white background, and instructed male participants to evaluate the attractiveness of the women. The results showed that women in front of a red background were considered more attractive than those in front of a white background. However, differences in background color did not influence the perceptions of female participants. The findings also indicated that women in front of a red background increased the sexual desire and sexual behaviors of the male participants; however, the background color did not affect the men’s perceptions of the women’s honesty, friendliness, and intelligence. These results indicate that red, a color associated with sex, influences how men assess women.

Currently, the market is saturated with red products such as red mobile phones, red laptops, and red glasses. The objective of this study was to investigate whether carrying or wearing red products enhances the attractiveness and sex appeal of women. We conducted two experiments to determine whether the perceptions of men and women increase the attractiveness and sex appeal of women carrying red products. Compared with those holding products of other colors, women carrying red products were hypothesized to be more attractive and sexually appealing to men, but not women.

Previous studies have indicated that women wearing a red dress or standing before a red background are more attractive to men. Experiment 1 was designed to further examine whether women carrying a red-colored product would produce a similar effect. In the experiment, photographs of a woman carrying a laptop in a color most commonly seen on the market (i.e., black, silver, blue, and red) were provided. Subsequently, the male participants were asked to rate the women’s attractiveness in order to determine whether laptop color influences men’s assessments.

A total of 80 male participants were recruited from National Kaohsiung Normal University. The participants were randomly divided into four groups, and each group consisted of 20 men. Each group was assigned to observe and rate the attractiveness of a woman carrying a red, black, silver, or blue laptop.

First, 10 photographs of women and 10 photographs of laptops were obtained from Websites, after which the 20 participants were instructed to rate the photos based on attractiveness (a score of 1 indicated a high level of unattractiveness and 10 represented a high level of attractiveness). The photograph of a woman that garnered a mean attractiveness score of 5.2 and the photograph of a laptop that garnered a mean score of 5.1 were selected. The reason for choosing photographs of women and laptop that were considered to exhibit a medium attractiveness level (i.e., neither very pretty nor very ugly) was to prevent the appearance of the women and style of the laptop from influencing the participants’ assessments. After selecting the laptop photographs, logos were removed using Photoshop and the color was changed to black, silver, red, and blue. Next, the four different-colored laptops were combined with the selected photo of a woman to produce four images of her carrying a black, silver, red, or blue laptop.

Five questions were posed in the questionnaire: (1) How much does the woman in the photo attract you? (2) How strong is her sex appeal? (3) How strong is your desire to engage in sexual activity with her? (4) How assertive do you find her? (5) How healthy do you think she is? The assessment scores ranged from 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest), and the first three questions were related to sex and the final two were general questions.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The experiment was conducted in a meeting room. The participants were given the questionnaire either individually or in small groups of two to three people, and the participants responded to the questions without prior knowledge of the study objective. The participants were first instructed to provide their demographic information, after which the questionnaire was administered. The questionnaire included an 11cm by 10cm photo of a woman carrying a laptop. The five questions were located below the photo and the participants were instructed to give a score for each question based on their first impression.

@&#RESULTS@&#

We used one-way analysis of variance to determine whether men’s perceptions of the woman’s attractiveness, sex appeal, assertiveness, and level of health, and the men’s desire to engage in sexual activity with the woman were influenced by the color of the laptop she was carrying. Table 1
                         shows the mean score of each color based on the responses of the male participants.

Concerning the woman’s attractiveness, the results (F(3,76)=10.46, p
                        <.05) showed that laptops of different colors generated varying levels of perceived attractiveness among the male participants. The post hoc analysis revealed that the woman carrying a red laptop was perceived as significantly more attractive than the same woman carrying a silver laptop (3.50 vs. 2.80, p
                        <.001), a black laptop (3.50 vs. 2.60, p
                        <.001), or a blue laptop (3.50 vs. 2.55, p
                        <.001).

Regarding sex appeal, the results (F(3,76)=6.37, p
                        <.05) showed that the woman carrying a laptop of various colors resulted in varying levels of perceived sex appeal among the male participants. The post hoc analysis indicated that the woman carrying a red laptop was perceived as more sexually appealing than when she was carrying a silver laptop (3.05 vs. 2.35, p
                        <.01), a black laptop (3.05 vs. 2.15, p
                        <.001), or a blue laptop (3.05 vs. 2.25, p
                        <.001).

Regarding the desire to engage in sexual activity with the women, the results (F(3,76)=2.03, p
                        =.12) showed that the differences were non-significant, although a trend was present. The post hoc analysis indicated that the woman carrying a red laptop was perceived as more sexually desirable than when she was carrying a silver laptop (3.35 vs. 2.10, p
                        <.05), but did not significantly differ when she was carrying a black laptop (3.35 vs. 2.40, p
                        =.10), or a blue laptop (3.35 vs. 2.45, p
                        =.13).

Regarding assertiveness, the results (F(3,76)=3.67, p
                        <.05) showed that the color of the laptop that the woman carried engendered varying levels of perceived assertiveness among the male participants. The post hoc analysis showed that when the woman was carrying a red laptop, she did not appear more assertive to the male participants than when she was carrying a silver laptop (3.35 vs. 3.85, p
                        =.16), a black laptop (3.35 vs. 2.70, p
                        =.07), or a blue laptop (3.35 vs. 3.45, p
                        =.78), but the woman was perceived as more assertive when she was carrying a silver laptop as opposed to a black laptop (3.85 vs. 2.70, p
                        <.01); the lowest level of perceived assertiveness was associated with the black laptop.

Concerning the woman’s level of health, the results (F(3,76)=2.87, p
                        <.05) indicated that the color of the laptop generated varying levels of health perceptions among the male participants. The post hoc analysis showed that from the men’s perspective, the woman did not appear healthier when she was carrying a red laptop than when carrying a silver laptop (3.40 vs. 3.85, p
                        =.07), a black laptop (3.40 vs. 3.25, p
                        =.55), or a blue laptop (3.40 vs. 3.20, p
                        =.42). The woman holding a silver laptop, in contrast to the blue laptop, was perceived as being significantly healthier (3.85 vs. 3.20, p
                        <.05); carrying a blue laptop generated the least healthy image.

Experiment 1 revealed that men considered women carrying red-colored products as highly attractive and sexually appealing. Whether this is a general phenomenon that applies to everyone or a phenomenon that is related to gender is important to determine. Therefore, the second experiment was designed to further investigate whether carrying a red laptop enhanced how other women perceived the woman’s attractiveness and sex appeal. A previous study determined that women in front of a red background are relatively more attractive to male participants. However, this effect was not observed among female participants [18]. Therefore, carrying red-colored products was hypothesized to not enhance how other women perceived a woman’s attractiveness and sex appeal. As in the first experiment, photos of a woman carrying a silver, black, red, or blue laptop were used in the second experiment.

A total of 80 female participants were recruited from National Kaohsiung Normal University. The participants were randomly divided into four groups, and each group consisted of 20 participants. Each group was assigned to observe and rate the attractiveness of a woman carrying a red, black, silver, or blue laptop.

The photos from the first experiment was again used. However, because the participants were women, the question regarding the desire to engage in sexual activity was omitted.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The procedure used in this experiment was the same as that used in Experiment 1.

@&#RESULTS@&#

We again used a one-way analysis of variance to analyze the data. Table 2
                         shows the mean score of each color based on the responses of the female participants.

Concerning the female participants’ perceptions of attractiveness, the results showed that the differences were non-significant (F(3,76)=1.57, p
                        =.21). The post hoc analysis revealed that the woman carrying a red laptop was not perceived as significantly more attractive than the same woman carrying a silver laptop (2.95 vs. 2.70, p
                        =.30), a black laptop (2.95 vs. 3.05, p
                        =.68), or a blue laptop (2.95 vs. 2.60, p
                        =.15). The results for perceptions of sex appeal revealed no significant differences (F(3,76)=0.38, p
                        =.77). The post hoc analysis indicated that the woman carrying a red laptop was not perceived as more sexually appealing than the same woman carrying a silver laptop (2.55 vs. 2.50, p
                        =.84), a black laptop (2.55 vs. 2.65, p
                        =.68), or a blue laptop (2.55 vs. 2.40, p
                        =.53).

Regarding assertiveness, the results showed that the differences were non-significant (F(3,76)=0.27, p
                        =.85). The post hoc analysis showed that when the woman was carrying a red laptop, she did not appear more assertive to the female participants than when she was carrying a silver laptop (3.30 vs. 3.40, p
                        =.70), a black laptop (3.30 vs. 3.50, p
                        =.45), or a blue laptop (3.30 vs. 3.30, p
                        =1.00). For perceptions of health level, the differences were non-significant (F(3,76)=0.17, p
                        =.92). The post hoc analysis showed that the woman did not appear healthier when she was carrying a red laptop than when she was carrying a silver laptop (3.70 vs. 3.85, p
                        =.54), a black laptop (3.70 vs. 3.80, p
                        =.68), or a blue laptop (3.70 vs. 3.85, p
                        =.54). Overall, the second experiment revealed that carrying a red laptop did not make the woman more attractive, sexually appealing, or assertive, or appear healthier to women.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This research examined whether carrying red-colored products increased the attractiveness and sex appeal of women. The results of Experiment 1 showed that men considered women carrying a red laptop significantly more attractive and sexually appealing than those carrying a silver, black, or blue laptop. Although the male participants’ desire to engage in sexual activity with the woman carrying a red laptop was not significantly higher compared with their desire to do so with the women carrying laptops of other colors, the mean was descriptively higher (a non-significant trend was present). However, carrying a red laptop did not affect how the men perceived the woman’s assertiveness and level of health. In Experiment 2, the same materials and procedures were used, but female participants were recruited instead of males. The results showed that no differences existed in how women perceived the attractiveness, sex appeal, assertiveness, and health of the woman holding laptops of different colors.

The findings indicated that men found women who carried red-colored products highly attractive and sexually appealing, whereas this color did not affect how women perceived other women. These results support the findings of Elliot and Niesta [18], as well as those of the series of studies conducted by Guéguen and Jacob [14–17,20]. Therefore, women who desire to enhance their attractiveness and sex appeal are advised to increase their usage of red-colored products. Interestingly, Schwarz and Singer [21] discovered that their male participants found women standing before a red background (compared with a white background) to be more sexually attractive and that this perception was not observed for older women regardless of the background color (red or white). This indicates that red is only effective for younger women and not for older women. This study suggests that future studies should separate the users of red-colored products into younger and older women to test whether age influences the perceived sex appeal of red-product users.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was supported by the National Science Council of Taiwan under Grant NSC101-2410-H-017-024. The author would also like to thank Pei-Shan Guo and Jia-Ying Chen for assisting with data collection.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

