@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#How homepage aesthetic design influences users’ satisfaction: Evidence from China

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Effect of homepage’ aesthetics on users’ satisfaction is studied, based on S-O-R.


                        
                        
                           
                           The effects of key design elements on homepage aesthetics are studied.


                        
                        
                           
                           The evidence is from China.


                        
                        
                           
                           Aesthetic formality has a positive impact on aesthetic appeal.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Aesthetic design

Stimulus-Organism-Response theory

Emotion

Perceived ease of use

Satisfaction

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In the product emotional design era, the website homepage design, especially the aesthetic design, has become a key factor that influences users’ first impressions, attitudes and behaviors. Based on the Stimulus-Organism-Response (S-O-R) theory, the current study examines the mechanism through which the aesthetic design of a comprehensive job-hunting website homepage affects users’ satisfaction. Emotion and perceived ease of use were used to describe users’ internal evaluation to the homepage (i.e. organism). The Structural Equation Modeling method was used to test the proposed hypotheses. The empirical evidence shows that aesthetic formality does not have a significant impact on positive arousal, but it has positively influences on energetic arousal through its impact on aesthetic appeal. The other hypotheses proposed in this study are all been supported. The additional results, i.e. the effects of three key design elements on homepage aesthetics, are found. The aim of this study was to provide practical recommendation in the establishment of a pattern of webpage aesthetics that influences users’ satisfaction.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The Internet, as one of the greatest human inventions in twentieth century, has been applied widely in people’s lives since its invention, and has influenced people’s life styles deeply. And many websites with different types appeared, such as news websites, social networking websites, shopping websites and government websites. Since the functions of websites in the same category are highly homogenous. In the context of Emotional Design and User-Centered Design about product development, users’ non-functional requirements (e.g. technical, content-related and form-related) of a website have received considerable attention from scholars and designers. As the form-related the visual appearance of the webpage interface is taken as one of the most important non-functional requirements, and it can affect users’ overall impression, emotions and behavior intention [1–3]. If the visual appearance design of the webpage is good, users’ overall impression will be good, positive emotion will be aroused and subsequent approach behavior towards a website may come into being.

At present, job-hunting websites have become an important approach for job seekers to search recruitment information. As of March 9, 2015, according to a comprehensive ranking of job-hunting websites conducted by a Chinese website (top.chinaz.com), www.yjbys.com, www.51job.com, and www.zhaopin.com, are the top three, respectively. Compared to local or industrial job-hunting websites, comprehensive websites have attracted a larger amount of job seekers due to their massive advertising campaigns and their rich content in terms of positions, industries, and locations. As user experience has received more attention, in addition to the content richness of a comprehensive job-hunting website, the aesthetics of the webpages used to reflect the quality of webpages’ visual appearance [2,3] may be another key influential factor of users’ experience and satisfaction to a website, which in turn may improve the websites’ market competitiveness. However, less research has ever investigated the issue in-depth. For many users who surf around the Internet without any particular aim for their search, they may easily move to another website if the website does not prove to be satisfactory [3]. Therefore, this study was conducted to examine how the visual appearance of a comprehensive job-hunting website can influence users’ satisfaction from the perspective of webpage aesthetics. Because the content/information design of a webpages is also important [4,5], to eliminate the influence of content/information design to this study, we will design webpage prototypes used to collect data for analysis.

Usually, a website may have lots of webpages. It’s important to note that the homepage is the first webpage users see when they open the website. Singh and Dalal [6] have provided empirical evidence in support of the argument that a homepage is like an advertisement. And a websites’ first impression produced by the homepage can affect users’ first visceral ‘gut feeling’ that helps to decide users’ attitudes toward the entire website, which in turn may affect whether the users are going to stay at this place or continue surfing to other sites [3]. Given that the aesthetic design of a homepage plays a vital role in influencing users’ perceptions about the quality of its visual appearance, this study explores how the homepage with different levels of aesthetics affects users’ internal evaluation, and how their internal evaluation affects their satisfaction subsequently. The Stimuli-Organism-Response (S-O-R) theory, based on the assumption that environmental cues influence people’s cognitive or emotion, which subsequently influence their behaviors [7], has been widely applied to examine how environmental factors influence users’ responses [1,2,4,5]. Thus, the S-O-R theory is adopted in this study. Emotion and perceived ease of use are used to describe users’ internal evaluation (organism). An organic mode, regarding the influence of homepage aesthetics on users’ emotion and perceived ease of use, was constructed to obtain a deeper understanding of users’ satisfaction.

The rest of this article is structured as follows: First, a review of the relevant theoretical background and literatures, i.e. S-O-R theory, webpage aesthetics and PAD theory, is presented. Second, the research model and hypotheses are introduced, followed by the methodology, analysis and results. Finally, the empirical results are discussed and the conclusions and limitations are presented.

The classical S-R theory in behaviorism refers to human behaviors as a learned response to stimuli, which treats human mind as a black box. Mehrabian and Russell [7] proposed the S-O-R environmental psychology model, which extended the S-R theory by integrating organism to account for internal cognitive and affective processes of people in response to external stimulus. They maintained that stimulating cues perceived from the environment triggers one’s internal evaluation, which subsequently result in positive or negative behaviors or intentions toward the stimuli.

Since Donovan and Rossiter [8] introduced the S-O-R theory to the retail context, it has become one of the most important theories in this filed. Since then, this theory has been widely used in the marketing research, especially to explain how features of the retail environment influence consumer behaviors through the mediating effects of induced emotional responses in the traditional offline retailing context [9–12]. Under the context of e-commerce, consumers prefer online shopping. Thus, many researchers have extended the S-O-R theory to the online shopping content, and examined the effects of webpage/website design features on consumers’ organism and their subsequent behaviors [13–16]. Table 1
                         shows several important studies in the past five years [1,2,4,5,17–21]. The stimulus is the set of characteristics of the environment that affect the internal states of the individuals, such as graphics, colors, links, menus, background music tempo, entertainment and webpage visual complexity. Organism refers to the intervening internal process, such as users’ arousal, pleasure, trust and impulsiveness. The response includes users’ satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the experience and the approach-avoidance behavior toward the website, such as store search, purchase intention and re-visit.

The visual appearance of a webpage is very important, because it is one of the key factors that influence users’ first impressions and subjective experience [22,23]. Dickie [24] defined the notion of aesthetics as a “philosophy of beauty”. In terms of webpage, the aesthetics represents a beautiful impression created by the combination of various elements and attributes [2].

In the related researches of webpage aesthetics, several scholars have studied the stability of user’ perceived webpage aesthetics. Lindgaard et al. [22] found that the exposure time and the perceived visual appeals (denoting what many would call webpage “aesthetics”) are highly correlated. They concluded that users’ first impression toward a website can be formed quickly and will remain consistent regardless of the exposure time (500ms vs. 50ms). In line with Lindgaard et al., Tractinsky et al. [25] also provided direct evidence on the premise that aesthetic impressions of a webpages are formed quickly. In a study on the critical factors that influence the perceived aesthetic fidelity of a webpage, Park et al. [26] found that the aesthetic fidelity increases when webpage designers use more appropriate visual design elements that are more relevant to the target impression in their webpage development, and decreases when the users perceive the same webpage more diversely. Some other researchers applied the S-O-R theory to study the effect of webpage aesthetics on users’ emotion, cognitive and behaviors [2,18].

For the webpage aesthetics’ construct, Schenkman and Jonsson [3] noted that visual aesthetics of webpages comprise of two dimensions, i.e. aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal. Later, Lavie and Tractinsky [27] conducted four studies to develop a measurement instrument of perceived website aesthetics, and two main dimensions i.e. classical aesthetics and expressive aesthetics were founded. The classical aesthetics dimension in Lavie and Tractinsky’s study [27] was considered to be aligned closely with the notions of aesthetics that presided from antiquity until the 18th century. These notions emphasize orderly, clean, clear and symmetrical design of the website, and are closely related to many of the design rules advocated by usability experts, which is aligned with the concept of aesthetic formality in Schenkman and Jonsson’s study [3]. Both of classical aesthetics and aesthetic formality all emphasize a good webpage design should be economic, useful and practical [2,3,18,27]. Expressive aesthetics dimension in Lavie and Tractinsky’s study [27] is manifested by designers’ creativity and originality and by the ability to break design conventions, which is also in line with the concept of aesthetic appeal emphasizing the significance of beauty and importance of the overall impression about the webpage in Schenkman and Jonsson’s study [3]. Both of expressive aesthetics and aesthetic appeal all reflect the degree of pleasure, attraction and entertaining that users obtain from the webpage, which are closely tied to the hedonic quality of the webpage [2,3,18,27].

There are two dominant views on emotion’ structure, i.e. the discrete approach and the continuous approach [28]. Discrete emotion theorists suggest the existence of six or more basic emotions (e.g. happiness, sadness, anger, fear, disgust, and surprise), which are universally displayed and recognized [29,30]. Continuous emotion theorists suggest the existence of two or more dimensions that can be used to describe and distinguish between different emotions [7,31]. Compared with the discrete approach, the continuous approach can describe more emotions quantifiably. PAD emotion model proposed by Mehrabian and Russell is one of the continuous approaches and has been applied widely [1,2,7,17,18]. It uses three bipolar dimensions of pleasure-displeasure, excited-calm, and dominance-submissiveness to describe emotions.

In the most of the previous studies, the three dimensions in PAD model were assumed to be independent of each other across individuals. Only several were about the study of the relationship between the three. For example, Ward and Barnes [32] demonstrated that dominance has a positive direct impact on arousal and pleasure under the retail context. Kuppens [33] found arousal is closely related to pleasure. According to Thayer’s study [34], the arousal was divided into two different types, i.e. energetic arousal and tense arousal. Drawing on Thayer’s study [34], Koo and Lee [35] examined the inter-relationships among the three dimensions in different contexts (online vs. offline). The results showed that while dominance has a significant impact on both energetic and tense arousal, but no significant relationship has been found between dominance and pleasure. The effect of dominance on tense arousal is not statistically supported in an online shopping context, and both energetic and tense arousal has a positive and/or negative impact on pleasure. In line with Koo and Lee’s study [35], Chang et al. [2] revealed the mediating effects of energetic arousal and tense arousal on the control-pleasure linkage.

In the empirical researches based on the theory of the S-O-R, emotion has been used as one important factor that explains how users’ personal response and evaluation of the surroundings occurs [1,2,17,18]. So in our current study, emotion described by PAD model was also used to represent individual’s organism through which environmental cues (i.e. webpage aesthetics) are connected with users’ satisfaction.

In the technology acceptance model, perceived ease of use refers to “the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would be free of effort” [36]. We presume that the concept is particularly suitable to apply to the context of human-computer interfaces, which in our case, is the homepage interface. A homepage with better aesthetic formality will be more helpful for users to understand the arrangement of structure and content. In the study of improving the web survey respondent experience through socially-present and aesthetically-pleasing user interfaces [37], the significant positive influence between aesthetic formality and perceived ease of use has been verified. For the homepage with content more diversified, whether the same relationship between the two is really existed, and whether the relationship can be enhanced, are still not known. Thus, we proposed the following hypothesis:
                        H1
                        Aesthetic formality has a significant and positive influence on perceived ease of use.

Generally speaking, if a homepage with better aesthetic formality can add some hedonics and innovation, the aesthetic appeal will be improved. If a homepage is with worse formality aesthetics, the value of aesthetic appeal will not be high. In other words, aesthetic formality may be the basis of user’s aesthetic impression, and aesthetic appeal may be the content at a deeper level. Whether the logical relationship between the two dimensions of homepage aesthetics really exists has not been studied. We therefore proposed that:
                        H2
                        Aesthetic formality has a significant and positive influence on aesthetic appeal.

Russell and Mehrabian [38], and Russell et al. [39], have found that both arousal and pleasure can explain most of the variances of emotions and the dominance can be seen as redundant in a sense. Thus, the dominance was not considered in this study. Based on the results of relationship between arousal and pleasure [2,34], under the context of comprehensive job-hunting website, we proposed the same hypotheses:
                        H3a
                        Energetic arousal has a significant and positive influence on pleasure.

Tense arousal has a significant and negative influence on pleasure.

Chang et al.’s study [2] shows that aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal of the online shopping website is positively related to dominance, and dominance is positively related to energetic arousal and negatively related to tense arousal. Regardless of dominance, whether aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal can directly have relations with energetic arousal and tense arousal were not examined. In addition, though scholars [27,40] have suggested that aesthetics of computer interfaces is a strong determinant of users’ pleasure, Chang et al. didn’t find the directly significant relationship between webpage aesthetics and pleasure, while Casey and Poropat [37] found that classical aesthetics of the web survey interface has a significant and negative influence on negative emotion, expressive aesthetics has a significant and positive influence on positive emotion, and, interestingly, additional post hoc analyses indicated that expressive aesthetics was also positively related to negative emotion. In Casey and Poropat’s study [37], the International Positive and Negative Affect Schedule Short Form (I-PANAS-SF) was used to measure users’ emotion state. Though they didn’t distinguish the emotion from the perspective of pleasure and arousal, from the scales, we can found that the positive emotion state is exactly the same with high pleasure and high energetic arousal, and negative emotion state is exactly the same with low pleasure and high tense arousal. Thus, through comparing the studies of Chang et al. [2] and Casey and Poropat [37], it can be seen that the influences of aesthetic design on emotion states are still controversial. The reason may be associated with the difference of research objects. Casey and Poropat [37] pointed out that the non-significant relationship between the quality of classical aesthetics of the web survey interface and positive emotion suggests that effective use of classical aesthetics principles seems to be expected by users and does not necessarily contribute to the positivity of uses’ evaluations. And for a design with higher expressive aesthetics, compared with the online shopping webpage, the web survey interface design within the task domain of web survey participation (which is cognitively demanding and influenced by interface usability) could elicit negative evaluations.

At present, no aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal principles for comprehensive job-hunting website homepage have been put forward. And the quality of aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal of these homepages now is varied, which in turn may elicit users’ different emotions. Based on the studies of Lavie and Tractinsky [27], Chang et al. [2] and Casey and Poropat [37], we proposed the following hypotheses to check the direct relations between homepage aesthetics and emotions.
                        H4a
                        Aesthetic formality has a significant and positive influence on energetic arousal.

Aesthetic formality has a significant and positive influence on pleasure.

Aesthetic formality has a significant and negative influence on tense arousal.

Aesthetic appeal has a significant and positive influence on energetic arousal.

Aesthetic appeal has a significant and positive influence on pleasure.

Aesthetic appeal has a significant and negative influence on tense arousal.

Lastly, satisfaction as a measure of the users’ overall attitude about aesthetic perception of a homepage, whether it can be affected by users’ emotion and perceived ease of use, and whether there are different contributions of perceived ease of use, pleasure, energetic arousal and tense arousal to it, accordingly:
                        H6a
                        Perceived ease of use has a significant and positive influence on satisfaction.

Pleasure has a significant and positive influence on satisfaction.

Energetic arousal has a significant and positive influence on satisfaction.

Tense arousal has a significant and negative influence on satisfaction.

The research model proposed in the current study is shown in Fig. 1
                     . And the hypotheses are necessary supplements to the studies of Wang et al. [18] and Chang et al. [2], to some extent.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

This study used the instruments of relevant variables from the previous studies. The measures of aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal were adopted from Wang et al. [18]. Perceived ease of use was adopted from Davis [36] and Thong et al. [41]. Pleasure, energetic arousal, and tense arousal were adopted from Koo and Lee [35]. Satisfaction was from Gao and Bai [21]. Because the instruments of each variable are in English, they were first translated into Chinese with the help of two English majored graduate students to make respondents better understand the meaning of each instruments. To examine the differences between Chinese and English, a back-translation process (i.e. the Chinese instructions were then translated into English) was performed with two other English majored graduate students’ help. The result showed that there was no obvious discrepancy between the back-translation and the original.

A preliminary Chinese survey was formed first. Seven graduate students who had sufficient experiences of using the job-hunting websites in the last five months were asked to fill in the survey in order to verify the content validity and psychometric properties of the measuring scales. Based on the comments from the participants, several items were revised due to a consistent concern of the difficulty in answering. Then a pilot test was conducted to further test the reliability and validity of the measures. The final constructs and measurement items are shown in Appendix A.

A questionnaire was developed to collect responses for data analysis. The questionnaire consisted of two sections, personal information section and comprehensive job-hunting website homepage investigation section. In the second section, aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal were measured using a seven-point semantic difference scale, and the others were measured using a seven-point Likert-scale anchored from strongly agree (1) to strongly disagree (7).

The research objects used to collect questionnaire data were then designed. On the basis of Guo et al.’s study [42], three important design elements and their different levels affecting the visual appearance for the comprehensive job-hunting website homepage were determined by two rounds of focus group discussion. Five researchers with at least two years experiences in ergonomics research, five web designers with at least one and a half years work experience and four expert job-hunting website users participated in the focus group sessions. They were asked to clarify what design elements they thought were important for the appearance of a comprehensive job-hunting website homepage first. According to the recorded information, the top three design elements (i.e. body color, layout style, and presentation form of advertisements) were determined. Then they were expected to continue to list the levels with maximized differences for each element. After summarizing, blue, purple and orange are determined as three levels for the body color of website, picture-based, flash-based and text-based recruitment information as three levels for the presentation form of advertisements, and three levels as shown in Appendix B for the layout style. Based on the three design elements, we designed nine comprehensive job-hunting website homepage prototypes (as shown in Appendix C) following the orthogonal completeness principle. To eliminate the influence of the content/information design, the content of the nine prototypes were exactly the same.

The college graduates have become the major labor force of the job market. The job-hunting website is one of the major channels for them to get recruitment information. Therefore, convenient samples of university students, mainly from Northeastern University (China) and other universities in China, were utilized. A few enterprises and institutions employees who had graduated in the past 2years were also involved. “Snowball method” was used to distribute the questionnaires through emails. Each respondent was distributed an electronicquestionnaire, together with one of the nine prototypes. They were asked to fill in the questionnaire as a job seeker who wanted to obtain information from the job-hunting website only after he/she got a good understanding of the prototype design. The whole survey process lasted about one month, and a total of 241 valid completed questionnaires were used for data analysis. Table 2
                         shows the demographic information of the respondents. The Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) method was used to verify the research model and the given hypotheses. In pursuit of the stability of the SEM analysis results, a sample over 200 [43], or with more than five samples for each observed variable [44], is better. This study included 25 observed variables, so 241 samples could guarantee the reliability of parameter estimation in the SEM analysis.

Data analysis was performed through IBM® SPSS® Amos 21.0.0, a structural equation modeling software. A two-stage analysis method: measurement model and structural model, with the conventional maximum likelihood estimation technique, was used to validate the causal relationship among variables in the research model.

In terms of measurement model, the confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was conducted to estimated reliabilities and validities of the research variables. Cronbach’s α was also used to check the internal consistency of estimated items within each latent variable.

The fit indices of χ2
                        =556.359, df=253, χ2/df=2.199, RMSEA=0.071, CFI=0.960, GFI=0.844, NFI=0.929, and IFI=0.960 indicated that all goodness-of-fit measures were within acceptable levels [17,45–48]. Then, the reliability and validity analysis of the measurements for aesthetic formality, aesthetic appeal, perceived ease of use, pleasure, energetic arousal, tense arousal, and satisfaction were conducted. Results are presented in Tables 3 and 4
                        
                        . All the squared multiple correlations (SMC) were greater than 0.50 (from 0.463 to 0.917), and the value of Cronbach’s α coefficient exceeded the 0.70 limit (from 0.872 to 0.962), indicating sufficient reliability of the measurement scale [49,50]. Validity test can be used to check whether the observed variables can be used to measure the potential variables. Content validity, convergent validity and discriminant validity were tested. All of the observed variables in this study were adopted from the existing research, and have been validated by knowledgeable scholars, indicating a good content validity. All the standardized factor loadings (FL) were higher than the threshold value of 0.50 (from 0.680 to 0.958) at a significant level of 0.001, all the composite reliability (CR) were higher than 0.70 (from 0.878 to 0.963), and all the average variances extracted (AVE) were higher than 0.50 (from 0.707 to 0.867), indicating a good convergent validity [51–53]. The data also passed the discriminant validity test, as shown in Table 4, the square root of the AVE in each latent variable (i.e. construct) exceeded the correlation coefficients of this particular latent variable with other latent variables [54].

Additionally, considering the validity of self-report questionnaires, this study also performed statistical analyses to assess the severity of the possible common method bias. Harman’s one-factor test [55], one of the most widely used techniques, was conducted on the seven latent variables. Typically, in this test, all of the items are subject to exploratory factor analysis (EFA). As an alternative to EFA, CFA can also be used to implement the test. In particular, the CFA approach can model all of the manifested items as the indicators of a single factor that represents method effects [56]. The single factor model in CFA fitness indices (χ2
                        =2824.465, df=275, χ2/df=10.271, RMSEA=0.197, GFI=0.376, IFI=0.663, CFI=0.662 and NFI=0.640) does not yield a better result than the present model, confirming that common method biases are not a likely contaminant of this study.

After confirming the psychometric properties of the measurements, the structural model was estimated to determine whether the proposed research model fits well. The indices of χ2
                        =581.091, df=260, χ2/df=2.235, RMSEA=0.072, CFI=0.957, GFI=0.837, NFI=0.926, IFI=0.958 indicated an acceptable level of goodness-of-fit measures [17,45–48].


                        Fig. 2
                         presents a summary of the standardized path coefficients. Path coefficient reflects the relationship among the latent variables and the influence degree among them. γ was used to represent path coefficient between exogenous latent variables and endogenous latent variables, and β was used to represent the path coefficient between the endogenous latent variables. R2 reflected the extent to which the endogenous latent variables can be explained by the exogenous latent variables. Our findings suggest that aesthetic formality has a significant and positive impact on perceived ease of use (γ1
                        =0.879, t=18.681, p<0.001), and aesthetic appeal (γ2
                        =0.723, t=11.780, p<0.001). Therefore, H1 and H2 are supported. Energetic arousal is found to positively influence pleasure (β31
                        =0.639, t=8.570, p<0.001), while tense arousal has a significant and negative impact on pleasure (β32
                        =−0.121, t=−2.070, p<0.05). Thus, H3a and H3b are supported by the empirical evidence. In terms of the impacts of aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal on energetic arousal, pleasure, and tense arousal, only H4b, H4c, H5a, H5b, and H5c are supported. Aesthetic formality is found to have a significant influence on pleasure and tense arousal but not on energetic arousal (γ42
                        =0.133, t=2.303, p<0.05; γ43
                        =-0.592, t=-7.127, p<0.001; γ41
                        =−0.010, t=−0.159, p=0.874). However, aesthetic appeal is found to have a significant influence on energetic arousal, pleasure, and tense arousal (β51
                        =0.870, t=11.352, p<0.001; β52
                        =0.198, t=2.344, p<0.05; β53
                        =−0.239, t=−3.028, p<0.01). The positive impacts of perceived ease of use, energetic arousal and pleasure on satisfaction are supported by the evidence (β61
                        =0.246, t=4.944, p<0.001; β62
                        =0.324, t=3.485, p<0.001; β63
                        =0.275, t=2.788, p<0.01), as well as the negative impact of tense arousal on satisfaction (β64
                        =−0.213, t=−3.825, p<0.001), which confirmed H6a, H6b, H6c and H6d.

This study further investigated the mediation effect of aesthetic appeal in the relationship between aesthetic formality and energetic arousal. A growing body of statistical simulation literature advocates the use of the bootstrap to finding a confidence interval for direct and indirect (mediated) effect or for testing direct and indirect effect for significance, and the bias-corrected bootstrap confidence intervals available in AMOS has been found to produce reliable inferences for these two effects [57,58]. This study uses AMOS 21.0.0 to investigate the direct and mediation effects based on bias-corrected bootstrapping procedures. The parameter estimate of the direct effect between aesthetic formality and energetic arousal was −0.010 (p=0.960), while aesthetic formality indirectly affected energetic arousal through aesthetic appeal, i.e. indirect effect was 0.629 (p=0.001). This result indicated that aesthetic appeal had a full mediating effect in the relationship between aesthetic formality and energetic arousal.

One-way ANOVA was first used to examine the aesthetics differences among nine homepage prototypes. The results show that the value of aesthetics formality (average value of the three items of aesthetics formality) is different for different prototypes (F=1.975, p=0.050), so is aesthetic appeal (average value of the three items of aesthetics appeal) (F=2.893, p=0.004). Then in order to understand how different design elements can influence users’ perceptions of the aesthetics of a homepage, the relationships between the design elements of the comprehensive job-hunting website and aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal were further investigated using the multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA). Aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal were dependent variables, and the body color, layout style and presentation form of advertisements were independent variables. The main effect of each design element was analyzed separately, as shown in Table 5
                        . The results indicated that the body color of a homepage doesn’t significantly influence aesthetic formality (F=1.240, p=0.291) nor aesthetic appeal (F=1.241, p=0.291). The layout style was found to have a significance impact on aesthetic formality (F=7.151, p=0.001), but not on aesthetic appeal (F=0.996, p=0.371), while the presentation form of advertisements was found to have a significance impact on aesthetic appeal (F=8.834, p<0.001), but not on aesthetic formality (F=0.028, p=0.973).

The results of Bonferroni post hoc test indicated that the value of perceived aesthetic formality of a homepage differs when the layout styles change. For example, the homepage with the first layout style (M=1.602, SD=1.152) had a significant difference from the second style (M=0.857, SD=1.460, p<0.001) and the third style (M=0.941, SD=1.462, p<0.01). The value of perceived aesthetic appeal of a homepage with the text-based advertisements presentation (M=−0.288, SD=1.580) differed significantly from the picture-based presentation (M=0.461, SD=1.379, p<0.01) and the flash-based presentation (M=0.621, SD=1.425, p<0.001).

This empirical study revealed how the website homepage aesthetic design can influence users’ satisfaction. Most of the hypotheses in the research model were supported by the empirical evidence. The relationships, among homepage aesthetic design, emotional experience, perceived ease of use and satisfaction, were further confirmed in the context of comprehensive job-hunting website homepages.

Corresponding to the study of Casey and Poropat [37], which examined how web survey interfaces influence users’ perceived ease of use, affect and trust in the researchers, our study also found that aesthetic formality can positively influence perceived ease of use. In addition, aesthetic formality has a significantly positive influence on aesthetic appeal. It can be seen that in order to improve the quality of perceived ease of use and aesthetic appeal of a homepage, the aesthetic formality maybe one of the fundamental factors. Thus, when designing a website interface, the designers should focus on the aesthetic formality. Even though the attractive, fascinating, creative designs with great appeal can easily attract users’ attention at the beginning, once users find the design has problems in aesthetic formality (e.g. logically confusing, less use-friendly), their experience may become bad, as proposed by Chang et al. [2], which can be indicated by H1, H6 and H7 in this study.

With respect to the emotional model, in line with the literatures [2,35], the empirical results of this study also supports that energetic arousal positively influences pleasure, while tense arousal negatively influences pleasure. This suggests that when users browse the homepage, their energetic arousal by the homepage design can increase the sense of pleasure. Otherwise, their tense arousal is undesirable to pleasure.

This study also supports that different aesthetic designs can evoke users’ different emotions, as proposed by a number of previous studies [2,18]. Aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal are found to negatively influence tense arousal, which indicates that the poor design of a homepage, such as lacking of logics, confusing layout, unattractive, can evoke users’ negative emotions, e.g., anxiety or nervousness. Aesthetic appeal is found to have a positive impact on energetic arousal, which indicates that attractive designs can help to evoke users’ positive emotions, e.g., activeness and excitement. The direct and positive influence of aesthetic formality on energetic arousal is not supported, but the influence of aesthetic formality on energetic arousal is significant through aesthetic appeal. This indicates that a homepage has good aesthetic formality, but if its aesthetic appeal is not good enough, the homepage will not arouse users’ energetic arousal. Surprisingly, while Chang et al. [2] find that both aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal are not verified to directly affect pleasure, the results of this study confirm that aesthetic design has a significant and directly positive influence on users’ pleasure. Therefore, by improving the homepage aesthetic design, users’ sense of pleasure can be enhanced. All of these empirical results can provide evidences on how interface designers can improve users’ emotional experience by improving the interface aesthetic design of a homepage.

In addition, user’s emotional experience and perceived ease of use of the homepages can significantly influence satisfaction, i.e., energetic arousal, pleasure and perceived ease of use are all found to have positive influences on satisfaction, while tense arousal is found to have a negative influence on satisfaction. Thus, to make users satisfied with the homepage design, designers should strive to maintain users’ happy mood, energetic arousal and perceived ease of use, avoiding the tense arousal.

The homepages with one of the three different layout styles all have medium qualities of aesthetic formality (mean value ranging from 0 to 2). Compared with the homepages with the second and the third layout style, the homepage with the first style has a higher value. By conducting e-mail and telephone follow-ups, we learned that most participants preferred the first layout style because they were more familiar with it. Then the effect of familiarity on users’ perception might be an interesting future research issue. In the homepage with the second layout style, the contents that users care are surrounded by advertisements, when the presentation form of advertisements is picture or flash, even though the core content can be distinguished, the logic of content is likely to be jeopardized. When the presentation form of advertisements is text, it is even more difficult for users to distinguish the core content from the text-based advertisements. Faraday [59] has confirmed that when users are searching in a webpage, the visual scan path is usually from top to bottom and from left to right for text and bulleted points. In this third layout design, users may take a longer time to locate the core content because the information was displayed at the right side of the homepage.

Text-based presentation form of advertisements can negatively influence the perception of an aesthetic appeal design. And most of the participants thought the text-based advertisements are distracting and boring, while other types of advertisements, i.e., picture-based and flash-based, can help to enhance homepages’ diversity and vitality, which in turn can positively influence the homepage’ aesthetic appeal. Some influential websites, such as www.51job.com and www.zhaopin.com, display lots of flash-based or picture-based advertisements on their homepages. According to a survey conducted before this study, we found that flash-based and picture-based advertisements are more likely to attract users’ attention than the text-based advertisements. But they both may also easily have a negative effect called “a presumptuous guest usurps the host’s role”, which, in turn, may let users get lost in the advertisements. According to the survey, we also found that the real job seekers are usually anxious when searching for recruitment information. And what’s important is that their negative emotion may highly increase because of the multifarious images. However, this phenomenon was not supported by our results. The empirical results of this study shows that picture-based or flash-based advertisements presentation would rather improve homepage aesthetic appeal than cause negative emotions. The reason may be that in the processing of designing the prototypes we manipulated the number and size of advertisements, which can ensure the advertisements presentation is more reasonable and acceptable than the real comprehensive job-hunting website homepages, and advertisements’ potential effects existed in the real homepages is eliminated.

Under the premise of content design of a homepage is excluded, referencing the S-O-R model, and using webpage aesthetics and PAD emotional model, we studied how the homepage aesthetic design influences users’ satisfaction. We find that the aesthetic design of a homepage can significantly affect users’ emotional experience and perceived ease of use, which will affect users’ satisfaction subsequently. Therefore, when designing a website, the designers should pay special attention to its aesthetic design in order to increase users’ satisfaction. For example, the design of aesthetic formality may be supported to follow the standard guidelines to meet users’ expectations. Then designers should use effective pictures or flashes, or an innovative thinking to improve the quality of aesthetic appeal design.

There are at least three limitations regarding this study. First, though the scales in Chinese have been revised and checked following the back-translation method to ensure the uniformity of each item with the original questionnaire (in English), understanding deviationsabout items caused by cultural differences is still possible to influence the results. Therefore, a future systematic research is needed to further develop and validate measurement scales in the Chinese context. Second, the snowball method of recruitment possibly leads to a biased sample and each of the participants was given the artificial scenario of acting as a job seeker, these may reduce the generalisability of the study findings. If possible, in a real environment, the true job seekers will be invited to participant in this study later. Last, we only look at three different design elements and their main effects on users’ perceptions of aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal. Future research needs to include more design elements (e.g., font, font size), and their interaction effects can be studied also.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 71171041 and 71471033). Thank the editor and anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and advice.


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Constructs and items
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Aesthetic formality 
                                       [18]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    The homepage is:
                                 
                                 
                                    1. Well organized/poorly organized
                                 
                                 
                                    2. Ordered /chaotic
                                 
                                 
                                    3. Legible/illegible
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Aesthetic appeal 
                                       [18]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    The homepage is:
                                 
                                 
                                    1. Fascinating/monotonous
                                 
                                 
                                    2. Creative/conventional
                                 
                                 
                                    3. Impressive/unremarkable
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Perceived ease of use 
                                       [36,41]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    1. Learning how to use this homepage is easy for me.
                                 
                                 
                                    2. When I was browsing the homepage, I felt this homepage was clear and understandable.
                                 
                                 
                                    3. I find this homepage easy to use.
                                 
                                 
                                    4. It is easy for me to become skillful at using this homepage.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pleasure 
                                       [35]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    When I was browsing the homepage, I felt:
                                 
                                 
                                    1. Cheerful
                                 
                                 
                                    2. Contented
                                 
                                 
                                    3. Pleased
                                 
                                 
                                    4. Happy
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Energetic arousal 
                                       [35]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    When I was browsing the homepage, I felt:
                                 
                                 
                                    1. Active
                                 
                                 
                                    2. Energetic
                                 
                                 
                                    3. Excited
                                 
                                 
                                    4. Sleepy (Reversed)
                                 
                                 
                                    5. Vigorous
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Tense arousal 
                                       [35]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    When I was browsing the homepage, I felt:
                                 
                                 
                                    1. Anxious
                                 
                                 
                                    2. Nervous
                                 
                                 
                                    3. Relaxed (Reversed)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Satisfaction 
                                       [21]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    1. I am satisfied with the performance of this website.
                                 
                                 
                                    2. I am pleased with the experience of using this website.
                                 
                                 
                                    3. This website does a good job of satisfying my needs.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

Note: Area B stands for advertisements. Area A stands for everything except the advertisements. Each style only represents the relative position of A and B, not the relative size.


                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

