@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A mobile application for cognitive screening of dementia

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A novel mobile cognitive screening (MCS) test is designed for mobile devices.


                        
                        
                           
                           MCS has easier interface for elderly participants compared to the personal computers.


                        
                        
                           
                           MCS can offer a wider range of multimedia components compared to the paper tests.


                        
                        
                           
                           MCS can compare cognitive functions against the average of healthy individuals'.


                        
                        
                           
                           MCS can differentiate healthy and impaired cognitive abilities.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Dementia

Neuropsychological test

Cognitive screening

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Neuropsychological assessment tests have an important role in early detection of dementia. Therefore, we designed and implemented a test battery for mobile devices that can be used for mobile cognitive screening (MCS). This battery consists of 33 questions from 14 type of tests for the assessment of 8 different cognitive functions: Arithmetic, orientation, abstraction, attention, memory, language, visual, and executive functions. This test battery is implemented as an application for mobile devices that operates on Android OS. In order to validate the effectiveness of the neuropsychological test battery, it was applied on a group of 23 elderly persons. Within this group, 9 (of age 81.78±4.77) were healthy and 14 (of age 72.55±9.95) were already diagnosed with dementia. The education level of the control group (healthy) and dementia group were comparable as they spent 13.66±5.07 and 13.71±4.14 years at school respectively. For comparison, a validated paper-and-pencil test (Montreal Cognitive Test – MoCA) was applied along with the proposed MCS battery. The proposed test was able to differentiate the individuals in the control and dementia groups for executive, visual, memory, attention, orientation functions with statistical significance (p
                     <0.05). Results of the remaining functions; language, abstraction, and arithmetic were statistically insignificant (p
                     >0.05). The results of MCS and MoCA were compared, and the scores of individuals from these tests were correlated (r
                     2
                     =0.57).
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Average life expectancy has recently increased due to the improvements in medicine and technology. As a result, incidence and prevalence of dementia have also increased. According to Alzheimers Disease International's 2014 report, it is estimated that there are 44 million people living with dementia wordwide, and this number is expected to almost double by 2030 and to reach more than triple by 2050 [1]. As there is no effective treatment for dementia, studies are focused on slowing the progress and alleviating the symptoms of dementia. Hence early diagnosis of dementia is of critical importance. Early diagnosis can be possible by screening the cognitive abilities of the population over a certain age. Dementia is characterized by memory impairment, progressive decline in daily activities, a variety of psychiatric symptoms and behavioral problems. Cognitive screening can be performed by neuropsychological tests. These tests are composed of simple questions that evaluate certain cognitive abilities. Therefore, there has been vast amount of research to design test questions which can accurately assess the cognitive abilities. In early applications, paper and pencil were used in these tests. The advantage of these tests was the ease of using pencil by the elderly people. However, the spectrum of the possible questions on a paper was quite narrow. With the development of digital technologies cognitive tests were computerized. Computers enhanced the variety of questions due to the use of rich multimedia components. In addition, computerized test results can be stored on digital media which makes storing, retrieving, and analyzing easy. On the other hand, elderly people typically have difficulty using PC interface (i.e. computer mouse). This disadvantage limited the use of computerized neuropsychological test for screening dementia. Mobile devices bring the power of multimedia with the ease of user interface together. They can offer almost all multimedia components of personnel computers, and their touch screen interface is much easier than using a computer interface especially for elderly people. Hence, it was immediately adopted as a medium of neuropsychological tests.

In this study, we aimed to design a test battery that is applicable on mobile devices (i.e. tablet computers, mobile phones, etc.). Our objectives were; (a) an easy user interface for elderly people, (b) to design a variety of questions for testing different cognitive functionalities, (c) data analysis for comparing individual results against total population.

The paper organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes similar neuropsychological tests that are widely used. In Section 3, the design and details of the proposed test questions are described. The test is applied to a group of elderly people, and the results are explained in Section 4. The results are analyzed and discussed in Section 5. Section 6 summarizes and concludes this study.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

In this section, we introduce the neuropsychological tests in the literature (see Table 1
                     ). Some of these tests are based on paper and pencil (Section 2.1), personnel computers (Section 2.2). A systematical review can be found in [2].

Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is a screening test which is developed for the evaluation of cognitive impairment's first stage [3]. The abilities that are evaluated with this test are memory, visual–spatial processes, attention, concentration, abstraction, orientation and language functions. Duration of the test is about 10min and the total score is 30 points. If the participant gets at least 21 points, it is considered as a state with normal cognitive abilities. MoCA has been validated and used in many neurological diseases.
                              1
                           
                           
                              1
                              See http://www.mocatest.org/references.asp for a complete list of fields where MoCA was validated and used.
                           
                        

Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) was developed to rapidly assess the mental functions in terms of cognitive aspects [4]. Test is consisting of 11 questions and its total score is 30 points. The duration of the test is approximately 5–10min. MMSE includes evaluation of cognitive abilities about orientation, record memory, attention, mathematical operations, recall and language tests.

ANAM is a test library in which cognitive, computer-based evaluations may be carried out, such as attention, concentration, reaction speed, memory, mathematical ability, managerial function and decision-making [5,6]. ANAM consists of 22 different performance evaluation tests which are sensitive in terms of cognition.

CANS-MCI was developed for the detection of mild cognitive impairment, and it is used for the assessment of memory, language and executive functions [7]. Tests in CANS-MCI are administered by computer with a touch-screen and speakers. Completion time of the tests is about 30min.

The battery aims to impair 3 cognitive abilities: working memory and planning, visuospatial memory and attention [8,9]. The tests are applied via a touch screen.

The battery includes 7 tests focusing on 5 cognitive abilities: memory, cognitive flexibility, psychomotor speed, time, reaction and complex attention [10,11]. The duration of the battery is approximately 30min and the tests are applied via a computer keyboard.

The battery includes 11 subtests which evaluate information processing, motor speed, verbal and spatial memory, attention, language and spatial abilities [12,13]. The tests are applied by using a single key, pointing, or spoken responses that are entered by the technician.

In the subtests of CGS there are simple, choice, and complex reaction times, matching, working memory, continuous monitoring, incidental learning and associative learning [14,15]. The tests are applied by using a computer keyboard which is represented on the screen by using any two keys for yes and no. The duration of the battery is about 15–20min.

The evaluated cognitive abilities in CSI are memory, attention, response speed, processing speed [16]. The tests are applied by a restricted set of keys and the completion time of the battery is between 25 and 35min.

This battery is the computerized version of the CERAD word-list learning task [17] with significant modification [18]. It includes evaluation of memory, executive functions, and language. The test can be applied by either by the examiner himself or by telephone. The completion time of the battery is 10min.

The battery has 2 forms which are standard form including 18 subsets and short form including 12 subsets [19]. The evaluated cognitive abilities in MicroCog are attention/mental control, reasoning/calculation, memory, spatial processing, and reaction time. The tests are applied by using a keyboard in a multiple-choice format. The duration of the battery is approximately 1h.

The battery includes 9 subtests which evaluate verbal and nonverbal memory, verbal rhyming, verbal naming, Go-NoGo response inhibition, problem solving, Stroop interference, visual spatial imagery, staged information processing speed, finger tapping, and visuomotor planning [20,21]. The tests are applied by using a mouse and the number-pad of the keyboard. The completion time of the battery is between 45 and 60min.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

The MCS is a mobile neuropsychological test software application running on tablet computers. It is composed of 33 tests in 14 different types to evaluate the cognitive skills. Tests are developed by using Java Android Developer (ADT) for tablet computers that are running on Android operating system. In this work, each test counts as 1 point and the total score is 33 points, but the weights of these scores can be refined after tests with more participants. Tests in the application are described in this section.

There are many demographic factors that may affect the cognitive processes of patients. Therefore, the demographic information of the patients should be collected to analyze the test scores. Particularly, factors such as age, education level may affect the cognitive performance On the other hand, these tests may be very simple for patients who have high level of education can give rise to ceiling effect. In the startup screen of our application, there are questions about the detailed demographic information. Demographic data entry screen is shown in Fig. 1
                           (a).

There are numbers from 1 to 5 and letters from A to E. It is expected from the participant to combine the numbers and letters clicking initially the number then the letter sequentially. The instruction for the test is as follows: “Try to combine the numbers and the letters sequentially from the beginning to the end clicking primarily the number button then the letter button (Ex: 1→A→2).” With this test, sustaining attention and especially the ability of completing a task by changing the set is evaluated. Such tests are quite sensitive to the early impairment in forebrain functionality. If the test is completed correctly, the participant gets 1 point. Trail making test is shown in Fig. 1(b).

On the screen, a circle for the clock and hour/minute hands are seen. There are also sorted numbers from 1 to 12. It is expected from the participant to drag the numbers into the circle according to the layout of the real clock's numbers and rotate the hour and minute hands in order to set the time as 11:10. The instruction for the test is as follows: “Try to drag all numbers into the circle according to the clock layout and rotate the hour and minute hands setting the time as 11:10.” Clock drawing is an easy and special test that provides to evaluate many cognitive functions together. Briefly, this test is reviewed as a basic frontal process test which includes planning, abstraction and visual processes. If the test is completed correctly, the participant gets 1 point. In Fig. 2
                           (a) clock drawing test is shown.

On the tablet computer screen, 30 letters which include 9 “A”s are displayed continuously every 2s in 1min. It is expected from the participant to touch the “CLICK” button when the letter “A” is seen on the screen. The instruction for the test is as follows: “Shortly after, different letters will be displayed on the screen and when you see the letter ‘A’, click the button named CLICK.” After this instruction, there is also one more message box which is named as “Click the button only when you see the letter “A” to draw the participants’ attention. With this test, continuous attention performance of the participant is evaluated. If the test is completed without any fault or only with 1 mistake, the participant gets 1 point. In Fig. 2(b), attention test screen is shown.

There is a manikin on the screen and a ball under one of the hands of this manikin. It is expected from the participant to find the position of the ball. If the ball is under the right hand of the manikin, the participant should touch the “RIGHT” button, otherwise the “LEFT” button. There are 4 different positions of the manikin in 4 test and the instruction for the test is as follows: “Click one of the buttons assigned ‘LEFT’ or ‘RIGHT’ considering the position of the object under the hand of manikin.” This test evaluates the visual configuration and frontal functions. Each correct answer is 1 point. Samples from the visual test screens are shown in Fig. 3
                           .

There are 2 shapes of 4×4 grids on the screen. It is expected from the participant to determine if these 2 objects are same or different. The instruction for the test is as follows: “If these 2 objects seen on the screen are similar click the button named ‘SAME’, if not similar click the button named ‘DIFFERENT’.” Two shape similarity tests are applied. With this test, visual–spatial processing ability is evaluated. Each correct answer is 1 point. Similarity test interfaces are shown in Fig. 4
                           .

A shape on a 4×4 grid is shown on the screen for a certain amount of time. On the next screen there are two shapes, and one of these shapes is the same from the previous screen. It is expected from the participant to choose which of the 2 shapes is exactly the same with the shape the user saw on the previous screen. The instruction for the participant is as follows: “Please look at the shape on the screen carefully. After you totally understand the shape, click the ‘OK’ button for skipping to the other screen having 2 different images, then touch the image which is exactly the same as the previous one.” Two matching tests are applied. This test evaluates the visual–spatial processing, learning and memory abilities. Each correct answer is 1 point. In Fig. 5
                           , samples of shape matching test screens are shown.

The results of 4 arithmetic operations: Addition, subtraction, multiplication and division are asked to the participants. In each test, it is expected from the participant to calculate the result and touch the answer from a set of numbers on the screen. The instruction for the participant is as follows: “Answer the mathematical operation clicking the button assigned with the number showing the result.” With these tests; basic calculation, concentration and memory processing abilities are evaluated. Each correct answer is 1 point. Samples of the arithmetic test screens are shown in Fig. 6
                           .

Three different proverbs are asked in the MCS Test application. For each proverb, there are 3 pictures showing the abstract, concrete and irrelevant meanings of the given proverb. It is expected from the participant to touch the picture with the abstract meaning. The instruction for the participant is as follows: “Choose the picture showing the exact meaning of the proverb and click on the picture.” With these tests, semantic association in abstract notions is evaluated. Each correct answer is 1 point. Two questions from the proverb test are shown in Fig. 7
                           .

There are 6 questions in this test, in which different pictures of some objects or animals are shown on the screen. It is expected from the participant to write the name of the object or the animal correctly by using the letters shown on the screen. The objects and animals are chosen such that they are well known and have no synonyms. The instruction for the participant to apply each test is as follows: “Write the name of the object or the animal by clicking the appropriate letter buttons.” These tests evaluate the naming ability of the participant. Each test is 1 point and if the participant gives correct answers to these 6 tests, the user gets 6 points. Two sample screens of the naming test are shown in Fig. 8
                           .

In this test, there is a sequence of numbers starting from 20. It is expected from the participant to complete this sequence by clicking the appropriate numbers shown on the screen. For this purpose, the participant has to subtract 3 from previous number of the sequence. The instruction for the participant to apply the test is as follows: “Please fill in the empty spaces by clicking the appropriate numbers by subtracting 3 from the numbers starting with number 20.” This test evaluates the participants’ attention and calculation functions. If the test is completed correctly, the participant gets 1 point. Numbers test screen is shown in Fig. 9
                           (a).

In this test, there are objects with different sizes, different colors and different shapes. It is expected from the participant to drag the right object (in terms of size, color and shape) which is mentioned as text and told in audio into the shopping cart on the screen. The instruction for the participant to apply the test is as follows: “Please drag the defined object to the basket.” This test evaluates the participants’ language ability, the ability for understanding the instruction and the perception ability. Each correct answer is 1 point. In Fig. 9(b), screenshot of the colorful shapes test is shown.

In this test, products from greengrocer and charcuterie (delicatessen) are given in an arbitrary order. On the screen, empty shelves of both greengrocer and charcuterie sections are shown. It is expected from the participant to replace the products to the appropriate section. In the earlier version of the test, it was expected to drag the items. However, we observed that dragging so many items one by one was not easy for participants. Therefore, instead of dragging items, we changed the interface so that the participant touches the product first, and then touches to the correct section in order to replace the product. If the participant wants to cancel a product from a section, a touch on the replaced item is required. The instruction for the participant to apply the test is as follows: “Please place the products on the screen correctly either to the greengrocer section or the charcuterie section. Click the product button first, and then click the empty space on the appropriate section which you would like to place the product. If you would like to remove one of the products, you need to click the space in which the product is placed.” This test evaluates the participants’ categorization and semantic association abilities. If the test is completed correctly, the participant gets 1 point. The interface of the market test is shown in Fig. 10
                           (a).

In this test, it is expected from the participant to remember the date of the test. The instruction for the participant to apply the test is as follows: “Set today's date by choosing the correct day, month and year.” This test evaluates the participants’ time orientation function. If the date is entered correct (with ±1 day tolerance), the participant gets 1 point. The screen of the date test is shown in Fig. 10(b).

In this test, the text of a story is shown on the screen. In addition, the story is narrated from the speaker. After participant reads and listens the story, 3 different multiple choice questions are asked at the next 3 screens after the text is removed from the screen. The questions are from the content of the story, it is expected from the participant to choose the correct answers. The instruction for the participant to apply the test is as follows: “Please listen to the story shown on the screen carefully and answer the questions correctly which will be shown on the next screens.” Story recall test evaluates the participant's perception of audial and visual language and memory functions. Each correct answer is 1 point. The screen design of the story recall test is shown in Fig. 11
                           .

At the end of the MCS test, all demographic information about the participant, the total score and detailed information about the wrong answers in the tests are written to an XML file. We preferred to keep data in XML files instead of a database. This way it is easy to email XML files which can be reached from the tablet computer's file system. When the files are sent to the related physicians, they should be deleted from the tablet computer to ensure data privacy.

The results are visualized by radar chart. The axes of the radar chart are the cognitive abilities that are tested in MCS. The scores of the individual for each function and average scores of healthy participants (control group) are drawn on the output chart. This visualization helps the physicians to compare each cognitive ability of an individual against the average of the control group. The cognitive functions on the chart axes are visual, language, memory, attention, abstraction, orientation, arithmetic and executive functions abilities. A sample output chart is shown in Fig. 12
                        (a).

@&#RESULTS@&#

In this section, the results of the statistical analysis on MCS results and its comparison with MoCA scores are reported.
                        2
                     
                     
                        2
                        Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) is used for statistical analysis.
                      Both MCS and MoCA tests were applied to all participants in patient and control groups. Hence, we compared the scores of the proposed MCS test against a validated and widely used MoCA test.

9 healthy people (control group) and 14 patients (patient group) that were already diagnosed as dementia were included in this study.
                        3
                     
                     
                        3
                        The test was approved by the institutional ethics committee (INAREK – 20/2013).
                      The ages of the participants in the patient group were between 73 and 89 with an average of 81.78±4.77. For the control group the ages were between 63 and 95, and the average age of the group was 72.55±9.95. From the patient group, 78.57% were female, 22.43% were male. In the control group, 78.78% were female, 22.22% were male.

The average year of education in the patient and control groups were 13.71±4.14 and 13.66±5.07 years respectively. These demographic information is listed in Table 2
                     .

The average score of MCS in patient group was 19.92±4.41, in the control group it was 26.88±3.48. See Fig. 12(b) for the average scores of patient and control groups for each cognitive function. The average score of MoCA in the patient group was 13.57±5.61, and in the control group it was 24.55±3.08. The difference between the scores of the patient and the control group in both MCS and MoCA tests is meaningful (p
                     <0.01) (see Table 3
                     ).

The average scores of MCS and MoCA for all cases were 17.86±7.21 and 22.65±5.28 respectively. According to the scores of individuals, the correlation between MCS and MoCA scores are shown in Fig. 13
                     . The correlation coefficient between the scores of these tests was r
                     2
                     =0.57, and this correlation was meaningful (p
                     <0.01).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Our first observation with MCS test was the statistically significant difference between the scores of the control and the patient groups. Therefore, we can claim that the MCS Test can distinguish cognitive impairment from healthy cognitive functions. However, when the scores for each cognitive function were investigated separately (see Table 4
                     ), we observed that some of the cognitive functions could not be effectively evaluated for the two groups. The scores of the language, abstraction, and arithmetic abilities for the control and patient groups were not different with statistical significance (p
                     >0.05).

For the arithmetic ability, we observed that the average year of education for both control and patient group was high. The arithmetic test with basic algebraic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) were too simple for the participants with more than 13 years of education. Hence we concluded that more complicated arithmetic test questions are required to evaluate the arithmetic ability of the control and patient groups (see Table 5
                     ).

For the abstraction ability, we observed that the participants in both control and patient groups chose the concrete meaning of the proverb instead of their abstract meaning. We believe that the result may be due to lack of better instructions before the test. Hence, we concluded that our method of application of this test should change. We are planning to add more instructions and a sample question before the application of the test.

For the visual ability, we used two tests: Naming (Fig. 8) and colorful shapes (Fig. 9(b)) tests. When we examined the scores of naming and colorful shapes tests, we observed that the scores of the naming test was the reason of a statistically insignificant difference between patient and control groups. In the naming test, the names of 3 animals (dog, elephant, and zebra) and 3 objects (chair, brush, and scissor) were asked to the participants. Among these animals, elephant and dog were named correctly and zebra could not be answered by both patient and control groups. On the other hand, all objects were named correctly by both groups. Hence we concluded that all three objects and two animals (dog and elephant) were too easy, and zebra was to hard for the participants in both patient and control groups. Therefore, the set of objects and animals that were asked in the naming test were not chosen good enough to detect dementia patients. We are planning to keep the naming test, but change the set of objects and animals that are asked in this test.

There are certain limitations of the proposed MCS test. First of all, the number of participants in both control and patient groups are limited in this study. Therefore, further tests with more participants are required for the validation of the MCS test. In addition, the MCS test should be validated for different neurological diseases that cause dementia. Currently, the patient group is formed by dementia patients which may be caused by different diseases. With its current design the same questions are asked whenever the application is used. Hence it is not possible to monitor the cognitive progress of a person. In some cases, it may be required to monitor the cognitive changes in time. For example, a neurologist may want to see the possible improvements in the cognitive abilities of a patient undergoing to a certain treatment.

The test is currently in Turkish but the software can be adapted for other languages. However, this adaptation may not be straightforward. For example, proverbs may be meaningless in other languages, objects/animals may not be familiar etc. Therefore, cultural, geographical, and other differences should be considered to adapt the questions to another language. Further validation tests may also be required when the test is adapted.

Currently, all correct answers are counted as 1 point to determine the final score. However, some of the questions may be more important to evaluate a certain cognitive ability compared to another question. With a limited number of participants, it is not possible to decide the level of importance, for the test questions. As the number of participants increase, we are planning to analyze the variance of scores within each group and assign weights for the questions. Hence, questions that can evaluate a cognitive ability with a higher precision will have a higher score.

In the future versions of the MCS test, we are planning to design new questions that use video and animations. In addition, we will search new interfaces, guidelines etc. that would make the current questions more efficient in terms of evaluating the cognitive abilities.

As it was stated in Section 2, there are numerous alternatives to MCS test. Among these tests, we would like to compare the MCS test against the MoCA and ANAM test as they are widely used and well validated:

(1) it ANAM. ANAM is a computer-based test that is performed via computer keyboard and mouse. It is typically used to evaluate the cognitive abilities of younger individuals (i.e. soldiers). It has a wide range of questions and specific batteries can be formed by selecting a set of questions. Therefore, a test battery can be formed for the evaluation of a specific cognitive ability. It is also possible to evaluate the change in the cognitive abilities of an individual in time. However, the interface of the test is not easy for the elderly participants who may not have much experience with personal computers. Therefore, we did not prefer to perform ANAM test on the control and patient groups.

(2) MoCA. MoCA test is performed on a paper with a pencil. This is an easy interface for the elderly people as they used pencils intensively throughout their education. In addition, MoCA is validated quite extensively using normative data for many diseases in many different languages. On the other hand, the possibilities for the questions are limited on a paper. Rich multimedia components such as audio, video etc. cannot be used. The scores of the MoCA test is based on professionals who evaluate the answers of MoCA, and thus the MoCA scores become subjective.


                     MCS vs. ANAM/MoCA. Compared to ANAM, MCS test has fewer number of questions, which cannot be configured to form different test batteries. As a result, MCS cannot be used to evaluate the change of cognitive abilities in time. However, the touch screen interface of the tablet computers is much simpler compared to personal computers especially for the elderly users. Compared to MoCA, MCS test uses images and audio in the questions. In addition, the results of the tests are automatically scored, which makes these scores more objective. The results are visualized against the average score of the healthy group, which may be a useful tool for evaluation of certain cognitive abilities.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

A novel mobile application is developed in this study for the cognitive screening of dementia. This test that we named Mobile Screening Test (MCS) is applied to a limited number of participants in order to understand its potential as a useful tool. It was shown that, the MCS test could differentiate people with healthy cognitive abilities from patients who were diagnosed as dementia with statistical significance. In addition, the MCS test scores were compared with a well-known cognitive test (MoCA). A correlation was observed between the scores of the same participants from MCS and MoCA tests. Hence we conclude that the proposed MCS test can be used as a screening tool for dementia.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

