@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Implementation and evaluation of an Asbru-based decision support system for adjuvant treatment in breast cancer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We design and built a decision support system for the treatment of breast cancer based on Asbru.


                        
                        
                           
                           The DSS is integrated with the electronic patient record in use in a Medical Oncology Unit.


                        
                        
                           
                           We evaluated the DSS in the multidisciplinary meeting for the decision of the adjuvant treatment.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results show an agreement of nearly 90% between the meeting decisions and the DSS recommendations.


                        
                        
                           
                           We discuss the reasons for non-agreement and additional insights into the design of effective DSS.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Clinical guidelines

Decision support systems

Asbru

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The domain of cancer treatment is a promising field for the implementation and evaluation of a protocol-based clinical decision support system, because of the algorithmic nature of treatment recommendations. However, many factors can limit such systems’ potential to support the decision of clinicians: technical challenges related to the interoperability with existing electronic patient records and clinical challenges related to the inherent complexity of the decisions, often collectively taken by panels of different specialists. In this paper, we evaluate the performances of an Asbru-based decision support system implementing treatment protocols for breast cancer, which accesses data from an oncological electronic patient record. Focusing on the decision on the adjuvant pharmaceutical treatment for patients affected by early invasive breast cancer, we evaluate the matching of the system's recommendations with those issued by the multidisciplinary panel held weekly in a hospital.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The gap between practice and best evidence in delivering health care services has been known well since long ago [1]. Although not always achieved, a major goal of health care systems is the provision of safe, cost-effective and evidence-based health care [2].

Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs), defined as “…systematically developed statements to assist practitioner and patient decisions about appropriate health care for specific clinical circumstances” [3], promise to efficiently disseminate the ever increasing amount of available clinical knowledge in order to reduce the undesired variation in the provision of care and thus to improve the quality of the care [4].

In real clinical settings, expert clinicians distil CPGs into simpler and more structured clinical protocols, i.e., a comprehensive set of rigid criteria describing the steps to managing a disease adapted to the local workflow and the available resources, easily usable in practice.

The main challenge in the practical use of guidelines and protocols, however, is the efficient dissemination of their content. Traditional paper dissemination of CPGs is relatively ineffective in influencing physicians’ behavior [5], and the huge effort of guideline creation may not be matched by the level of adherence to them in everyday practice [6].

By delivering specific options and recommendations to the user depending on the disease and patient conditions in an automated fashion, Computerized Decision Support Systems (CDSS) can improve the compliance of clinicians with protocols, especially when integrated into the clinical workflow [7,8].

The domain of oncology is a promising field of application for CDSS’, because pharmaceutical treatment protocols are largely algorithmic, yet often complex. The cure of breast cancer in particular has seen an explosion of life-saving treatment advances in recent years and an overwhelming range of therapies and drugs is available today. To decide the best therapy, the oncologist has to assess and combine several different patient and disease parameters (patient age, tumor morphology, hormone responsiveness, disease stage, etc.), a job computerized systems are particularly good at.

The integration of a CDSS into the IT infrastructure of a hospital, however, remains challenging as the data available in the Electronic Patient Records (EPR) at the point of care rarely meet the information referred to in the CPG in a direct way.

To ensure the best quality of care, many cancer treatments are decided in a discussion attended by experts of the different specialties involved in the cancer diagnosis and care. At the same time, many decisions are still taken by single physicians and there is demand for a support of those less familiar with the protocol in all its details.

This results in the following question discussed in this paper: How close can the decision of a CDSS, based on parameters found in the EPR, resemble that made by a multidisciplinary expert panel?
                  

The OncoCure project explored this question by designing a CDSS to implement the breast cancer treatment protocols used in the Medical Oncology Unit (MOU) of the S. Chiara Hospital of Trento (Northern Italy). In a first step, we compared the recommendations produced by the CDSS with recommendations by an expert panel. The result of this comparison is presented here. In a second step, we plan to deploy the CDSS in those cases where an expert panel is not available.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe related work. In Section 3 we describe the protocol concerned, the OncoCure CDSS, and the modeling process. In Section 4, we discuss how we explored the capability of the OncoCure CDSS as a supporting tool in the decision process; the results of the evaluation are expounded in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6, we discuss the results and their implication for designing effective CDSS’.

@&#RELATED WORK@&#

Supporting the execution of clinical guidelines and protocols by CDSS’ has a rich history. Early systems, dating back as far as 1987 [9], directly encoded the guideline in question in a knowledge-based system. A more recent system deployed at the Tenon hospital in Paris is OncoDoc2 [10]. It increased the compliance rate of decisions from 79% to 93% [11]. In this system, the user enters the patient data, thereby browsing the knowledge base manually. In contrast, the OncoCure CDSS directly connects with the EPR, relieving the user from data entry.

To facilitate the modeling task, various formal and semi-formal languages were developed and several comparisons of these languages were published [12,13]. Latoszek-Berendsen et al. [14] discuss them in the wider context of guideline development and impact.

Of these approaches, the DeGeL framework [15] is the closest to our system because it uses Asbru (compare Section 3) which is also used in the OncoCure project. The DeGeL framework features a set of distributed tools, focusing on the hybrid representations, in which parts of the guideline are specified in a more formal way while others remain free-text. It incorporates the Spock execution engine [16] which is able to process hybrid guideline models, e.g., hybrid Asbru [17]. The above is complemented by IDAN [18], a temporal abstraction mediator for the Spock engine mentioned above, and MEIDA [19], a framework for mapping the Computer Interpretable Guidelines (CIG) terms to specific EPRs using medical standard vocabulary. Similarly to our architecture, MEIDA adopts a Virtual Medical Record (VMR) approach mapping the local database schema into the VMR schema. The OncoCure project fully formalized the protocol, which meant that executing fully formal Asbru was possible. In fact, recently the fully formal Picard module was included into DeGel, and evaluated in the cardiology and Pre-Eclampsia/Toxemia of pregnancy domains [20]. In the last case, cross-over “in-vitro clinical evaluation” was performed with the help of 36 different clinicians at an OB/GYN department using realistically simulated clinical data based on a set of clinical scenarios and decision points within them. The simulation results demonstrated that the correctness of the physicians’ decisions relative to the guideline increased in the CDSS arm from 32% to 98%, while the completeness of applying the guideline increased from 47% to 93%; and that the variance amongst different decision points, scenarios, and clinicians decreased considerably.

KDOM [21] is another general framework for the integration of guideline models with specific EPRs, evaluated by mapping a guideline encoded in Guideline Interchange Format version 3 (GLIF3) to two EPRs. Differently from our system, where we separated the database mapping from the abstraction rules, KDOM uses a mapping ontology with both the property group that conceptualizes the abstract knowledge and the group to map CIG fields to the target EPR table(s).

In the cancer domain, MATE [22], which is based on the CREDO software platform [23], focuses on supporting the decision of patient management options during breast cancer multidisciplinary meetings. It combines seven guidelines and adds multimedia support to the decision process and achieved a compliance of 93.2% in 1056 analyzed cases. While it is much more comprehensive than the OncoCure system, it contains its own data entry facilities for its stand-alone EPR, while OncoCure is integrated into an existing EPR used at the point of care.

Another system to support breast cancer follow-up was developed by Abidi et al. [24] using the Guideline Elements Model (GEM) to mark up the guideline before modeling the recommendations as a Protégé [25] ontology. They developed a web-based execution engine to combine the ontology representing the guideline and associated domain knowledge and the patient ontology describing the patient's state. However, there is no linking with an EPR. Instead, all data are entered as needed in the decision process.

Using guideline-based knowledge in the oncology domain has been assessed in other contexts as well. For example, an evaluation of the effectiveness of assisting the decisions of clinicians in the domain of post-bone-marrow-transplantation, for the specific task of assessment of the patient's evolving state over time, was performed at the Palo Alto VA Care Center by Martins et al. [26]. They used the KNAVE-II system [27], an intelligent interface for querying, interpreting summarize, visualize and explore distributed time-oriented clinical data.

Beyond the domain of cancer, the Athena-HF project created an automated knowledge base for heart failure management, resembling our work in the layered approach to knowledge modeling and coupling to the EPR. It uses the EON system, which itself uses Protégé [25], to model the guideline, the Padda guideline execution server [28] to execute it and the Tzolkin Temporal Data Mediator [29] to bridge the concepts of the guideline to the data entities in the EPR. Similar to our own experience, the authors found most – but not all – of the data required to execute the guideline to be present in the EPR. As in our project, complex assessments by the human expert had to be queried to complement the data in the EPR. Natural Language Processing was used to extract some of additional information from free text. Such text was not available in our project.

The OncoCure CDSS is a prescriptive computerized decision support system to support the oncologists of the Medical Oncology Unit in providing the appropriate medical treatment to breast cancer patients during all the stages of therapy. It is based on the Asbru encoding of the breast cancer treatment protocols used in the MOU, which describes the treatment starting after surgery and concluding with follow-up. Asbru is a guideline representation language that represents clinical guidelines and protocols as time-oriented skeletal plans [30–32].

While the system obtains as much data as possible from the oncological EPR used in the department without user effort, it leaves the control over the final decision with the physician, presenting a list of options that match the protocol. Where necessary, it queries data not found in the EPR from the user before making a suggestion.

In this section, we outline the protocol, the modeling process, and the principal data entities. Then, we present the various knowledge bases and the system architecture, concluding with a detailed description of the decision process.

Each oncologist of the MOU is specialized in one or more related types of cancer and prepares internal protocols for the treatment of the disease(s) by gathering and distilling information from national and international guidelines and consensus conferences. The internal protocols recommend the treatment of choice for each kind of tumor in relation to patient status and disease parameters, measured through appropriate laboratory tests (anatomical and pathological examination of surgical specimen, blood tests, diagnostic imaging, etc.), or subjectively evaluated by the oncologist during clinical visits. In the clinical routine, the decision of the most appropriate pharmaceutical treatment for a patient should leverage on them.

The internal protocols for treating breast cancer, in particular, are a local customization of national and international guidelines issued by the Italian Association of Medical Oncology (AIOM) [33] and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) [34], integrated with recommendations from breast cancer consensus conferences (e.g., the St. Gallen consensus conference [35]).

The largest part of the protocols gives recommendations for the systemic adjuvant treatments, i.e., pharmaceutical therapies (chemotherapy with cytotoxic chemicals, biological therapy with monoclonal antibodies, receptor modifiers, hormone therapy or a combination of them) administered after the surgical removal of the tumor to kill cancer cells spread to other parts of the body. Over the past two decades, randomized clinical trials have attempted to define optimal therapy regimens, doses, and schedules in the adjuvant treatment for breast cancer. These studies, along with the results of overview analysis, have permitted to define detailed recommendations that oncologists should follow in order to minimize the risk of cancer recurrence. The selection of the appropriate treatment is based on measurable prognostic and predictive factors: patient characteristics independent of the disease (such as age), features of the tumor (such as tumor size and histological type), and biomarkers, i.e., measurable parameters in tissues and cells (such as hormone receptor status, progesterone receptor status, axillary node status and measures of cell turnover).

In contrast to guidelines, which are mostly in textual form, protocols mainly contain informal “box and arrow” diagrams and schematic tables, accompanied by short explanation text. In Fig. 1
                         we show an example of the diagram for the adjuvant therapy decision of a specific category of hormone responsive patients.

Notwithstanding protocols are more formal and concise than guidelines, they still present ambiguities and incompleteness that must be resolved. While the encoding effort for protocols is smaller than for guidelines, the translation to a formal executable model is far from trivial since protocols, like guidelines, are combinations of written text and informal diagrams, and contain implicit knowledge and assumptions about the care process and the medical background that must be explicated. Moreover, to smoothly integrate the system in the clinical workflow, it is necessary to specify the care process tasks in which protocols are used and define the system requirements. In fact, most of the first year of the project (10 months) was devoted to the acquisition of the explicit knowledge written in the protocols and the implicit knowledge of the actual care process carried out in the ward, and to the codification of the Asbru model.

The modeling required the collaboration of physicians and computer scientists: the former have the knowledge to grasp the deep clinical meaning of the protocols, the latter have the training in creating formal models. To this end, we conducted non-standardized interviews with the oncologist expert in treating breast cancer during periodical encounters, in order to gather inputs about the clinical process, the workflow and the resources involved. The oncologist's answers were recorded as informal text, successively analyzed and discussed again to formalize the protocols and encode the model in Asbru.

The semi-formal decision model represented in the clinical protocol uses different kinds of parameters whose origin and assessment method are not explicitly indicated in the protocol. To formalize the protocol in a machine-executable model, the type of each parameter must be precisely defined. To this end, we defined an ontology of the parameters required by the Asbru-based CDSS, classifying them in three categories (compare [36]):
                           
                              
                                 Primitive parameters. Patient and tumor data originating from some laboratory tests or from objective assessment (e.g., the number of axillary metastatic lymph nodes, the percentage of estrogen receptor positive cells, the patient age), which are directly used in decision diagrams or serve for computing abstractions. Usually, these parameters are stored unprocessed in patient folders (either paper-based or in some hospital information system). Since the OncoCure CDSS works connected with the departmental EPR, these parameters are directly available to it.


                                 Abstractions. Parameters that can be computed without human intervention from lower-level data through clearly defined rules. The abstractions can be higher level concepts used in the protocols (e.g., the hormone responsiveness, the patient risk level), taxonomic abstractions (e.g., in the TNM staging system of malignant tumors a T1a tumor is-a T1 tumor), or temporal abstractions (e.g., “use of taxanes in previous treatments”).


                                 Holistic parameters. Parameters that must be queried from the doctor, because it is not possible to define an algorithm with certainty or, even though the parameters were broken down into elementary findings, the resulting elements would themselves require subjective judgment by the oncologist (e.g., patient fit for chemotherapy, tumor aggressiveness).

The above distinction between different types of parameters and the strategies for dealing with them guided the implementation of the OncoCure CDSS, which is based on three interrelated knowledge bases neatly separated from the information model:
                           
                              •
                              The XML-based minimum dataset for treating breast cancer (Fig. 2
                                 ), i.e., the definition of all the parameters (divided in primitive parameters, abstractions and holistic parameters) needed by the system to execute the model: name, type, allowed values, range, etc. The breast cancer dataset is the instance of a general XSD schema, defined to allow the representation of any cancer domain. In the dataset, we defined 12 primitive parameters, 5 abstractions and 4 holistic parameters used by the system.

The logical expressions to compute the abstractions from lower level data. In the current version the algorithms are written as CLIPS rules [37] and executed by the freely available forward-chaining CLIPS engine. We wrote 27 abstraction rules. Further 5 rules were added to set unknown or missing values of specific parameters to default values, according to the oncologists indications (see [36]).

The Asbru model executed by the Asbru interpreter, which contains the hierarchical network of plans, the definition of the conditions connecting plan transitions, and the declaration of the parameters used in the transition conditions: the abstractions, the holistic parameters, and the subset of the primitive parameters directly used by the Asbru interpreter. The adjuvant part of the model contained the definition of about 200 plans.

Although the abstractions could be performed by the data abstraction module of the Asbru interpreter, we opted to move most of them in an external rule engine mainly because the abstractions are, in general, rather stable, while the rules and parameters used for their computation may require more frequent revisions. This choice makes the maintenance of the guideline model easier.

The CDSS architecture, built upon the three knowledge bases above, is shown in Fig. 3
                        . In order to separate the different types of knowledge, the OncoCure CDSS was built as a modular system composed by several communicating software modules that connect the Asbru interpreter with the EPR:
                           
                              •
                              The DSS Coordinator manages the communication between and coordinates the execution of the tasks of the other modules, by orderly sending requests to and receiving responses from them. To exchange patient data between the modules, we utilized the VMR approach [38], which supports a well-defined structured data model for representing information related to individual patients. The CDSS VMR stores the actual value of the patient parameters produced and used by the OncoCure CDSS (Fig. 4
                                 ). The disease-specific minimum dataset constitutes the reference model for building, maintaining end exploiting the VMR at runtime.

The Data Extraction Module interfaces the OncoCure system with the EPR database used in the MOU, implements the queries to retrieve the primitive data directly available in the EPR and stores them in the patient VMR.

The Data Abstraction Module wraps the CLIPS rule engine that executes the CLIPS rule model to compute the abstractions from the primitive data. The module feeds the engine with the VMR primitive data and stores the newly resulting abstractions back in the VMR.

The Asbru Manager Module wraps the Asbru interpreter, which executes the Asbru protocol model. The module feeds the interpreter with the parameters from the VMR, runs the interpreter, and transforms the interpreter output to recommendations or requests to the user.

The GUI Adapter Module implements the graphical user interface through which the physician interacts with the system: he/she receives requests and recommendations from and gives feedback to the OncoCure CDSS (providing parameters or choosing a recommendation) to allow the CDSS to proceed with the guideline execution. In the current version, the module implements a Web-based user interface accessible through a Web browser to allow both the ease integration with the oncological EPR in use in the oncology department and to access the system from the Internet.

Whenever the user needs support to decide the next treatment steps, she sends the identifier of the patient for which support is requested to the server using the Web based interface (see also the sequence in Fig. 3). If support is request for a new patient, the Data Extraction Module interrogates the EPR database and retrieves the breast cancer prognostic primitive data for the patient. The data are displayed to the user as shown in Fig. 5
                        . The oncologist can provide possibly missing data by filling the empty fields in the parameter form. If the query fails (e.g., the case is not found in the EPR), all the fields are empty and the values can be provided by the oncologist. The parameter form is created from the minimum data set model to facilitate input. For example, if the model defines a parameter with a set of allowed values, the page displays a list box from which the user can only choose one of the allowed values (as the Intensity field in Fig. 5).

When the user sends the data to the Web server the DSS Coordinator stores the parameters in the patient VMR (created from scratch if it does not exist) and invokes the CLIPS engine to execute the CLIPS rules and compute the abstractions. The abstractions are added to the VMR. The updated VMR is then passed to the Asbru manager, which invokes the Asbru interpreter. The interpreter executes the Asbru model and the Asbru manager transforms the interpreter output to recommendations or requests to display in the user interface. The oncologist can provide feedback choosing one of the recommended treatments or providing the values of holistic parameters, which are stored in the VMR for the next run (Fig. 6
                        ).

When the user chooses a “leaf” option, for example the administration of a specific combination of drugs, the CDSS activates the option and waits for feedback from the user that signals the completion of the action before proceeding with further recommendations. This means that the system does not actively request further decision from the user, which would be unacceptable in this application context. Instead, the system waits until the user marks one treatment complete, thereby re-triggering the decision process.

For each patient, the OncoCure CDSS stores the state of the care process at every run, i.e., the VMR, the recommendations selected by the doctor at each step, and the start and completion of the chosen activities. Together, they represent the patient history related to the breast cancer disease, and are persisted on file after each run, allowing the system to be shut down and restarted, initiating the execution from the last plan state reached for the specific patient, and to display the patient treatment history (see Fig. 6, bottom panel).

The organization of the information about treatments was performed at knowledge model level by conveniently grouping the model plans, and reflects the perception of the oncologists, who prefer to choose the treatment modality first (hormone therapies, chemo-therapies), and the specific (combination of) drugs later [39].

While the OncoCure CDSS supports the whole process of medical treatment, we chose to limit the measure of the performance to the initial decision on the adjuvant treatment only, for the following reasons: the decision is important and complex, it is well documented in the patient record, and the patient is not present, which means that the effort for the evaluation does not interfere with patient interaction.

In the following, we first describe the clinical setting of our evaluation and then the details of the evaluation carried out.

The guidelines set up by the working panel following the first European Breast Cancer Conference in 1998 [40] recommend that the optimal treatment of breast cancer patients must be decided by a multi-specialty team attending regular meetings to plan and monitor the treatment. The process of breast cancer care starts outside the MOU where the diagnosis of cancer become apparent after a set of clinical visits and tests for investigating symptoms or signs suffered by the patient or from the result of a screening campaign. Within few days from the initial diagnosis, the patient is referred to an out-of-hospital multidisciplinary meeting in which the first therapeutic strategy is decided. Thanks to the campaigns for the general awareness of breast cancer, the majority of patients presents with the disease at an early-stage, for which the first therapy step is the surgical removal of the tumor.

In the majority of cases, surgery must be followed by pharmaceutical adjuvant therapy to reduce the risk of cancer recurrence. The adjuvant treatment is decided in a second multidisciplinary panel discussion (MPD), held inside the hospital on the first Tuesday after the surgical intervention. The specialists involved in the cancer diagnosis and treatment attend these weekly meetings: the pathologist, the breast cancer radiologist, the breast surgeon who routinely performs breast cancer surgery, the radiation oncologist, and the medical oncologist specialized in the treatment of breast cancer.

For each case, the discussion starts with the specialists presenting the tumor findings and personal considerations pertaining their own discipline. For example, the breast radiologist expounds on the features of the lesion seen in the mammography images, while the surgeon exposes the problems encountered resecting the tumor. The conversation, however, is quite informal: each physician can intervene at any time providing her contribution. At the end of the discussion, the oncologist summarizes the case and decides the most appropriate adjuvant treatment for the patient. Several information systems are used during the discussion: the hospital information system, which mainly stores the medical reports produced in the hospital, the pathology laboratory information system, and the oncologic EPR, which is used in the MOU for the total management of cancer patients. None of them, however, accommodates room for the MPD decision; currently the therapy recommendation is written on a paper form (Fig. 7
                        ), along with the patient's personal data, the significant tumor parameters, and possibly additional factors that have influenced the decision. The therapies decided in the MPD are recorded in the oncological EPR later during the first visit in the MOU to confirm the start of the therapy.

The meeting is an ideal test bed for the evaluation of a protocol-based CDSS. First, to evaluate if these tools can effectively provide appropriate treatment recommendations, a real clinical decision making moment is needed. Although MPD decisions should be based on protocols, different factors not foreseeable when guidelines or protocols were prepared may influence the oncologist's decision. The more the real patients differ from the ideal ones defined in guidelines, the higher the number of these external factors and the more the oncologist's decisions can diverge from those recommended.

Secondly, the OncoCure CDSS interface for data entry handles the problem of missing, outdated or unreliable data allowing the oncologist to manually input the parameters required by the protocol not found in the EPR database or modify/update parameters recorded in the EPR (e.g., reassessed hormone receptors), a situation that often arises during the MPDs.

Lastly, the MPD is a controlled test environment that does not raise ethical issues, since patients are not present to the discussion. In the successive decision moments (e.g., the first encounter in the ward in which the oncologist must confirm the MPD decision) on the contrary, the patient is present. In this situation, the use of a new tool could pose problems related to possible malfunctioning and incorrect suggestions or to the screen-gaze phenomenon [41] that can disrupt the very delicate patient–oncologist relationship.

To evaluate the OncoCure CDSS in the MPD, one of us attended several panel discussions operating on the CDSS system. During the discussion of a case, the operator run the system inserting the patient identifier code used in the EPR. Since the OncoCure CDSS Data Extraction Module was interfaced with the oncological EPR in use in the MOU, the form input fields were automatically filled with the patient's primitive data stored in the EPR database. Primitive parameters not yet available in the EPR at the moment of the discussion but provided by the caring team from other sources, were manually entered by the operator in the initial page. Similarly, holistic parameters were manually entered, if required during the simulation. After each simulation run the operator recorded the kind of therapy – chemotherapy (CT), immunotherapy (IT), hormone therapy (HT) or a combination of them – and the specific regimens recommended (e.g., 6 cycles of FEC followed by herceptin and aromatase inhibitors), without communicating this information to the participants so as not to influence the panel's decision. At the end of each meeting, the recommendations provided by the system were compared with the panel's therapies decisions annotated on the MPD forms to determine whether the two recommendations matched. In the case of discrepancies, we asked the expert oncologist for the reason for panel's decision in order to assess whether and why the system provided a different recommendation. We only considered cases discussed in MPDs for the most appropriate pharmaceutical adjuvant treatment after removal of the tumor mass by surgery. The selection criteria were as follows:
                           
                              •
                              Patients with invasive early breast cancer. In situ cancers were excluded because they usually are not treated after surgery;

Tumors not metastatic and not recurrences of a preceding tumor: for these cases, we defined different knowledge models;

Patients not previously treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy,
                                    1
                                 
                                 
                                    1
                                    Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is the administration of cytotoxic chemicals before the surgery to reduce the size or extent of the cancer, so as to allow or reduce the extent of the surgical resection.
                                  since these patients cannot be treated with a second chemotherapy and the adjuvant decision is simply to administer hormone therapy or not (depending on hormone responsiveness);

Cases for which the primitive parameter values, necessary to automatically compute the abstractions and execute the plan hierarchy down to a ‘leaf’ therapy regimen plan, were either available in the EPR or known by the panel at the time of the meeting.

We selected 61 cases eligible for simulation. To assess the validity of the OncoCure CDSS recommendations over a long period, we followed two temporally distant groups of MPDs: 36 cases were discussed in MPDs held in the last third of 2009, 25 cases were discussed in MPDs held in the first third of 2012.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Results (Table 1
                     ) show a high level of agreement between the panel recommendations and those from the OncoCure CDSS, considering both the total number of cases (85.2%) and the cases grouped by discussion year (86.1.0% for 2009 cases and 84.0% for 2012 cases). Although the agreement percentage for cases discussed in 2009 is slightly higher than that for 2012 cases, the difference is not significant (p
                     =1.00, Fisher's exact test).

Agreement was defined as follows (see Table 2
                     ):
                        
                           •
                           The recommendations of the panel and of the OncoCure CDSS match (first table row) when the MPD specifies the regimen, i.e., the specific (combination of) drugs(s) (e.g., 6 cycles of FEC - fluorouracyl, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide), or the classes of drugs (e.g., anthracyclines and taxanes), and one of the alternatives proposed by the OncoCure CDSS either corresponds to the MPD regimen or contains the drugs belonging to the MPD drug classes. This group also includes cases when MPD generically recommends IT or HT or a combination of them, since the only IT drug used for breast cancer is herceptin and the rule for choosing the specific HT drug is simple: either tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors, depending on menopausal state.

Some patients present particular conditions, known at the time of the MPD decision, that contraindicate chemotherapy treatment, although disease parameters demand for it: elderly patients with age-related problems, patients with psychiatric problems, presence of comorbidities, etc. In these cases, if the patient is hormone responsive, the panel recommends only hormone therapy. The recommendation of the OncoCure CDSS matches the MPD decision if the provision of holistic parameters to the CDSS – not fit for chemotherapy, contraindications to some (class of) drugs, etc. – drives it to recommend the same hormone therapy.

In few cases (3 in 2009 and 3 in 2012) the MPD recommended generic CT, without the specification of the regimen. This can happen for various reasons: the panel could be in a hurry (a lot of patients to discuss), or simply the regimen choice was obvious in the oncologist's mind. In these cases, the matching was determined by retrieving the therapy regimens actually administered to the patients from the EPR.

In two cases (one in 2009 and one in 2012) the recommendations did not match because of evident transcription errors. The control of the data recorded in the EPR allowed us to assess the correctness of the OncoCure CDSS recommendations. Hence, we reclassified the two cases in the matching group.

We classified cases as differing, i.e., mismatches, when the OncoCure CDSS recommended a different therapy regimen with respect to the panel even when providing holistic parameters to the system. In consequence of the matching criteria indicated above, the cases not matched were those for which the panel recommended a chemotherapy regimen not in the set of the alternatives proposed by the CDSS.

We revised the differing cases with an expert oncologist to determine the reasons of the differences, reported in Table 3
                     . In five cases (first table row), the panel recommended a lighter therapy with respect to the one recommended by the CDSS. These alternatives were lighter CT or HT instead of CT. In fact, these cases belong to a category of tumors for which some parameters indicate an aggressive behavior, but this indication is counter-balanced by other characteristics – in our case the small size (<0.5cm), or the lobular histological type. These tumors are not well covered by evidence-based guidelines and the oncologist prefers to perform the treatment with less side effects. The oncologists adopt the same conservative approach (second row) for cases in which only one parameter is beyond the threshold that assigns the case to the next higher risk level
                        2
                     
                     
                        2
                        The risk level selects the patients for the kind and intensity of the administered therapy and is computed by the system by combining several clinical and pathological parameters: age, tumor dimension, lymph-node involvement, Her2-receptor status (Her2-positive breast cancers tend to grow more quickly than other types of breast cancer), vascular invasion, grade, proliferation index, and hormone responsiveness.
                      that would require a more aggressive therapy. In contrast to the cases described before, in one case (third row) the oncologist preferred to administer a stronger chemotherapy with respect to that recommended by the protocols. As a matter of facts, although each of the disease parameters was slightly under the threshold to classify the case to the next higher risk level, she judged that, considered in their totality, the parameters indicated an aggressive tumor requiring a strong treatment. Those above are all examples of treatment decisions in which the oncologist adopts a holistic view of the disease, for which the knowledge she applies can hardly be reduced to algorithms implementable in a CDSS.

Finally, in one case several disease characteristics (Her2 positive high-grade tumor, high Mib1 proliferation index
                        3
                     
                     
                        3
                        Expressed as a percentage, Mib1 index indicates the proliferation activity in breast cancer.
                     ) would have suggested a relatively strong chemotherapy in combination with herceptin. Considering the age of the patient (88 years), however, the panel recommended no treatment, because the tumor was not hormone responsive and HT has not effect. Actually, the CDSS proposed only CT, because no alternatives could be modeled in its knowledge base.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS@&#

A variety of factors can hinder the effective implementation of a guideline-based CDSS in real clinical settings. The lack of interoperability with the existing EPR platforms is a great challenge, but not the only one. The decisions about the appropriate clinical actions are often the result of collective discussions in multidisciplinary care teams. In such contexts, the final decision, although based on clinical guidelines, may take into account a variety of factors that may not be directly represented in the EPR.

In this work, we have evaluated an Asbru-based Computerized Decision Support System in a real clinical setting to assess its capability of performing the decision made by the multidisciplinary expert panel that discusses and decides the adjuvant treatment for breast cancer patients, using the objective parameters found in an oncological EPR. While the CDSS supports all decisions along the treatment path, our evaluation focussed on the initial decision as it is the one that is most important and most completely documented in clinical practice. This is a prerequisite to the further evaluation necessary to actually demonstrate the OncoCure CDSS capability to support the full oncological careflow over an extended period of time.

The system showed a high level of agreement (more than 80%) with the panel of experts in recommending the most appropriate therapy in relation to the patient conditions and tumor characteristics. In spite of the “noisy” context, in which experts of different specialties involved in the provision of care expound and discuss the issues and findings pertaining to their part of the care process, the results of this study indicate that the oncologist leading the discussion applies the breast cancer protocols formalized in the CDSS knowledge base. Consequently, the OncoCure CDSS can effectively support the panel's decision regardless the evolution of the discussion.

Moreover, the matching rate does not change over a relatively long period (more than 2 years). The last important change in the recommendations for the treatment of breast cancer was made in the 11th St. Gallen conference held in March 2009, which proposed a radically different treatment selection algorithm [42]. Following those recommendations, in 2009 we were able to review and update the OncoCure CDSS knowledge models before the evaluation study [39]. The results obtained show that the oncologists’ decision criteria are quite stable: they change them according to major consensus meetings proposals; hence, the possible updating to the CDSS knowledge base can be planned.

The discussion of the results with the physicians leads to additional insights into the design and development of an even more effective CDSS, which will guide the future development of the system.
                        
                           
                              User–system interaction. Our experience showed that the CDSS must allow the physician to enter subjective assessments that depend on complex implicit, hard to codify knowledge, but also on individual patient preferences. We call this kind of information holistic parameters.

In 40 cases, the recommendations of the OncoCure CDSS matched the panel decision without the provision of holistic information. In 12 cases, holistic parameters had to be entered. In these latter cases, however, the OncoCure CDSS recommendations could not be considered completely wrong, since the heavier treatments suggested by the system are just those recommended by the protocols in the presence of those objective parameters. The oncologist decides for a lighter treatment having some additional knowledge that cannot be expressed easily in formalized models. Moreover, for all the 12 cases, we had to provide only two holistic parameters, very few, compared to the 12 primitive parameters extracted from the EPR. As a matter of fact, in 9 cases we had to provide the holistic information that the patient was not fit for chemotherapy: for age-related problems (6 patients), for psychiatric problems (2 patients), or for a particular cancer type not responding to CT for which precise indications do not exist; three cases were comorbid patients with contraindications to anthracyclines.


                              Domain coverage. The guidelines for treating breast cancer do not cover all the parts of the domain equally well. Although this is less of a problem for breast cancer compared to other medical domains, still for some cases indications are not clear and/or concise. Examples of this problem found in our set of cases are tumors with clinical–pathological parameters that classify them as aggressive but very small in size (<0.5cm), surgically removed when their aggressiveness had not yet had serious consequences, or with a favorable histological type. In these cases, applying implicit knowledge, the oncologist prefers to choose a treatment with less side effects, although there is no corresponding recommendation in the protocol.


                              Global view of the disease and the parameter thresholds. In some cases, the oncologist takes a more general view of the disease than prescribed in the protocols and considers that the association of certain parameter values indicates the necessity of a treatment different from that recommended. This happens, for example, when most of the parameters are close to the threshold for selecting a stronger treatment. In other cases, when only one parameter is just beyond the threshold that would suggest a stronger treatment, the oncologist may prefer the lighter one to reduce the impact on the patient, possibly after discussing the option with the patient herself.

These findings highlight the dichotomy between the continuous nature of cancer biology and its representation in an executable model that can only be discrete. In modeling treatment protocols, in fact, it is necessary to define precise mathematical rules for selecting patients eligible for the different treatments based on finite parameter thresholds that, especially for values near the thresholds, may not represent well the biological reality. Modeling this knowledge in the CDSS continues to be very difficult.

In the near future, we plan to provide the system to the oncologist in the MPD to be used during those panel's discussions that, for any reason, are attended by an oncologist less expert in breast cancer. We are in the process of acquiring sufficient data to thoroughly evaluate the system for the rest of the treatment process, which spans years.

The original protocol that we modelled also included the treatment of metastatic breast cancer, which is a complex domain. However, it turned out that the protocol contained more of a draft for how to proceed than a concise guideline. While our technology permits for the coverage of this area, it is not yet sure that the knowledge acquisition necessary will be justified by the user benefit, mostly because the importance of holistic parameters queried on each encounter in this treatment phase increases and thus the benefits from EPR integration diminishes.

None declared.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

