@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Automated estimation of disease recurrence in head and neck cancer using routine healthcare data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Routinely collected data can estimate rates of disease progression, progression-free and overall survival in patients with head & neck cancer.


                        
                        
                           
                           Estimates of overall survival are accurate.


                        
                        
                           
                           Estimates of recurrence and progression-free survival are less accurate.


                        
                        
                           
                           Patients who do not have treatment for recurrent disease may be missed by this approach.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Head and neck cancer

Disease recurrence

Routine datasets

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Overall survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS) are key outcome measures for head and neck cancer as they reflect treatment efficacy, and have implications for patients and health services. The UK has recently developed a series of national cancer audits which aim to estimate survival and recurrence by relying on institutions manually submitting interval data on patient status, a labour-intensive method. However, nationally, data are routinely collected on hospital admissions, surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. We have developed a technique to automate the interpretation of these routine datasets, allowing us to derive patterns of treatment in head and neck cancer patients from routinely acquired data.
               
               
                  Methods
                  We identified 122 patients with head and neck cancer and extracted treatment histories from hospital notes to provide a gold standard dataset. We obtained routinely collected local data on inpatient admission and procedures, chemotherapy and radiotherapy for these patients and analysed them with a computer algorithm which identified relevant time points and then calculated OS and PFS. We validated these by comparison with the gold standard dataset. The algorithm was then optimised to maximise correct identification of each timepoint, and minimise false identification of recurrence events.
               
               
                  Results
                  Of the 122 patients, 82% had locally advanced disease. OS was 88% at 1 year and 77% at 2 years and PFS was 75% and 66% at 1 and 2 years. 40 patients developed recurrent disease. Our automated method provided an estimated OS of 87% and 77% and PFS of 87% and 78% at 1 and 2 years; 98% and 82% of patients showed good agreement between the automated technique and Gold standard dataset of OS and PFS respectively (ratio of Gold standard to routine intervals of between 0.8 and 1.2). The automated technique correctly assigned recurrence in 101 out of 122 (83%) of the patients: 21 of the 40 patients with recurrent disease were correctly identified, 19 were too unwell to receive further treatment and were missed. Of the 82 patients who did not develop a recurrence, 77 were correctly identified and 2 were incorrectly identified as having recurrent disease when they did not.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  We have demonstrated that our algorithm can be used to automate the interpretation of routine datasets to extract survival information for this sample of patients. It currently underestimates recurrence rates due to many patients not being well-enough to be treated for recurrent disease. With some further optimisation, this technique could be extended to a national level, providing a new approach to measuring outcomes on a larger scale than is currently possible. This could have implications for healthcare provision and policy for a range of different disease types.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Measuring clinical outcomes in cancer patients remains challenging. Studies often report results from single centres, from large national studies, or from clinical trials. Single centre studies often provide detailed data, but in small numbers of treated patients, while national studies have more patients but lack details of treatment and outcomes. Clinical trials may provide high-quality data, but in small groups of highly selected patients, and are expensive to perform. Therefore the challenge remains to report high-quality, detailed clinical outcomes in large numbers of patients, without relying on specialised data collection.

Head and neck (H&N) cancers represent a large, heterogeneous group of cancers with ∼460,000 cases worldwide [1]. Treatment often involves an intensive combination of surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy and patients can suffer significant long-term side effects. Despite this, tumour recurrence rates remain high and survival rates are relatively poor (National Head & Neck Cancer audit 2011 
                     [2]). Similar treatments may be given at recurrence, depending on the pattern of recurrence and the patient's ability to tolerate further treatment, but are toxic and expensive. Therefore, assessment of treatment efficacy, through measuring recurrence rates and recurrence-free survival, is important for patients, clinicians and health services.

The UK has had a dedicated national audit database for H&N cancer (DAHNO) since 2004 which requires manual data entry. As a consequence, by 2012 only 11.5% of patients had data on recurrence (National Head & Neck Cancer audit 2011 
                     [2]) Over this time period, the scope and scale of routinely-collected electronic healthcare data has expanded, often driven by the requirement for data for payment systems. In the UK, there are a variety of data sources, including data on hospital admissions and procedures (Hospital Episode Statistics; HES), radiotherapy (Radiotherapy Dataset; RTDS), chemotherapy (Systemic Anti-Cancer Therapy dataset; SACT) and deaths (Patient Demographics Service; PDS).

Learning how to use these data to answer clinically-driven questions, in a timely, accurate and relevant fashion represents a significant challenge [3]. A computerised method of accessing and interpreting such data can potentially yield useful clinical patterns and outcomes that are currently measured by national audits at considerable expense.

We have previously described a pilot study presenting a method of estimating recurrence and survival in H&N cancer patients based on manual analysis of routine data in a small group of 20 patients [4]. This work was based on capturing clinical intuitions about patterns of care and treatment in the form of simple rules about intervals between different treatment types. Since the routinely available data do not contain information on treatment intent, potentially curative treatments that were close to each other in time were assumed to be as part of a planned pattern of sequential, curative treatments, whereas if there was a significant gap between initial curative treatment and subsequent treatment, that subsequent treatment was assumed to be for recurrent disease. However, the assumptions underlying this approach are unlikely to be uniformly correct, and have never been validated in a large patient group.

In this study we:
                        
                           1.
                           Extend the range of clinical intuitions that we capture in computational form

Introduce a novel computer-based automated framework, written in Python, to merge and interpret the routine data and automatically identify diagnosis and recurrence events/dates;

Use that as a basis for performing simple in silico experiments to validate and optimise our approach in a larger patient sample (n
                              =122).

@&#METHOD@&#

Patients from a single cancer centre (UCLH, London), were included if their first diagnosis of H&N cancer was made between 2009–2012, they had radiotherapy given with radical intent (either as primary modality or for recurrence), we were able to identify their date of diagnosis, they attended at least one follow-up visit at UCLH post-diagnosis, and they had an eligible histological subtype (squamous cell carcinoma, undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma). The identification and exclusion of patients is shown in Fig. 1
                        .

We manually extracted data on patient characteristics, staging and treatment from hospital records. The date of diagnosis was the date that the first diagnostic specimen was obtained. The date of recurrence was the earliest date that recurrence was confirmed, on clinical, radiological or histological grounds. The date of last follow-up was the latest date of known contact with the hospital. The overall survival interval was the time between diagnosis and death or last follow-up. The progression-free survival interval was the time between diagnosis and evidence of recurrent or progressive disease (see Fig. 2
                        , upper half). Patients who were lost to follow-up, or were alive at the conclusion of the study were censored at the time of last known follow-up (according to the Kaplan–Meier method). This provided a “Gold standard” dataset of manually curated and analysed data.

We obtained local data sources for each patient from the Hospital Information Department, UCLH. These were:
                           
                              1.
                              Personal demographic service (PDS): notification of death, and date of death if dead

Hospital episode statistics (HES): records of start and end dates of admissions and inpatient procedures and diagnoses

Chemotherapy data (SACT): records of administration of chemotherapy and diagnoses and dates of treatments

Radiotherapy data (RTDS): records of delivery of radiotherapy and diagnoses and dates of treatments.

All data sources use the International Classification of Diseases v 10 (ICD-10) for diagnostic information. HES uses the Office of Population and Census Classification of Interventions and Procedures v 4 (OPCS-4). ICD-10 is widely used internationally, and both have mappings to other terminologies such as SNOMED-CT.

Our algorithm integrated the extracted HES, SACT, RTDS and PDS data to form a single list of event data for each patient, comprising diagnostic (ICD-10) and interventional codes (OPCS 4.4). The events were arranged in chronological order and filtered to ensure only treatments relevant to head and neck cancer were analysed (according to ICD10 codes relating to malignant neoplasms of the head, face or neck as displayed in Appendix 1.1). This information was used to inform the development of our algorithm.

None of the routine data sources (RTDS, SACT, HES and PDS) directly report either date of diagnosis or date of disease recurrence, and so we defined proxy time points for relevant clinical events. Automated strategies were used to identify these proxy time points and thus estimate survival.


                        Date of diagnosis was taken to be the date of the first recorded ICD-10 code in HES that corresponded to a diagnosis of head and neck malignancy (see Appendix 1.1).


                        Date of recurrence. We used the start date of secondary treatment for HNSCC (whether surgery, radiotherapy or chemotherapy) as a proxy for recurrence. We initially defined a treatment as being for a recurrence if it was given more than 90 days after the end of the previous treatment if two treatments occurred within this time interval they were considered to form a planned primary treatment strategy, otherwise the later treatment was assumed to be treatment for recurrent disease.

All routine data (HES, SACT, RTDS and PDS) were extracted on a per-patient basis. Blank entries were removed. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy data were summarised and ordered chronologically, and used as the basis for estimating OS and PFS. For the purposes of this study, we compared the output of software with the manually curated gold standard dataset to allow us to assess the accuracy of the automated approach.

We further optimised our approach through use of a time-based threshold to distinguish between a series of primary treatments, which may follow on from one another, and treatments given in response to disease recurrence. Our manual pilot study [4] used a static time interval of 90 days between consecutive treatments to distinguish delayed primary treatment from treatment for recurrence. In this work, we explored systematic optimisation of this time interval via in silico experimentation. Since both diagnosis and recurrence are often preceded by coded diagnostic procedures, we investigated whether backdating diagnosis and recurrence would improve estimated OS and PFS. We backdated the date of diagnosis or recurrence to the earliest of:
                           
                              1.
                              The date of the earliest diagnostic procedure within a set time interval of a treatment for H&N cancer; this time interval was initially set at 42 days, and then varied to find the optimal interval.

The first date of metastatic disease (determined by the appearance of a metastatic cancer ICD-10 code in HES, appendix 1.1).

The start of radiotherapy for an H&N cancer.

Since a longer backdating time interval risks inclusion of irrelevant diagnostic procedures, we attempted to find the shortest time interval (used for backdating for both diagnosis and recurrence) consistent with the optimal agreement with the gold standard data. For each experiment, overall survival and progression-free survival intervals were calculated using the proxy diagnosis and recurrence time points as illustrated in Fig. 2 (lower half). We assessed the impact of our experiments based on the agreement between the automated results and the gold standard data in three areas:
                           
                              1.
                              Recurrence events (assessed by calculating the proportion of patients in whom the recurrence was correctly detected by the automated data vs. the gold standard).

Overall survival interval (calculated on an individual patient basis); we found the survival intervals in the gold standard and the routine data set, and took the ratio. In line with other work [5,6] a ratio of 0.8–1.2 was taken to represent reasonable agreement.

Progression-free survival interval (calculated individually and presented as a ratio, as for overall survival time).

Since we could not assume that correlation was normally distributed we used Kendall's tau to assess correlation using the statistical software, R [7].

The routine data was supplied as a set of text (CSV) files. We wrote our own software (in Python v3.2) to integrate data from the different data sources, to automatically identify diagnosis and recurrence time points, to calculate survival intervals, and to determine the agreement between the automatic analysis and the gold standard dataset. These results were then exported as a text file for subsequent analysis in the open-source statistics software, R. Fig. 3
                         shows the flow of data through the automated software.

The software requires five sets of input data:
                           
                              •
                              A list of anonymised patient identifiers, used to allow us to link data from different sources

Routine data sources (from HES, SACT, RTDS and PDS)

Look-up tables to translate ICD10 and OPCS codes to text (Appendices 1.1 and 1.2)

A list of procedures that are not considered signs of recurrence (Appendix 1.3)

A list of diagnostic procedures (e.g. biopsy: Appendix 1.4).

@&#RESULTS@&#

122 patients met the inclusion criteria (Fig. 1). The median age was 61 (range 20–82) and 82% of the patients presented with locally advanced disease (stages III–IV). The tumour sites and staging data are presented in Table 1
                     . 40 of the patients developed recurrent or progressive disease. Overall survival was 88% at 1 year and 77% at 2 years. Progression-free survival was 75% and 66% at 1 and 2 years. Our initial, automated, unoptimised method provided: an estimated OS of 87% and 77% and PFS of 87% and 78%: 21 of the 40 patients with recurrent disease were correctly identified and 19 were missed; of the 82 patients who did not develop a recurrence, 77 were correctly identified and 5 were incorrectly identified.

We investigated the impact of backdating the date of diagnosis and recurrence to the date of biopsy, radiotherapy treatment or date of presentation with metastatic disease. The results of this are summarised in Table 2
                           . Backdating to the date of biopsy improved the number of patients in whom the dates of diagnosis and recurrence were in agreement with gold-standard data, as did backdating to the start of radiotherapy. Backdating to a diagnosis of metastatic disease had no impact, and we therefore disregarded it in further analysis. Combining backdating to biopsy or start of radiotherapy resulted in a modest improvement in performance above our initial technique, reducing the number of patients where there was significant error (ratio of automated/gold standard outside 0.8–1.2) in OS and PFS interval by 57% and 8% respectively. However, none of the backdating strategies improved the identification of disease recurrence.

Since backdating to biopsy and start of radiotherapy by up to 6 weeks improved performance modestly, we systematically varied the interval from 14 to 70 days, in 14 day increments. On the basis of this, a time interval of 56 days was the shortest interval with the best agreement with the gold standard data for both diagnosis and recurrence (Figs. 4 and 5
                           
                           ). Altering the time intervals used for backdating improved the agreement of dates further, but did not improve the number of patients in whom we detected recurrence.

The results of optimal definition of the interval between one treatment and another to distinguish between planned adjuvant treatment and treatment for recurrent disease are displayed in Table 3
                           . We aimed to minimise the incorrect classification of adjuvant treatment and to maximise correct identification of treatment for recurrent disease. A time interval of 120 days resulted in the fewest recurrence event disagreements (21) and falsely identified recurrence events (n
                           =2 events). This results in an optimal specificity of 97.6% and sensitivity of 52.5% for detecting recurrence events.

Using a 120-day interval to differentiate between planned adjuvant treatment and treatment of recurrent disease also gave the best agreement between the gold standard and automated PFS intervals (Fig. 6
                           ). Since this did not increase the number of recurrences missed and minimised the number incorrectly ascribed (see Table 3), this appears to be the optimal time-period in this group of patients.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

The best agreement between the automated analysis and manual analysis of the gold standard data came from:
                              
                                 1.
                                 Backdating to a diagnostic event to no more than 56 days prior to the first evidence of a H&N cancer diagnosis code.

Backdating to radiotherapy with no time limit.

Assuming that treatment was for recurrent, rather than initial, disease if it occurred more than 120 days following the primary diagnosis.


                           Table 4
                            displays the results of the final optimised automated strategy.

We further stratified the results to see the influence on tumour type on successful identification of recurrence; results displayed in Table 5
                           . We successfully predicted 78% of recurrences in laryngeal cancer, 54% in oropharynx- and 67% in oral cavity cancers. This is probably as laryngeal cancer tends to present at an earlier stage (and in our sample was the subsite with the largest number of patients with stages I and II disease) and therefore recurrences would be amenable to further radical treatment. This suggests that even though most of the patients in our sample had advanced disease, our method would be relatively robust if more early stage cancers were included.

There was good correlation for OS and PFS between the two datasets as displayed in Fig. 7
                        . For OS, Kendall's tau was 0.97 (p-value<0.0001), and for PFS, tau=0.82 (p-value<0.0001).

98% and 82% of patients showed good agreement between the automated technique and Gold standard dataset of OS and PFS respectively (ratio of Gold standard to routine intervals of between 0.8 and 1.2). 61 diagnosis dates out of 122 were correct to the nearest week of the true date. The automated technique correctly assigned recurrence in 101 out of 122 (83%) of the patients. Of the 40 patients who developed a recurrence, 21 were identified by the automated technique. Of these, four dates were perfectly identified, seven were within 1 week and nine were within 1 month of the Gold standard dataset. The automated technique failed to detect 19 patients who developed a recurrence, and incorrectly inferred that two patients had developed a recurrence when they had not.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

We have automated and optimised a novel computer-based approach for estimating disease-recurrence in head and neck cancer through a series of experiments. An earlier pilot study suggested that our approach may have some validity. This study has confirmed its feasibility in a larger group of patients using an automated approach, and has documented the specific impact of a range of automatic backdating strategies on the performance of our approach. The final automated approach successfully identified recurrence status in 83% of patients, and 98% and 82% of patients showed good agreement between the automated technique and gold standard dataset of OS and PFS respectively (ratio of gold standard to routine intervals of between 0.8 and 1.2).

Our optimisation procedure showed small yet measurable improvements in estimating OS and PFS intervals over the unoptimised technique. The diagnosis date was generally later than that for the gold standard by a median of 2 days, and the estimated OS interval was more than 20% different from the gold standard OS interval for only three patients. Backdating to biopsy was found to improve diagnosis date agreement; without backdating to biopsy the routine diagnosis date preceded that for the Gold standard by a median of 5 days.

However, backdating did not improve the proportion of patients who developed recurrent disease but were not detected by our approach. Of the 19 patients with recurrent disease who were missed, 16 (79%) of these failed cases were due to the patient not receiving treatment for their recurrence. One other was because the patient suffered from early recurrence 41 days after primary treatment and so a secondary treatment was assumed, following our automated technique, to be planned primary treatment. Another missed recurrence had an incorrect ICD10 code, and the final missed recurrence was because the surgical treatment of recurrence was miscoded as a reconstructive procedure. Two recurrences were falsely detected in the routine data due to: (i) a wrong diagnosis codes (HN cancer rather than lung cancer) being assigned a radiotherapy treatment, and (ii) a patient receiving treatment coded as chemotherapy one year after primary radiotherapy, which was therefore used as an indication of recurrence by our automated approach. These results are summarised in Table 5
                     .

There are several limitations to this work. Firstly, we have only looked at patients from one cancer centre in the UK, and we have concentrated our work on patients at higher risk of recurrence, rather than using a random sample. It will be important to assess the performance of our system in an unselected population, particularly in those with a lower risk of recurrence. However, we chose to use data which are available at a national level in the UK, and are based on widely used standards (OPCS, ICD-10), so that that they could be reasonably easily replicated. In particular, we have not used clinically important data which are not currently reliably collected in routine care, such as cancer stage. In addition, we accept that our results may not generalise to other populations. Our technique has moderate performance. It is not clear what level or performance is necessary for the technique to be clinically applicable, and previous studies have not examined performance in detail. We suspect that even having broad estimates may be useful, but there are also clear areas for development which are the focus of on-going work.

Aside from the specific problems in this dataset, there are two main problems in using routine health-care data for clinical purposes. The first is that such data, often collected by staff who are not involved in direct clinical care, may not accurately reflect the clinical situation. In our dataset, these were the causes for three of the errors. In theory, these could be reduced by training and increasing clinical involvement (see [8] for a discussion). The second source of error is in the mismatch which occurs in using administrative data for clinical purposes. These data are collected to inform payment and billing operations, rather than clinical care, and using them for clinical purposes often requires some degree of inference. In systematic terms, the development of progressive/recurrent disease is not directly captured in the routine data, and thus we infer recurrence from diagnostic and treatment activity that happens as a result. In this dataset, there was a specific instance where a patient received a high-cost drug regimen in the intensive care unit, which was coded as “chemotherapy”. The degree to which these inferences can be generalised and extended remains unclear, and is to some extent probably disease and health-care system specific.

Previous work in this area is extremely limited. Other authors have shown that routinely collected data can be used to estimate mortality rates, related to either different oncological treatments [9] or following orthopaedic surgical procedures [10]. There has also been work showing that cancer registry data can be used to measure recurrence rates in breast cancer [11]. However, there is very little work on using routinely available procedure-level data to infer disease recurrence. One study examined the use of such data to estimate measures of metastatic disease in breast, prostate and lung cancer [12], and used a combination of ICD-9 codes for diseases and treatment codes for chemotherapy. The other study used patients enrolled in a clinical trial, and looked at their routine health claims data to estimate recurrence and death [13]. They found a good rate of agreement, with the routine healthcare data being able to measure the 5-year disease-free survival rate with a substantial degree of accuracy. In both cases, the authors used a combination of clinical intuition and logically-described criteria to use the routine data to infer recurrence. This approach is similar in principle to our work, although we included a wider range of treatment modalities than either of their studies did, and is the only one to include patients with head and neck cancers.

Our work has focused on head and neck cancer, where local recurrence is relatively common and rarely left untreated. However, we believe that our approach is applicable to other tumour sites, and possibly non-malignant diseases. Although there are some disease-specific aspects to the work (for example, the presentation of disease with initial lymph-node involvement in the neck), the principle of retrospectively assigning a date of diagnosis to a primary tumour based on the (earlier) date of presentation of metastatic disease would seem to be applicable across multiple tumour sites. Similarly, the use of repeated treatments to measure recurrent disease is one that is potentially applicable to a wide variety of conditions where recurrence is a possibility. However, it is restricted to those patients who are able or willing to receive subsequent treatments, and there are a proportion of patients who are either unwilling or unable to undergo further treatment, and thus will not be detected by our approach. Currently, our approach offers reasonable performance in a group of patients who are well enough to undergo initial curative treatment. There remain further possibilities for optimisation, through a more individualised assessment of relapse, and cross-referencing data on overall survival and local recurrence. These, and other developments, remain the subject of further work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We have developed a computer-based automated technique to extract data on relevant clinical events from routine healthcare datasets (HES, SACT, RTDS and PDS). Diagnosis, recurrence and death dates, and date of last follow-up were identified and overall survival and progression free survival intervals were calculated from this data. The automated algorithm was optimised to maximise correct identification of each timepoint, and minimise false identification of recurrence events. We tested our algorithm on 122 patients who had received radical treatment for head and neck cancer; the recurrence status for 82% patients was correctly identified, and in 98% of patients there was acceptable agreement between the routine and gold standard dataset for overall survival intervals (83% for progression free survival). 21 recurrence events were correctly identified out of a total of 40. The 19 who were missed were mainly due to the patient not receiving treatment for their recurrence; secondary treatment was used as an indicator for recurrence in the algorithm. We have demonstrated that our algorithm can be used to automate interpretation of routine datasets to extract survival information for this sample of patients, and the coding schemes and approach that the technique uses opens it up to use at a national level. There is potential to develop this algorithm to sensitise the recurrence dating strategy to contraindications of the patient, and also to perform retrospective analysis by predicting likelihood of recurrence through knowing the final status of the patient.

No authors have been paid for this work, and all declare there are no conflicts of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors are grateful to Primrose Carr and Martyn Turner for their informatics assistance, and to Maria Kilkenny for her insight into the head and neck patient pathway. We would like to thank Meredy Pritchard and Atia Khan for assistance in collating patients for the study, and to the H&N cancer team (both surgical and oncological) at UCH for their interest and support. KR and AG were funded by EPSRC grant EP/F01208X/1.

See Table A.1.1
                     .

See Table A.1.2
                     .

See Table A.1.3
                     .

See Table A.1.4
                     .

@&#REFERENCES@&#

