@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effect of recording site on extracted features of motor unit action potential

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We simulated five motor units for normal, neurogenic and myopathic cases.


                        
                        
                           
                           We investigated the effect of recording sites on electromyography signals.


                        
                        
                           
                           Myopathic cases demonstrated the most prolonged phase duration near the tendon.


                        
                        
                           
                           Highest number of peaks are observed near the tendon in myopathic conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           A new feature referred as number of peaks×spike duration was defined.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Electromyography

Neuromuscular disease

Feature extraction

Motor unit action potential

Innervation zone and tendon

EMG simulator

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Motor unit action potential (MUAP), which consists of individual muscle fiber action potentials (MFAPs), represents the electrical activity of the motor unit. The values of the MUAP features are changed by denervation and reinnervation in neurogenic involvement as well as muscle fiber loss with increased diameter variability in myopathic diseases. The present study is designed to investigate how increased muscle fiber diameter variability affects MUAP parameters in simulated motor units. In order to detect this variation, simulated MUAPs were calculated both at the innervation zone where the MFAPs are more synchronized, and near the tendon, where they show increased temporal dispersion. Reinnervation in neurogenic state increases MUAP amplitude for the recordings at both the innervation zone and near the tendon. However, MUAP duration and the number of peaks significantly increased in a case of myopathy for recordings near the tendon. Furthermore, of the new features, “number of peaks
                     ×
                     spike duration” was found as the strongest indicator of MFAP dispersion in myopathy. MUAPs were also recorded from healthy participants in order to investigate the biological counterpart of the simulation data. MUAPs which were recorded near to tendon revealed significantly prolonged duration and decreased amplitude. Although the number of peaks was increased by moving the needle near to tendon, this was not significant.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The motor unit is the final common pathway for all types of movement and consists of lower motor neuron, its axon and the innervated muscle fibers. Muscle fibers belonging to different motor units intermingle. Bioelectrical activity of the motor unit that is recorded from the muscle fibers during voluntary contraction is known as motor unit action potential (MUAP).

Motor unit action potential is the summation of action potentials coming from the muscle fibers belonging to the same motor unit in the uptake area of the needle electrode [1]. This summation depends on temporal and spatial properties such as innervation order of the muscle fibers, the distance of the needle electrode to the muscle fibers and to the innervation zone [2].

During the examination of a muscle in conventional electromyography, the needle is inserted at a certain point over the muscle which is near to “motor point” [3]. The motor point coincides with the innervation zone for this muscle, that is, the muscle fibers get their motor innervation through motor end plates located in the middle part of a fusiform skeletal muscle. Muscle fiber action potential emerges at the motor end plate and propagates along the muscle fiber towards the tendons in both directions. When the needle is inserted near the motor point, the muscle fiber action potentials are acquired with a brief delay determined by the distance between the needle electrode and the innervation zone [4]. As a result, these action potentials reach the recording electrode with shorter delays in innervation zone when compared with tendon recordings and cause less muscle fiber action potential (MFAP) dispersion leading a shorter MUAP duration. Alternatively, inserting the needle electrode near the tendon rather than the motor point may change the MUAP parameters which are the main interest of the present simulation study.

Needle EMG detects the alterations of motor units in either neurogenic or myopathic disorders. In neurogenic diseases, muscle fibers that belong to the motor unit are denervated because of the loss of motor axon or motor neuron. Some of these denervated muscle fibers located in the area of overlapping intact motor unit territory can be reinnervated by the collateral sprouts of terminal axons. This collateral reinnervation process by sprouting is limited to the overlapping areas between the intact and denervated motor units [5]. Reinnervated muscle fibers have immature motor end plates causing irregular neuromuscular transmission. Furthermore, new MFAPs are added to the MUAP. Irregular neuromuscular transmission and the newly added MFAPs increase the MFAP dispersion and the number of phases causing a complex MUAP waveform which has prolonged duration. However, motor unit territory remains relatively the same. The reinnervation process increases the muscle fiber density at the overlapping areas and clustering occurs. Thus, more muscle fibers from the same motor unit are detected within the uptake area of the needle electrode yielding higher MUAP amplitudes [6].

In myopathic diseases, the number of muscle fibers within the motor unit territory is decreased and the remaining ones demonstrate increased variability in diameter. Myopathic MUAPs are usually short in duration and low in amplitude. However, if the recording needle encounters a muscle fiber with an increased diameter, MUAP amplitude increases yet their duration remains short [6]. Motor unit diameter decreases and electrically silent areas appear within the territory due to the muscle fiber loss [7]. Especially in chronic stages, some myopathic motor units reveal long duration, complex MUAPs with dispersed phases which may cause confusion while differentiating myopathy from neurogenic involvement [8–12]. Advanced EMG techniques such as “Macro EMG” should be used in order to make correct diagnosis [13].

The features that are valuable for diagnosing neurogenic or myopathic motor unit changes such as MUAP amplitude and duration have been defined relying on conventional EMG recording in which the needle electrode is inserted near the innervation zone [1]. However, conventional needle EMG lacks of showing the features that occurred due to the changes at the MFAP propagation which mostly depend on the fiber diameter. The propagation velocity of a muscle fiber's potential was calculated by the formula [14]:
                        
                           
                              
                                 Propagation velocity
                                    
                                 (
                                 m/s
                                 )
                                 =
                                 3.7
                                 +
                                 0.05
                                 (
                                 diameter
                                    
                                 (
                                 
                                    μ
                                 
                                 m
                                 )
                                 −
                                 55
                                 )
                              
                           
                        
                     In an intact motor unit, muscle fiber diameter variation is insignificant; however, there is a considerable variation among them especially in cases of myopathy [14]. As the increased variation in diameters results in variation among MFAP propagation velocity, the muscles of patients with myopathic disease are expected to have measurable differences between the MUAPs recorded from the two recording sites; the motor point and near the tendon.

Previous studies reported attempts to record and analyze MUAPs in various locations outside the innervation zone.

In 1988, Nandedkar et al. simulated motor units and calculated MUAPs by using a concentric needle electrode. They examined how MUAP features are determined by the displacement of the needle in the vicinity of the innervation zone [14].

In another study, Nandedkar et al. investigated MUAP features where the needle was placed proximally or distally to the muscle fibers in a certain motor unit territory. The MUAPs were recorded from the biceps muscles of normal subjects, as well as patients with neuropathy and myopathy [15].

Nandedkar and Sanders made a simulation study about myopathic motor unit action potentials in 1989. They created a normal motor unit and then altered its features to create four different scenarios for simulating myopathic conditions. The MUAPs were calculated from three different distances from the innervation zone at the same motor unit. They found that both muscle fiber loss and increased fiber diameter variability are required to simulate complex MUAPs [16].

Falck et al. studied the influence of the recording site within the biceps muscle on MUAPs in a group consisting of healthy subjects. They made recordings from 4 different sites in the muscle; middle superficial, middle deep, distal superficial and distal deep. They found a significant difference of MUAP features between the superficial middle and deep distal parts. Their study revealed that if the recording was done at the end-plate region, MUAP dispersion and duration would be less compared to those recorded from a distance more than 20mm away from the endplate due to temporal dispersion of MFAPs [17].

Stålberg and Karlsson made a simulation study using a normal muscle model in 2001. They revealed the effect of distance from end-plate in addition to many other features. They started calculating MUAPs on top of the innervation zone and moved the needle to the tendon in 6 consecutive steps with 10-mm displacements. They showed that MUAP amplitude decreased whereas the duration and the number of phases increased by moving the electrode towards the tendon [18].

Brownell and Bromberg studied the effect of intramuscular needle position on MUAP metrics in 2007. They used two different models to simulate a normal motor unit. They found a significant decrease in amplitude and area by displacing the needle electrode near the tendon. The number of turns and phases significantly increased. Nevertheless the duration did not significantly increase. They also recorded MUAPs from the biceps muscles of five healthy subjects, five patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and just one patient with dermatomyositis (DM). They showed that the changes in MUAP metrics are less prominent in biologic data and came to the conclusion that the electrode position is unlikely to affect the clinical interpretation [19].

This study aims to:
                        
                           a.
                           Calculate the normal, neurogenic and myopathic simulated MUAPs both from near to innervation zone and near to tendon at certain points in the motor unit territory.

Show how the MUAP features were changed by moving the needle towards to tendon.

Define new features of MUAP to support the differential diagnosis of myopathy.

Trace the same motor units’ activity for biological recordings at both recording sites.

Search the effect of high-pass filtering with different cut-off frequencies over the simulated MUAP signals for both calculation sites.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

A new dataset was prepared by using EMG Simulator v3.6, developed by Stålberg and Karlsson in 2000 (Keypoint Club). In this simulator, motor unit and muscle fiber properties can be set. More than one motor unit can be added and up to six different motor unit action potentials can be observed. Contraction level can also be adjusted.

Three different scenarios were created by considering definitive properties of neuromuscular diseases. These scenarios consist of normal, neurogenic and myopathic cases respectively as shown in Table 1
                        . Five different motor units were generated for each scenario.

Motor units for normal cases have 2.5mm territory radius and 100 muscle fibers. Fiber diameter was 50±5μm, motor end plate position was ±1mm and jitter value was determined as 20μs [18].

For motor units in neurogenic cases, motor unit radius was selected as 2.5mm and fiber diameter was again selected as 50±5μm. However, the number of muscle fibers was increased from 100 to 350–450 by adding new muscle fibers to simulate moderate reinnervation with collateral sprouting. Newly added muscle fibers were placed near to each other to simulate the restriction of reinnervation by collateral sprouting to certain fascicule [6,7,20,21]. They were placed randomly to create patchy areas with increased fiber density in some parts of motor unit to demonstrate reinnervation with collateral sprouting. The remaining part of the motor unit territory which lacks of reinnervation shows normal fiber density. These newly added muscle fibers had wider innervation zone in order to reflect the scattering of newly formed motor end plates. For the 5 simulated neurogenic motor units, two of them had innervation zones of ±3mm, and three of them had ±5mm. These newly formed motor end plates designed to show higher jitter values up to 100μs as a sign for irregular neuromuscular transmission [22]. All of the newly added fibers belonging to same patchy area had the same high jitter value up to 100μs. There were 3 to 4 reinnervation areas in a particular motor unit territory. These different reinnervation areas showed different jitter values from each other but they had the same high jitter within the same area.

In myopathic cases, number of fibers was decreased to a value between 30 and 40 in order to simulate the loss of muscle fibers which is independent of spatial position. Motor unit radius was selected as 1–1.5mm to reflect the muscle fiber loss from the periphery of the motor unit territory. Fiber diameters were selected between 20 and 75μm (35±15 to 50±25μm) in order to simulate the increased fiber size variability. Motor end plate location was ±1mm. Jitter value was determined as 20μs [16,22].

In the simulator, concentric needle electrode was chosen for MUAP calculations which were achieved by placing the needle to seventeen different locations within a motor unit territory. The sites where simulated MUAPs were calculated from was kept the same for all motor units in each scenario in order to minimize the bias in MUAP features caused by needle placement. Initially, calculations were made by inserting the needle 5-mm away from the innervation zone. Afterwards, the needle was moved 5cm in a longitudinal plane toward the tendon while conserving the same 17 sites for simulated MUAP calculations in transverse plane. Fig. 1
                         illustrates these 17 sites at the transverse plane and the placement of needle electrode near to innervation zone as well as near to tendon.

Hence, 17 MUAPs were calculated for each of 5 motor units for each of the three scenarios, both near the innervation zone and near the tendon.

These calculations were established by adjusting high-pass filter setting in the simulator. First, signals were calculated without filtering and then they were calculated using high pass filter with 1-kHz and 2-kHz cut-off frequencies respectively.

The dataset formed in this manner includes overall 510 unfiltered MUAPs consisting of 170 MUAPs for each scenario. Half of the MUAPs were calculated near the innervation zone and the other half were calculated near the tendon. By changing the high pass filter's cut-off frequency to 1kHz, 510 MUAPs were derived and further increasing the cut-off frequency to 2kHz, 510 more MUAPs were derived.

Recordings are made from 2 healthy participants to search how the MUAP changes by moving the recording needle from innervation zone to near tendon. These participants are already the authors of this article. Recordings were done with a two channel electromyograph (Synergy, Medelec) by setting the high-pass filter's cut-off frequency to 2Hz. Two 37-mm concentric needle electrodes were inserted to biceps muscle separated from each other with a distance of 3cm. One needle was placed 0.5cm near to innervation zone and the other one placed near to tendon. The point over the skin where the motor response of biceps muscle was recorded with an initial electronegative phase was marked and accepted as the innervation zone elicited by stimulating the musculocutaneous nerve that innervates the biceps muscle. Needle which was placed near to innervation zone was attached to first channel and the activity over the first channel was used to trigger both sweeps in order to acquire time-locked MUAP activity from both channels. The second needle which was attached to second channel was placed near to tendon and properly handled to record the activity of the same motor unit as a time-locked MUAP. Slight contraction level was achieved to recruit a few motor units in order to pick the time-locked MUAPs easily. Also, at this contraction level, subjects experienced less pain. Presence of a time-locked MUAP activity on both channels assured that they reflect the activity of the same motor unit recorded from 2 different points in the same muscle. By changing slightly the orientation of the needles, it was aimed to record the MUAP signal with the highest amplitude and the shortest rise time to ensure that the needles were closely positioned to the fibers of the active motor unit for both recording sites. A total of 12 normal MUAP pairs were recorded.

Motor unit properties and the location of recording needle electrode determine the summation of MFAPs which may eventually lead to either a simple or more complex MUAP. Temporal and spatial features determine in what extend of a single MFAP contributes to MUAP. Namely, the order of innervation of single MFAPs and the time for neuromuscular transmission depict the MUAP configuration in temporal domain. Whether a muscle fiber is located in the territory of recording needle's uptake area and if so, how close the muscle fiber to recording needle as well as how near the position of end-plate to recording site is the contributors for spatial domain.

Five MUAP features are determined for this study. These are maximum amplitude, spike duration at maximum amplitude, number of peaks, maximum amplitude×spike duration, and number of peaks×spike duration.
                        
                           a.
                           
                              Maximum amplitude: Maximum amplitude of the upward deflection at the positive side of the baseline.


                              Spike duration: Time between the first left and the last right local minimums of the MUAP.


                              Number of peaks: The sum of the negative peaks of the second derivative of the signal.


                              Maximum amplitude
                              ×
                              spike duration: Maximum amplitude multiplied by spike duration.


                              Number of peaks
                              ×
                              spike duration: Number of peaks multiplied by spike duration.

For obtaining the first derivative of the signal, +1 is assigned to the ascending (rising) signals and −1 is assigned to the descending (falling) signals. When the second order derivative is applied, negative and positive peaks of the signals are revealed. The process of obtaining the second order derivative of the signal is given in Fig. 2
                     .

The second order derivative of the signal can be used to count the number of peaks and also to calculate the spike duration. No threshold was used to define a peak because the simulated signals were noise-free so if there is a peak in the signal it is a real peak and it should be counted.

The features calculated above are used to compute the “maximum amplitude×spike duration” and the “number of peaks×spike duration”. The steps of feature extraction algorithm are given below:
                        
                           Feature 1
                                 
                                    -
                                    Select first fired MUAP from each signal.

Maximum Amplitude=Find the maximum amplitude for that signal

Feature 2
                                 
                                    -
                                    Find the first left local minimum and the last right local minimum according to the location of maximum amplitude for each signal.

Spike Duration=Right minimum−Left minimum

Feature 3
                                 
                                    -
                                    Find the second order derivative for each signal.

Number of Peaks=Count of positive values for that signal

Feature 4
                                 
                                    -
                                    Maximum amplitude×spike duration

Feature 5
                                 
                                    -
                                    Number of Peaks×spike duration

Biological MUAPs were exported as “txt” files from the EMG instrument (Medelec, Synergy). Unlike the simulation data, biological signal contained single MUAP in each trace. Therefore, there was no need to select the first fired MUAP from each signal.

Before extracting the features from biological signals, they must be filtered from noise to make the calculations correctly. The algorithm of extracting features for biological signals is given as:
                        
                           -
                           Noise reduction with wavelet transform

Smoothing with alpha-trim filtering

Windowing to pass over baseline noise

Alpha-Trim filtering is applied to smooth signals after noise reduction. Filtering window is used as 1×5. Maximum and minimum values of these 5 samples are discarded that inside the window. The average of these remaining 3 samples is calculated and this value is replaced in the new signal at that location where the window is placed. After that the window is moved one sample and these previous steps will be done again until the window is placed at the last sample. When the filtering is done the form of the signal is corrected. Fig. 4
                      shows the EMG signal after alpha-trim filtering.

Even though lots of filtering is done there can be noise present at the baseline. It is not possible to obtain a noise-free signal in biological recordings. For determining the spike duration and number of peaks correctly this baseline noise should be passed over and the local minimum locations should be found. A five sample long window is used to detect the ascending (rising) or descending (falling) of the signal. First, the window is placed to the first sample of the signal. Maximum and minimum values of these five samples are determined. If the difference between these maximum and minimum values is greater than ±10μV that means the signal started to rise or fall and the signal will be processed from that location. If the difference is lower than ±10μV that means the change is not enough and it is baseline noise. The window is moved one sample to the right and the process continues until a change that greater than 10μV is found. After a location is found like that criteria this location is marked as left point. Then the window is placed to the last sample of the signal and right point is determined using same method. Signal processing for feature calculation is done between these left and right points. Threshold is determined as 10μV because at the resting state, muscle fibers show low amplitude (<10μV) activity inside the motor end plate region [1] which is one of the contributors for the baseline noise.

Second order derivative is applied between these points. Number of peaks and spike duration can be calculated using second derivative. The other calculations of features were the same as the simulation data.

Mean values and standard deviations of MUAP parameters calculated near the innervation zone and near the tendon were computed for simulated normal, neurogenic and myopathic motor units. How the features changed when the needle was displaced from innervation zone to the tendon was expressed by calculating the differences between them. Normal, neurogenic and myopathic groups were compared by using ANOVA and Tukey tests. Features extracted from biological MUAPs were compared with paired t-test.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The MUAP parameters calculated without filtering are shown in Table 2
                        . At the innervation zone, the mean value of maximum amplitudes for normal motor units was 438.96μV. For myopathic motor units, the mean of maximum amplitudes was 393.27μV. Neurogenic motor units yielded the highest value such as 1183.61μV. When the needle was displaced near the tendon, the mean values of maximum amplitudes decreased for all three groups, with neurogenic cases still having the highest values.

The mean values of spike duration at the innervation zone for normal, neurogenic and myopathic motor units were 1.36ms, 2.08ms and 1.78ms, respectively. By moving the needle near the tendon, spike duration increased to 2.58ms, 3.41ms and 8.19ms for normal, neurogenic and myopathic motor units, respectively. In this case, myopathic motor units revealed the most prolonged spike duration. Fig. 5
                         shows an example of how the spike duration changed when the needle was displaced from the innervation zone to near the tendon.

At the innervation zone, the calculated mean values for the number of peaks were 1.39, 2.32 and 1.86 for normal, neurogenic and myopathic motor units, respectively. The number of peaks increased when the needle electrode was moved near the tendon. For normal motor units, the mean value increased to 3.13 whereas for the neurogenic motor units it was increased to 4.47. The most striking change in the number of peaks occurred for myopathy which reached a mean value of 7.21.

When the needle was displaced from innervation zone to near the tendon, a significant difference about “maximum amplitude”, “spike duration” and “number of peaks” features occurred among three groups. The neurogenic group was significantly different (p
                        <0.0001) from normal and myopathic groups in terms of the maximum amplitude values for both sites as shown in Fig. 6
                        A. Although the mean amplitude tends to decrease when the calculation point of MUAPs is moved near to tendon, some MUAPs revealed higher amplitudes. This observation depends how the MFAPs are synchronized. Main determinant of MFAP synchronization near to innervation zone is the time spent for the generation of MFAP at the neuromuscular junction. However, when the calculation point is moved near to tendon another factor which is the difference of conduction velocity of individual muscle fiber is added. Signals may be high in amplitude if they are summated properly, or low in amplitude if they cancel out each others’ phases. The observation of the peak amplitude differences less than zero might be explained as: the poorly synchronized MFAPs near to innervation zone get a good summation as the calculating point is moved near to tendon because of the slow conduction velocity of the muscle fiber which has a shorter time for MFAP generation at the level of neuromuscular junction.

The myopathic motor units revealed the most significant increase in spike duration and in number of peaks when the needle was placed near the tendon (p
                        <0.0001). Fig. 6B shows the spike duration and Fig. 6C shows the number of peaks for normal, neurogenic and myopathic cases for both recording sites and the differences between them.

The “maximum amplitude×spike duration” had the highest value for neurogenic cases at the innervation zone while the normal and myopathic cases revealed fairly low but almost similar values to each other. When the needle was inserted near the tendon, myopathic cases showed a dramatic increase in “Maximum amplitude×spike duration” because of the pronounced prolongation of spike duration. Likewise, the “number of peaks×spike duration” was found significantly higher in the myopathic group when the needle was placed near the tendon, reflecting the increase in both parameters (p
                        <0.0001). Fig. 7
                         shows the “number of peaks×spike duration” parameter for the three groups when the MUAPs were calculated at the innervation zone and near the tendon.

Increasing the cut-off frequency of the high-pass filter altered the calculated parameters of MUAP. “Maximum amplitude” and “spike duration” decreased in all three groups for both sites. The number of peaks for the MUAPs calculated without filtering was between 1–2 for normal motor units (1.39±0.49), 1–5 for neurogenic motor units (2.32±0.92), and 0–3 for myopathic motor units (1.86±0.74) at the innervation zone. By setting the cut-off frequency of high pass filter to 1kHz, the mean number of peaks for the MUAPs calculated at innervation zone was found as 1.6±0.54 for normal, 2.8±1.08 for neurogenic and 2.05±0.9 for myopathic motor units. Further increasing the cut-off frequency up to 2kHz revealed almost the same values for all motor units. By moving the needle near to tendon, number of peaks for normal and neurogenic MUAPs was almost doubled, however, for myopathic MUAPs number of peaks was increased 3–4 times for all filter settings. Counting the number of peaks from the MUAPs calculated near to tendon with 1 or 2kHz cut-off frequency revealed a moderate increase for normal and neurogenic motor units but not for the myopathic motor units in which the number of peaks remained almost the same compared to calculations without filtering. In other words, myopathic motor units revealed already increased number of peaks near the tendon due to prominent temporal dispersion of the MFAPs caused by high variability among the diameters of muscle fibers regardless of the filter setting. Although increasing the cut-off frequency of high-pass filter to 2kHz caused to decrease in the amplitude of the signal in certain locations within the motor unit territory with respect to WOF and 1kHz high-pass filtering, it also facilitates to focus on the fibers closest to the detection surface of the electrode.

The mean values of spike duration and the amplitude at the innervation zone for normal biological MUAPs were 3.74 (±0.68)ms and 0.15 (±0.06)mV, respectively. Mean values of spike duration and the amplitude for the MUAPs recorded near to tendon were 5.76 (±1.26)ms and 0.08 (±0.03)mV, respectively. Fig. 8
                         represents the activity of the same motor unit recorded as time-locked MUAP signals from innervation zone and near tendon. Increase in duration and decrease in amplitude values were extremely significant. Although the biologic MUAPs recorded near to tendon revealed increased number of peaks comparing to the ones recorded near to innervation zone (2.58±1.31 vs 3±1.35), the difference was not statistically significant.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, the changes in the calculated MUAP parameters of simulated normal, neurogenic and myopathic motor units were investigated by inserting the concentric needle electrode either at the innervation zone or near the tendon. The simulation data was partially supported with biological MUAPs as well. It is hypothesized that spike duration and the number of peaks must increase when the needle was displaced from the innervation zone to near the tendon. The differences between the conduction velocities of MFAPs should lead this finding due to the increased temporal dispersion which could only be noticed when recordings are taken away from the zone where they are innervated [25]. Simulated motor units revealed the increase in spike duration as well as the number of peaks as expected. Furthermore, it is emphasized that the myopathic MUAPs have the longest spike duration accompanied by the highest number of peaks when they were calculated near the tendon. Increased variability of muscle fiber diameter in myopathic motor units should be the underlying mechanism for this finding. Needle EMG examination during voluntarily contraction records the summated activity of muscle fiber action potentials belonging to the same motor unit so called “motor unit action potential”. Two major pathologies affecting the motor unit architecture are known as neurogenic and myopathic disorders. One should decide whether the pathology is neurogenic or myopathic by checking the MUAP features. On conventional EMG recordings, needle electrode is placed near to innervation zone. This type of recording gives valuable information to be used in diagnosis of motor unit disorders. On the other hand, because of the MUAP is a summated activity of individual MFAPs, any physiologic or pathologic factor which changes the degree of summation may yield additional clues about the underlying mechanism. In addition to conventional method, recording of EMG activity near to tendon simply achieves this by changing the degree of MFAP summation which is a function of muscle fiber conduction. As the MFAPs get greater summation, MUAP shows shorter spike duration. Contrary, less summation of MFAPs ends with a greater degree of MUAP dispersion. If a MUAP shows greater dispersion than the healthy motor units exhibit by moving the recording needle from innervation zone to near tendon, it can be estimated that the individual muscle fibers conduct the action potentials with a great variation among them. The increased variation of conduction velocity among the individual muscle fibers is a function of muscle fiber's internal resistance which is determined by the muscle fiber diameter, in part. The increased diameter variation among the individual muscle fibers is a hallmark for myopathic motor units, especially in chronic stages. In other words, two-sided recordings of MUAP activity, one from near to innervation zone and another from near to tendon, gives information about the diameter variance among the muscle fibers whom their action potentials summate to form MUAP. This opens another avenue to clinical neurophysiologists in practicing the architecture of disordered motor unit, based on the bioelectrical observations.

The increase in duration and the decrease in amplitude for the simulated MUAPs were supported with the biologic MUAPs, at least for the normal motor units. However, the increase observed in number of peaks was not significant for the biological signal. Although the biological signal consisted of the time-locked MUAPs derived from the same motor unit, these signals were recorded from different depths. Therefore, the number of muscle fibers contributing the MUAP activity should be different for both recording sites which might be an explanation for the discrepancy between the simulation and biologic data for the extracted feature of number of peaks.

In their simulation study conducted in 1989 Nandedkar et al. showed how the complexity of the signal and the duration of the MUAP increased depending on the variation in muscle fiber diameter [16]. They simulated a normal motor unit and, by changing the motor unit and muscle fiber parameters step by step, created myopathic condition. However, in their previous study, published in 1988, Nandedkar et al. simulated normal motor units and calculated the MUAPs 10, 20 and 30mm away from the innervation zone [14]. They found that increasing the distance from the innervation zone increased the MUAP phases but the duration was unaffected. In our study, we inspired by these studies which were conducted by Nandedkar et al. We once again showed the increased complexity of myopathic MUAPs by varying the muscle fiber diameter and by moving the needle electrode near to tendon. We also found the spike duration of MUAP which can reflect the dispersion of MFAPs was increased when compared with the calculations near to innervation zone.

Falck and Stålberg studied MUAP parameters in biceps muscles of healthy subjects in 1995 [17]. They recorded MUAPs at the middle third as well as the distal third of the muscle relative to the muscle belly (i.e. innervation zone) for both superficial and deeper levels. They found that recording MUAPs near the innervation zone causes shorter durations reflecting less temporal dispersion. In the discussion part of their manuscript, they pointed out that the duration gets longer as the needle moved further from the innervation zone by referring to the publication of Kaiser and Petersen's [26]. Although they have found prolongation of MUAP duration, the precise distance between the two recording sites (middle third and distal third) was not mentioned. On the other hand, they might have sampled different motor units at these two recording sites, a technical problem which we have avoided from in our simulations by displacing the needle carefully from innervation zone to near the tendon at a precise localization in the transverse plane ensuring that we trace the same motor unit. Moreover, for the biological recordings, we used two recording needles which were placed 3cm away from each other for acquiring time-locked MUAP signal pairs to ensure that the activity was coming from the same motor unit. However, in order to acquire the traces harboring only the time-locked MUAP signal, participants asked to achieve low level of contraction in which low-threshold small motor units were recruited. The amplitudes of MUAPs coming from these motor units were low. For the same reason, concentric needle electrodes were placed close to surface most of the time which would be another factor for low-amplitude MUAPs.

Stålberg and Karlsson introduced the EMG simulator that we used in our study in their paper published in 2001 [18]. They described how the parameters of the motor unit, muscle fiber and recording electrode may affect the calculated MUAP in simulation. They also compared the results of simulated data with the data of actual muscles and concluded that the simulated muscle and the corresponding EMG signal can be used both as a research tool and for teaching. As the needle electrode was moved away from the innervation zone, they showed that the MUAP duration and the number of phases increased. However, they noticed that the prolongation of duration was restricted to 20mm away from the innervation zone. Since we only aimed to compare the features of simulated MUAPs from innervation zone with those near the tendon, we did not examine how the parameters may have changed step by step as they did in their study using 10mm increments. Same authors simulated the pathological situations in their successive paper however they did not consider the effect of the distance from innervation zone [22]. Thanks to their EMG simulator program we found an opportunity to simulate myopathic and neurogenic motor units as well as the normal ones. Thus, we demonstrated that the myopathic motor units with the highest muscle fiber diameter variability showed the most prominent prolongation in spike duration and these motor units also showed the highest number of peaks when the MUAPs were calculated near the tendon.

In a more recent paper published by Brownell and Bromberg in 2007, the effects of needle placement on MUAP parameters were studied [19]. They used two different simulation models (one was from Stålberg and Karlsson's and the other one was from Hamilton-Wright and Stashuk's) and biological data acquired from healthy individuals as well as patients with neurogenic and myopathic involvement. According to their simulated MUAP data, MUAP parameters changed when the site for MUAP calculation was moved away from the innervation zone. They mentioned that the duration and number of phases increased, though, the amplitude decreased. The most affected parameter depending on the distance was amplitude. Interestingly, biological data revealed less striking changes depending on the distance compared to simulation data. Unfortunately, their biological material included only one patient with myopathy which might be insufficient to understand the effect of fiber size variation on MUAP parameters. Brownell and Bromberg's study is somehow different from ours about the inclusion of MUAPs and the calculation of MUAP parameters. They have included only the MUAPs that are greater than the threshold amplitude which was 200μV. They have used same amplitude threshold for both sites namely, near to innervation zone and near to tendon. However, the amplitude may be lower when MUAP calculation was done near to tendon, so we prefer to adapt the threshold. Visual limit of 200μV introduced by them seem too much to us when silent areas are defined as 50μV for scanning EMG recordings [20,21]. They have found similar MUAP durations in their one myopathic patient for both recording sites. In our opinion, an amplitude threshold of 200μV for both sites might contribute this observation. A major difference of our study is that we calculated the features of simulated MUAPs in certain points within a motor unit territory regardless taking into consideration the amplitude. By doing so, all simulated motor units were sampled from the same sites within their territory. That's why we prefer 50μV amplitude threshold like the one used in scanning EMG in which the scanning needle sometimes comes close to muscle fibers and sometimes not. By using amplitude threshold, we floored the signals to zero that are under 50μV for MUAPs that calculated near the innervation zone. When the calculation is made near to tendon, we used an adaptive threshold that its value is changed proportionally by dividing the MUAP's amplitude near the tendon to near the innervation zone. We found only one “silent area” for both sites in simulated myopathic motor units.

An innovative aspect of this study was the introduction of a new indicator of increased temporal dispersion among the MFAPs which we called “number of peaks×spike duration”. Muscle fiber action potentials travel faster over the thick fibers compared to the thin ones since the diameter is inversely proportional to the internal resistance of the muscle fiber [27,28], which is why this feature was the most distinctive indicator for myopathic cases.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Calculating the simulated MUAPs near the tendon demonstrate the most prolonged spike duration and the highest number of peaks in myopathic conditions reflecting the increased temporal dispersion. The “number of peaks×spike duration” is a new feature of temporal dispersion caused by fiber size variety and is strongly suggestive for myopathic motor units. According to this point of view, near tendon recording of MUAP gives additional clues which are depicting the pathophysiology underlying of myopathic motor units. However, near tendon recording of MUAP activity should be considered as complementary to conventional recordings, and not to be a replacement. Though this study lacks biological data acquired from patients with neurogenic and myopathic diseases, we plan to conduct a subsequent study in which the biological counterpart of the simulated MUAPs will be explored.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors thank Erik Stålberg, MD, PhD, and Lars Karlsson, PhD for developing the EMG Simulator and Keypoint Club for allowing us to utilize in our study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

