@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A comprehensive identification-evidence based alternative for HIV/AIDS treatment with HAART in the healthcare industries

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           To develop an integrated linear–nonlinear feature selection technique to identify the determinants of sustained HAART.


                        
                        
                           
                           To generate a hybrid model based on rough set classifiers to verify its performance.


                        
                        
                           
                           To create a relevant decision rule set of an LEM2 algorithm for specialist physicians as a diagnosis reference.


                        
                        
                           
                           To effectively offer the study findings and results from the given data set to relevant medical institutions and patients.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)

Highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART)

Linear–nonlinear feature selection

Hybrid model

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and Objective
                  The HIV/AIDS-related issue has given rise to a priority concern in which potential new therapies are increasingly highlighted to lessen the negative impact of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) in the healthcare industry. With the motivation of “medical applications,” this study focuses on the main advanced feature selection techniques and classification approaches that reflect a new architecture, and a trial to build a hybrid model for interested parties.
               
               
                  Methods
                  This study first uses an integrated linear–nonlinear feature selection technique to identify the determinants influencing HAART medication and utilizes organizations of different condition-attributes to generate a hybrid model based on a rough set classifier to study evolving HIV/AIDS research in order to improve classification performance.
               
               
                  Results
                  The proposed model makes use of a real data set from Taiwan's specialist medical center. The experimental results show that the proposed model yields a satisfactory result that is superior to the listed methods, and the core condition-attributes PVL, CD4, Code, Age, Year, PLT, and Sex were identified in the HIV/AIDS data set. In addition, the decision rule set created can be referenced as a knowledge-based healthcare service system as the best of evidence-based practices in the workflow of current clinical diagnosis.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study highlights the importance of these key factors and provides the rationale that the proposed model is an effective alternative to analyzing sustained HAART medication in follow-up studies of HIV/AIDS treatment in practice.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is the most severe expression of a spectrum of related disorders due to infection by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [1,2]. HIV infections are caused by two major types of retrovirus: HIV type 1 (HIV-1) and HIV type 2 (HIV-2) [3]. HIV-1 originated in West-Central Africa in the first half of the 20th century and has progressed to become the most widespread AIDS disease due to its lengthy 10 to 12 years latent period. HIV-2 mainly infects less developed countries. HIV causes AIDS, and the HIV virus infects T-helper lymphocytes (i.e., CD4, cluster of differentiation 4, which is a glycoprotein found on the surface of immune cells). The HIV infection entry is a complex and intricate process. The only viral surface protein, Envelope (Env), is composed of a trimer of glycoprotein 120 (gp120, a viral envelope protein) and gp41 (another viral protein) heterodimers. HIV-1 binds with glycoprotein 120 to CD4 T cells and uses gp41 to enter the host T-cells; consequently, the binding to CD4 T cells shifts the conformation of gp120 to allow HIV-1 to bind to co-receptors (two chemokine co-receptors, either CCR5 or CXCR4) expressed on the host cells, and the gp41 sub-unit starts fusion of the virion into the target cell after disassociation of the gp120 [4]. The gp41 includes three domains: an ectodomain (ECD), a transmembrane domain (TMD), and a cytoplasmic domain (CTD), and the gp41 also mediates the processing of the gp160 intermediate as well as the gp120/gp41 complex formation [5]. Furthermore, the HIV viral proteins contain the matrix (MA), capsid (CA), and nucleocapsid (NC) proteins [6], and HIV is spread between CD4 T cells by the three ways of cell-free spread, cell-to-cell spread, and hybrid spreading mechanisms against antiretroviral therapies [7]. In practice, five types of treatments are available to HIV/AIDS patients, including type 1: nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), type 2: non-nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), type 3: protease inhibitors (PIs), type 4: fusion inhibitors (glycopeptides)-gp120/gp41 (CCR5 or CXCR4), and type 5: integrase inhibitors.

Since the cause of HIV infection was first identified in early 1984, HIV/AIDS [8,9] has become one of the most devastating epidemics. Based on the literature [10], the transmission sources of HIV primarily include unprotected sexual intercourse, hypodermic needles, contaminated blood transfusions, and disease transmission from mother to child during pregnancy, delivery, or breastfeeding. In Taiwan, the two primary sources are homosexual acts and drug injections, and few people have acquired HIV/AIDS via blood transfusion. This suggests that the majority of those affected [11] are male patients. Importantly, the increasing trend of HIV/AIDS patients is still an advanced persistent threat to Taiwan's regulators. Thus, HIV/AIDS issues have had a great negative societal impact as both an illness and a source of discrimination, and these issues also have significant adverse economic effects; HIV/AIDS patients will exhaust large amounts of medical resources and increase the national healthcare burden. Thus, prevention of HIV infection is a key strategy to control the spread of disease and to avoid wastage of medical resources. This issue has attracted international medical and political attention and large-scale funding over time [12]. Considerable studies and practices have further formulated HIV treatment guidelines and established clinical prognostic models for tracing the natural history and curative effects of HIV disease [13]. A recent method, known as highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) [14–16], was proposed in 1995 and has performed well in treating HIV opportunistic infections to improve the patient's condition. Analytical studies on HAART revealed that the best time to start the therapy on infected HIV-1 patients is when the measurement of CD4 lymphocytes is over 350 cells/ml, which will result in a high survival rate. There are many key factors that have major effects on the clinical treatment of HIV/AIDS [17]. Thus, complete differentiation of the determinants is an interesting issue. Such meaningful work motivates this study.

In Taiwan, there is a lack of medical analysis and curative effects of HIV/AIDS disease. This shortage may cause inaccurate reactions to the clinical features of AIDS patients, and HIV/AIDS physicians only passively quote literature information on examples studied from abroad. In addition, medical works have encountered the problem of many spurious data features, and the determination of their feature properties as well as medical activities is a time-consuming and costly process and is lagging severely behind [18]. The originated medical data may contain demographic information (registration files), original claim data for reimbursement, and information on health care utilization, across inpatients, outpatients, and physicians, such as inpatient expenditures by admissions records, registry for contracted medical facilities, registry for board-certified specialists, and details of inpatient orders. These data are high-dimensioned and de-identified by scrambling the identification codes of both patients and medical facilities to form the original files of the database used for some specific purposes. These complex non-homogeneous data make it complex to apply the data mining tools used; thus, suitable feature selection methods are necessary in an effort to lower the data dimensionality. Feature selection techniques have been developed and can be simply classified as linear and nonlinear models [19]. The conventional linear method of statistics with data projections is easy to implement and has shown its effectiveness for data visualization and classification in a wide variety of application fields. Recently, numerous nonlinear methods of machine learning have been proposed to properly handle data with complex nonlinear structures; the family of nonlinear algorithms has attracted much attention because it exhibits noteworthy performance in many real-world data sets. On the one hand, the linear feature selection methods are an example of a linearly predictive feature. Swets and Weng [20] proposed a so-called content-based query technique of automatic feature selection for a hierarchical image database at the object recognition level. They demonstrated the applicability of the approach even for large variability within a particular object class. Cheng et al. [21] applied two common feature selection approaches, called data-driven automatic feature selection mechanisms and knowledge-driven expert judgment on a risk prediction of cardiovascular disease data set. Their empirical results suggested that the automatic feature selection mechanism improves the predictive power of a classifier on the majority class. Fauvel et al. [22] used a preprocessing step to extract relevant feature in hyperspectral images analysis for further classification and to prevent the Hughes phenomenon and obtain a satisfactory result. Kuo and Chang [23] proposed a regularized feature extraction (RFE) method and illustrated the importance of the hyperspectral image experiment for a small sample size classification problem, and the best feature extraction was by RFE with nonparametric weighted scatter matrices. Dhir et al. [24] compared information gain with the Fisher criterion for recognition of facial images with different illumination and proved that the information gain criterion gives a slight performance improvement when ICA-based features are used. Xu et al. [25] applied the F-score method of statistics to provide an effective solution for a good accelerating segmentation result on the liver. In the study by Sharma and Paliwal [26], the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) technique was proven to be a very popular method in pattern recognition for the reduced feature space and significantly improved the classification performance. On the other hand, nonlinear feature selection methods usually provide better results and more cost-effective identifiers for a nonlinear cause–effect relationship than linear feature selection methods. Blum and Langley [27] reviewed work in machine learning on feature selection methods for handling data sets containing large amounts of irrelevant information. They introduced some filter approaches, such as Relief and Focus algorithms, and wrapper approaches, such as naive Bayesian classifier and K-nearest neighbor for numeric prediction, which are highly sensitive to irrelevant features. Kohavi and John [28] compared some wrapper approaches to feature subset selection and achieved a significant improvement in accuracy for some data sets in the two families of induction algorithms used, decision trees and naïve Bayes. Casillas et al. [29] presented a genetic feature selection process to integrate a fuzzy rule-based classification system (FRBCS) with high-classification ability. They showed a significant improvement in simplicity, precision, and efficiency on the proposed feature selection processes. Zhao and Tsang [30] used four fuzzy approximation operators defined on a general triangular norm (t-norm) framework with fuzzy rough sets for attribute reduction and demonstrated the effectiveness and correctness of the theoretical contributions. Kuo et al. [31] applied a kernel-based nonparametric weighted feature extraction (NWFE), known as the KNWFE method, for extracting hyperspectral image features, and they showed that the KNWFE provides prominent performance when compared to the NWFE, decision-boundary feature extraction, independent component analysis, kernel-based principal component analysis, and generalized discriminant analysis. Feki et al. [32] used support vector machines and Gaussian Bayes models for both toy data and a real-life problem of banks classification and demonstrated a significant improvement of prediction performance using only a few variables. Cho and Kuru [33] used two different tree models, C4.5 and CART, of a decision tree approach for use in the dimensionality reduction and classification of electronic nose (EN) data. This study proved that the decision tree is a promising technique for a pattern recognition system for EN data in terms of the above two functions as a dimensionality reduction method. Huang et al. [34] presented an ACO feature selection method measured by the minimum redundancy maximum relevance criterion (ACO-mRMR) to classify hand motion surface electromyography (sEMG) signals, and the study results showed that the proposed ACO-mRMR method achieved considerably high classification rates in an sEMG motion classification task.

From the above information, traditional statistical methods have yielded satisfactory results in medical application fields [35] in the past decades, and the artificial intelligence (AI) methods of machine learning are also of emerging interest and are widely applied in different forms and solutions, such as medical applications [36–38]. Thus, there is an urgent need to combine AI and statistical techniques in analyzing the related clinical data on HAART to fill the emergent HIV/AIDS knowledge gap, and this study thus examines the related risk factors influencing HAART medication and provides effective background information from Taiwan's teaching hospitals. In response to the emergent problems described above, this study has four extensive objectives: (1) to develop an integrated linear–nonlinear feature selection technique to identify the determinants influencing sustained HAART medication; (2) to generate a hybrid model based on rough set classifiers to verify its performance; (3) to create a relevant decision rule set of an LEM2 algorithm for specialist physicians as a diagnosis reference for clinical care to facilitate follow-up treatment and to provide a double-check on HIV/AIDS therapy; and (4) critically, to effectively offer the study findings and results from the given data set to relevant medical institutions and patients.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

This section introduces the human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immune deficiency syndrome and its treatments, highly active anti-retroviral therapy, feature selection methods and their medical service applications, the rough set classifier, the LEM2 algorithm of rule induction, and other classifier approaches.

Epidemiology is the study of the basic science of public health. In epidemiological domains, the known medical virus/disease term is always given the abbreviation HIV/AIDS. UNAIDS [39] issued the latest report on the AIDS epidemic, indicating that the penetration of AIDS treatment had increased to 64% worldwide, and the mortality of AIDS had decreased to 25% during 2005–2011. AIDS was first clinically observed and recognized by the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [40] in 1981, and the HIV infection originated in West-Central Africa, where it was identified in early 1984. Initially, AIDS cases were documented as a cluster of injecting drug users and homosexual men with no known cause of impaired immunity, who showed symptoms of pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), a rare opportunistic infection [11]. AIDS is the most severe form of HIV infection, with the development of at least one serious complicating illness or a substantial decrease in the number (count) of CD4 lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). AIDS is a very complex disease; it always contingently causes other infectious diseases when the CD4 lymphocyte count is below 200 cells/mm3. Thus, HIV is a virus that specifically attacks and weakens the human immune system and can infect other people via blood, body fluids, and high concentrations of HIV exchange of body fluids. Although HIV has been widely studied in various fields, including the related literature [41–43], the treatment of HIV/AIDS patients is complex and requires a rigorous sustained commitment from the patients. The most prominent and effective treatments of HIV/AIDS patients are studied by both academics and practitioners from time to time, such as HAART and related glycoprotein (gp) synthetic inhibitors, particularly for gp41 against HIV-1.

The related gp41 synthetic inhibitors against HIV-1 have been recorded in many studies. First, Wild et al. [44] indicated that alpha-helical peptides homologous to the leucine zipper domain of the gp41 had significant antiviral results against HIV-1. Rimsky et al. [45] accordingly proved that mutations in the amino-terminal heptad repeat region of the gp41 had a successful medication to resistance to early alpha-helical inhibitors. Armand-Ugón et al. [46] recognized that the gp41 subunit of HIV-1 targeted as an antiviral therapy, as well as C34 (a well-characterized C-terminal heptad-repeat (CHR) peptide), can mimic the heptad repeat 2 in the ectodomain of gp41. Weiss [47] further showed that the gp160, a polyprotein precursor associated with gp120 and gp41, is primed for viral entry; the transmembrane subunit of the former fuses host-cell and viral membranes to deliver the viral core into the cell cytoplasm, and the surface subunit of bipartite envelope glycoprotein (Env) of the latter binds cell receptors to attach the virus to target cells and regulate viral entry. Liu et al. [48] proved that the development of small molecule HIV entry inhibitors by targeting the gp41 NHR (N-heptad repeat), NHR trimer, and CHR is a promising approach to inhibit HIV-mediated membrane fusion. Pan et al. [49] described how peptides derived from the region, such as fusion inhibitors T20 (Enfuvirtide) and C34, inhibit HIV-1 fusion by interacting with the gp41 fusion intermediate, and a potent synergistic effect results in a new therapeutic strategy for HIV/AIDS patients. Wilen et al. [50] showed that the crystal structure of the gp41 ectodomain and of the ectodomain partnered with a C34 inhibitory peptide revealed that the fusion-active conformation of gp41 was a six-helix bundle in which three N helices form an interior. Nomura et al. [51] reported that a synthetic peptide mimetic of the trimeric form of the gp41 showed a significantly increased inhibitory operation against HIV-1 and demonstrated a useful strategy for the design of effective inhibitors against viral infections. Jardine et al. [52] indicated that vaccine development to induce broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs) against HIV-1 has a global health priority, and potent VRC01-class bNAbs against the CD4 binding site of HIV gp120 have been isolated from HIV-1-infected individuals. The results of a study by Li et al. [53] indicated that the fourth variable (V4) region of HIV-1 tended to have a shorter length, fewer potential N-linked glycosylation sites (PNGS), greater evolutionary distance, and a lower negative net charge when HIV-1 isolates switched from a co-receptor usage preference for CCR5- to CXCR4-tropic virus entry. Finally, Rawi et al. [54] provided a new dimension of information that the identified residue couplings are important not only in assisting the gp120 and gp41 coordinate structure prediction, but also in designing a new and effective entry inhibitor that incorporates mutation patterns of HIV-1 Env.

HAART is used to treat HIV/AIDS; it is a variety of HIV drug therapy that is resistant against HIV to cure AIDS in practice, which reduces the amount of the virus, enhances the immunity function, assures the quality to improve survival rates, and reduces the production of drug-resistant bacteria. HAART recommendation regimens typically consist of a combination of NRTIs and NNRTIs, and a combination of one or two types of PIs (such as Crixvan, Norvir, and Fortovase) of anti-HIV drug [40]. After combinations of NRTIs, NNRTIs, and PIs, HAART can provide outstanding benefits in terms of HIV-induced morbidity and mortality [55]; however, a limitation of NRTIs is that they can induce side-effects of differing severity and frequency [56,57]. In clinical practice, although HAART is useful to reduce the volume of HIV, the incidence of HIV infection in patients, and mortality rates, it can only suppress virus replication to reduce the spread of infection during the entire treatment process, but cannot completely kill the HIV virus. Thus, the patient needs to continue to receive HAART medication; critically, it is recommended that HAART should not be interrupted.

Based on the information in Subsections 2.1 and 2.2 above, although most of these approaches for processing the treatment of HIV/AIDS are being researched in practice and achieving satisfactory results, the HAART approach is frequently used in the practice of medical works as well as based on expert advice. Therefore, this study adopts the HAART as the subject of research. A comparison of HAART and the other gp41 synthetic inhibitors will be explored in the future.

In the practical data available, there always exists a problem of high-dimensional data features, particularly for medical research. The high-dimensional data are highly complex and create difficulties in modeling time and memory calculation, and are moreover incapable of being interpreted or clearly explained in the application fields; furthermore, a known Hughes phenomenon [58] simultaneously arises for data with limited training samples. This phenomenon is that the volume of the space increases vastly, leading to sparsely available data when the dimensionality increases. This sparsity is a problematic issue in many methods and prevents general data organization strategies from being efficient and acquiring statistical significance. Fortunately, a good solution to solve the curse of dimensionality can be achieved by preprocessing the data into a lower-dimensional form, by the statistical effectiveness of linear-dimension reduction methods, such as principal component analysis (PCA), and by changing the nonlinear-robust selecting algorithms applied in various real-life application fields without losing significant information. The data preprocessing approach is used first to search for irrational or redundant features and data that need to be excluded, and the linear and nonlinear approaches work on various statistical and machine learning method data to reduce the need to organize spurious dimension properties in order to obtain statistically sound and reliable results to determine the feature importance. Thus, in application fields of machine learning, knowledge discovery in databases and the process of mining knowledge rules from the given data are important tasks. One critical aspect of knowledge discovery processes is feature selection. Feature selection is necessary and useful to assess attribute usefulness, attribute correlation, and to remove redundant attributes. The feature selection techniques aim to find meaningful low-dimensional representations of high-dimensional data to reduce the training time and to increase classification accuracy. Reducing the number of attributes can simplify the classification rules and prediction models [59]. Three important reasons for feature selection are: (1) model simplification, (2) ease of interpretation, and (3) faster model induction and structural knowledge.

It is worthwhile to further review different types of literature regarding feature selection-based algorithms or models. A good type of example, feature selection methods in QSAR (quantitative structure–activity relationship) models, in the healthcare domain is introduced in this study for feature selection to reduce high-dimensional data. To introduce first the QSAR models used for biological explorations is essential for a better understanding of feature selection techniques. QSAR analysis uses a mathematical model to correlate the activity of a molecule with molecular descriptors for a certain biological property. Goodarzi et al. [60] reported that QSAR studies have attracted much attention in drug discovery and development due to their advantages of saving substantial time and human resources in the application domains. Importantly, the literature review of 182 papers in this study by Goodarzi et al. [60] demonstrated a wide applicability across different feature selection techniques applied in QSAR modeling. They extensively categorize feature selection techniques into the three major methods: filter, wrapper, and hybrid. In simple terms, the filter method performs an unsupervised feature selection, and the other two methods involve supervised feature selection. Based on the literature [60], the linear or nonlinear classifiers apply an objective function based on the optimization criteria to select biological descriptors, and both the linear and nonlinear classifiers are thus classified as wrapper techniques. Many filter models used in QSAR studies are included, such as Fisher score [61], information gain [62], odds ratio [63], unsupervised forward selection [64], factor analysis (FA) [65], and PCA [66]; the wrapper method also has many models used in the same studies, such as K-nearest neighbor (KNN) [67], genetic algorithm (GA) [68], genetic programming (GP) [69], counter-propagation artificial neural network (CPANN) [70], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [71], Bayesian regularized neural network (BRNN) [72], and ant colony optimization (ACO) [73,74]. For more details related to these models, please refer to Goodarzi et al. [60]. Furthermore, Newby et al. [75] applied classification and regression trees (CART) of decision trees to select molecular descriptors in QSAR modeling. This paper indicated that the use of filter preprocessing of feature selection methods produces models with better interpretability and predictability for the prediction of oral absorption. Teixeira et al. [76] used three hybrid models: (1) support vector machine (SVM) + PCA, (2) GA + SVM, and (3) random forest (RF) + SVM for feature selection of molecule descriptors in QSPR models for predicting the standard enthalpy of the formation of hydrocarbons. Their study concluded that SVMs alone are not able to perform a good optimization, and that they can be combined with an RF step to obtain a minimum subset of important variables in order to train a faster and more robust model and yield better prediction performance. Svetnik et al. [77] proposed a wrapper RF variable selection procedure for use to generate a measure of variable importance in QSAR modeling for drug discovery and development. Their study showed that the non-recursive version of the procedure outperforms the recursive version, and concluded with comments about the dangers of using the RF's out-of-bag error estimate in the wrapper variable selection. Aguiar-Pulido et al. [78] indicated that the QSAR models have numerous advantages, such as reducing the costly failure of drug candidates in clinical stages and reducing the calculation time and spaces of experiments; thus, to achieve a reliably predictive QSAR model, different types of methods are tried and used from various study fields, including pattern recognition, artificial intelligence, machine learning, and molecular modeling. Regarding the QSAR modeling processes in the study by Aguiar-Pulido et al. [78], three steps are identified. First, they encode the molecular structure codification into molecular descriptors. Second, they select relevant variables in the context of the analyzed biological activity. Third, they search for the optimal model having a correlation with the molecular descriptors for a specific activity.

Based on the above information and Section 1, a variety of techniques from statistics and machine learning have been used for feature (or variable) selection and the model-building steps to support various application tasks from the limited literature until now, particularly for medical purposes. In the feature selection problem, the statistical methods are applied to check the linear and nonlinear behavior in a given data set, and the learning algorithm is used to select a relevant subset of features (or descriptors) upon which to focus attention, while ignoring the rest. In medical works, only molecules with a predicted interesting behavior are synthesized. These feature selection techniques have the functions applied to select the most important descriptors from the given medical data in order to decrease the model complexity and the risk of overfitting/overtraining. Furthermore, although the wrapper approach is more expensive in computational time than the filter method, its generalization performance is better [60]. The wrapper approaches are frequently used in the practice of various application works, and are thus the focus of this study. However, this study excludes exploring the feature selection methods in QSAR models due to limited space. Generally, this study mainly highlights the integration of linear and nonlinear methods of wrapper approaches to select key features according to their past prominent performance. A comparison of different types of QSAR models and the other feature selection algorithms will be explored in the future.

The rough set classifier (RSC) is based on rough set theory (RST), which tolerates vagueness, imprecision, uncertainty, and partial truth [79], and yields synergistic outcomes when combined with other data analysis methods to provide flexible analytical tools to solve real-world classification problems. The RSC employs mathematical modeling to process data classification problems for decision support systems in cases involving vague concepts and uncertain or hybrid data [80] and has thus been successfully applied in various fields, such as decision analysis, knowledge discovery from databases, expert systems, pattern recognition, and fault diagnosis [81]. The RSC yields advantages in the processing of classification problems as follows [81]: (1) it does not require any preliminary or additional information or assumptions regarding the given data, (2) it applies to both qualitative and quantitative analysis of factor variables, (3) a hidden fact can be retrieved from empirical data to comply with natural grammar to express these decision rules, (4) the extracted rules are representative of the data in the given database, after eliminating redundant or useless messages, and (5) decision rules are easily understood in the constructed model when compared with other classification methods. Generally, the RSC can be applied as a component of hybrid models in machine learning and data mining techniques and is particularly useful for rule induction processes in application domains [82].

A decision rule set can be extracted from a decision system to help solve practical problems. In RST, rule induction algorithms were first implemented in a data system known as Learning from Examples based on Rough Sets (LERS) [83]. The LERS uses RST to compute lower and upper approximations for concepts involved in conflicts with other concepts. The LERS system can identify a minimal set of rules from a given decision table based on examples of attribute-value pairs, and then classifies new examples based on the previously inferred set of rules. The LEM2 algorithm is frequently used to process numerical attributes and symbolic attributes with a specific threshold operation to simply conduct the discretization before rule induction, and is part of the rule induction in the LERS data-mining system [84]. Thus, this study uses the LEM2 algorithm as the rule induction method and compares its performance with that of other algorithms.

Classification is one of five important data mining functions. Four classification methods were used for performance comparison in this study, including decision trees, back propagation neural networks, support vector machine, and naïve Bayes classifiers, which were chosen based on their common use and good performance in various fields in earlier studies that applied them for medical classification tasks. (1) Decision trees (DTs) have a flow-chart-like tree structure, with good classification performance [85], and ID3 [86] is a decision tree algorithm based on information theory. C4.5 is a software extension of the basic ID3 algorithm designed by Quinlan [87] to address the issues not dealt with by ID3. (2) Back propagation neural networks (BPNNs) are typically for supervised learning; the multilayer perceptron (MLP), a feed-forward neural network trained by the algorithm of BPNNs [88], is one of the most widely used types of NN. The NN architecture significantly deals with problems having a nonlinear characteristic, consisting of a set of input layers, hidden layers, and output layers used to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs. (3) The SVM [89] is a supervised learning model used to analyze data and recognizes classification patterns and regression analysis. The SVMs can efficiently perform a nonlinear classification by implicitly mapping their inputs into high-dimensional feature spaces. In applications, SVMs are useful in medical science to solve optimization problems in the SVM community. (4) The naïve Bayes (NB) classifier has been well studied and is highly accurate in numerous application domains [90]; it is an effective learning algorithm and is widely used for classification tools in many fields. The NB classifier has received extensive attention due to its efficiency, reasonable predictive accuracy, and simplicity.

This section further introduces the proposed model and its proposed algorithm based on linear versus nonlinear feature selection techniques and the rough set classifier, with a preliminary assessment as well as data analysis performed on an empirical case study.

Most of the recent related methodology used to study AIDS patients with HIV/HAART employs epidemiological and statistical methods using a linear stand-alone model, and AI techniques using an integrated nonlinear hybrid model [91–93] are lacking in the study of medical application problems; thus, this study aims to fill in the knowledge gap in medical fields. Furthermore, in the medical experiments in related literature and by physicians, immune cells (i.e., CD4) and plasma viral load (PVL) are important indicators used to evaluate the AIDS disease for each patient. The practical results show that when the CD4 count is less than 200/mm3 or when the PVL is greater than 100,000 copies/ml, HAART medication should be considered. To address such an issue, this study proposes a hybrid model based on integrated linear-nonlinear statistical methods and AI techniques to identify important attributes that affect continued HAART, as well as a rough set classifier to generate a clearly understandable medical decision rule set to provide physicians with useful references on related HAART medication within the medical background of HIV/AIDS patients. The study uses a processing flow diagram of eight steps with their corresponding methods to present the proposed model for ease of understanding, as illustrated in Fig. 1
                        . In Fig. 1, the left side includes the eight steps of the proposed algorithm, and the right side details the corresponding methods or techniques. For example, in Step 8, different AI methods, including DTs-C4.5, BPNN, SVM, and NB, are used in this model verification development process.

The proposed algorithm is introduced with an empirical case study from real-world medical examples in detail as follows:
                           
                              
                                 Step 1: Data collection. The experimental data set focuses on cases over 84 months from 2005 to 2011, which were obtained from specific AIDS patients with HIV/HAART information at the teaching hospital in Taiwan, based on the literature related to AIDS patients and physician suggestions. The target sample is called the AIDS data set, which originally has 30 attributes.


                                 Step 2: Data preprocessing. We transfer the AIDS data set into an EXCEL format to expedite experiments and handle the instances that have incomplete data sets, with three types of attribute values, namely, inappropriate examples, values of personal privacy in patients, and irrelevant attribute values. Irrational examples are also erased, such as abnormal fee, prosthesis, human error, and dissimilar surgical operation in medical procedures. A total of 1320 instances were identified from 11 relevant attributes, including patient age (abbreviated as Age), patient gender (Sex), cause of disease (Code), disease duration (Year), CD4 count, PVL test, blood platelet (PLT) count, total bilirubin (T-bil) test, liver function index in aspartate aminotransferase (AST), liver function index in alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and medication status (i.e., HAART). The first 10 attributes were conditional attributes, and the last case is the decisional attribute.


                                 Step 3: Attribute symbolization. The 11 selected attributes are symbolized and normalized to facilitate the operational efficiency of classifying HAART. Except for the attributes Sex, Code, and HAART, the remaining eight attributes are continuous data. Table 1
                                  shows the related information and chi-squared test (χ2 test) result. For example, the HAART attribute is encoded into “Y” and “N,” representing sustained medication and unsustained medication, respectively. Moreover, a chi-squared test is a statistical hypothesis test in which the sampling distribution is a chi-squared distribution when the null hypothesis is true. The chi-squared test is typically used in categorical data analysis to check if variables are independent random variables. Clearly, all attributes are significant with a value of p < 0.0001, except for the attribute PVL because it is only an abnormal category. In particular, the emergent issue in the attribute PVL can be explored in subsequent research. For a convenient overview and comparison, Fig. 2
                                  presents the percentage information of related attributes on the AIDS data set.


                                 Step 4: Feature selection. The detailed processes of the feature selection techniques for the most important factors defined as input observation data are divided into four sub-steps, as follows:
                                    
                                       
                                          Step 4.1: We objectively calculate the degree of importance of various attributes. A method to simplify knowledge discovery is required for data mining, such as a feature selection technique. The condition-attributes are independent variables, and the HAART of the decision-attribute is a dependent variable and nominal class. Accordingly, we objectively calculate the degree of importance of various attributes to reduce the preselected essential attributes and to determine the core attributes based on various linear versus nonlinear techniques, including simple linear regression (SLR), logistic regression (LR), discriminant analysis (DA), radial basis function SVM (abbreviated as RBF-SVM in this study), polynomials kernel SVM (PNK-SVM), multilayer perceptron neural network (MLP-NN), and DT-C4.5, respectively.


                                          Step 4.2: We implement a normalization process. The degree of importance (i.e., weight value) of various attributes is implemented by a normalization process for the previously described linear versus nonlinear techniques according to the following equation: 
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         W
                                                         i
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      max
                                                      
                                                         {
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               W
                                                               i
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         }
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                                ×
                                                100
                                             
                                          , where W
                                                i
                                             
                                           is the weight value of the attribute i.


                                          Step 4.3: We rank the normalization values of attributes. The maximal normalization value is ranked 1 and assigned to a maximal score 1, and the remaining values may be deduced by analogy; however, the unselected attributes across various linear and nonlinear techniques are assigned a minimal score of 10.


                                          Step 4.4: We integrate linear and nonlinear techniques. First, based on the linear and nonlinear methods, two-thirds of the attributes are selected, and the remaining attributes are removed because their contribution is very low. Second, the sub-scores of the linear and nonlinear techniques are summarized and re-ranked, respectively. Third, the core attributes are selected based on the principle of the total scores and two-thirds of the attributes. Tables 2 and 3
                                           list the related normalization data of the linear and nonlinear methods, respectively; and Table 4 describes the integrated core attributes after normalization. As shown in Table 2, the selected five attributes are PVL, CD4, Code, Year, and Age, because they are present in the three linear methods; the selected seven attributes include PVL, CD4, Code, Age, PLT, Sex, and ALT because they have contributed to classifying the HAART medication for the four nonlinear methods shown in Table 3. In conclusion, we rank the seven key attributes influencing continued HAART for AIDS patients as PVL, CD4, Code, Age, Year, PLT, and Sex, based on the integrated linear–nonlinear techniques and the principle of selecting two-thirds of the attributes from Table 4. To present completely the processing of the linear and nonlinear algorithms used, the pseudo code information of the integrated feature selection algorithms is shown in Fig. 3.
                                          
                                          
                                       


                                 Step 5: Attribute discretization. The eight continuous attributes are discretized using the global discretization based on the Boolean reasoning method [81] to improve the classification performance and create linguistic information.


                                 Step 6: Data cutting. The 1320 instances in the AIDS data set are randomly divided into 67% training data (884 samples) and the remaining 33% of testing data (436 samples).


                                 Step 7: Rule induction. A total of 459 classification rules for training data are created using the LEM2 algorithm of rule induction, and Table 5 partially lists the decision rules. Accordingly, the 436 testing data are investigated to examine the 459 classification rules. From Table 5, two of the medication statuses are shown as follows:
                                    
                                       1.
                                       Sustained medication:


                                          Rule 7: IF (Sex = M) & (AST = “(-Inf,44.5)”) & (ALT = “(-Inf,32.5)”) & (T-bil = “(-Inf,0.65)”) & (Code = A) & (Year = “(-Inf,5.5)”) & (PVL = “(31807.0,Inf)”) & (CD4 = “(-Inf,263.5)”) = > Then, (HAART = Y (9)).


                                          Expression: If the patient is male, the measured value of AST is below 44.5 U/l, the measured value of ALT is below 32.5 U/l, the test value of total bilirubin is below 0.65 mg/dl, the AIDS disease is “A” (i.e., abnormal sexual behavior), the disease duration is below 0.55 year, the test value of PVL exceeds 31807.0 copies/ml, and the count value of CD4 is below 263.5/mm3, then this patient will take sustained HAART medication. This rule is supported by nine examples in the target data set.

Unsustained medication:


                                          Rule 1: IF (Code = B) & (Sex = M) & (ALT = “(32.5,Inf)”) & (T-bil = “(-Inf,0.65)”) & (AST = “(44.5,Inf)”) & (CD4 = “(607.5,Inf)”) = > Then, (HAART = N (22)).


                                          Expression: If the AIDS disease is “B” (i.e., an injected drug user or shares needles with others), the patient is male, and the measured value of ALT exceeds 32.5 U/l, the test value of total bilirubin is below 0.65 mg/dl, the measured value of AST exceeds 44.5 U/l, and the CD4 count value exceeds 607.5/mm3, then this patient will take non-sustained HAART medication. This rule is supported by 22 examples in the target data set.


                                 Step 8: Model verification. The experiments were repeated 10 times for the five different classifiers (DTs-C4.5, BPNNs-MLP, SVM, NB, and the proposed model), using the same ratio (2:1) 67%/33% random split, and the average accuracy of each method together with its standard deviation was calculated for the 10 runs. To broadly confirm the proposed model, the classification performance was varied on the used attributes, for which the indexed sequential access method (ISAM) in Step 4 was used. Table 6 presents the results for the five comparative methods in the AIDS data set. With regard to the classification accuracy, the proposed model based on the rough set classifier performs better than the listed methods in the AIDS data set, regardless of the organization of the five, seven, seven, or 10 attributes used and the average accuracy.
                                 
                              

Based on the experiments carried out, the three empirical results and mined findings are determined as follows.
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 Classification accuracy: From Table 6, the proposed model based on the rough set classifier performs well in terms of the highest accuracy and a stable standard deviation in the AIDS data set when compared with the listed methods. Generally, the classification performance is defined in the following four directions. (a) Simply, the ranking order in terms of average accuracy is the proposed model = > SVM = > BPNNs-MLP = > DTs-C4.5 = > NB; the ranking order in the average standard deviation of accuracy is DTs-C4.5 = > the proposed model = > SVM = > BPNNs-MLP = > NB. (b) In conclusion, in the various organizations of the five, seven, seven, and 10 attributes used, the best accurate is still the proposed model, and the worst is still NB; however, the most stable standard deviation is DTs-C4.5, and the worst is again NB. (c) Thus, it was found that NB is not suitable to address the HAART medication problem in this study, and the rough set classifier is more suitable than the other four classifiers. (d) DTs-C4.5 has a lower standard deviation than the listed methods. After a thorough review of the analytical results mentioned above, the proposed model and the DTs-C4.5 method should be further analyzed. When the worst case of the proposed model and the best case of DTs-C4.5 occur, the former has an 85.77% (87.50 − 1.73 = 85.77) accuracy compared with a 78.72% (77.19 + 1.53 = 78.72) accuracy of the latter. Positively, the proposed model is still more accurate than the DTs-C4.5 method in such a case.


                                 Key attributes: A key aspect of the knowledge discovery process used to mine knowledge rules from given data is the feature selection method used to select the most important attributes [94,95]. Identifying the key condition-attributes provides benefits to both the research and practice environments. (a) In the linear methods, the ranking of the key attributes is PVL, CD4, Code, Year, and Age to classify HAART medication for AIDS patients from Table 2. (b) According to Table 3, the key attributes include PVL, CD4, Code, Age, PLT, Sex, and ALT in the nonlinear methods. (c) In conclusion, the attributes PVL, CD4, Code, Age, Year, PLT, and Sex are the most important indicators influencing sustained HAART based on the integrated linear–nonlinear techniques shown in Table 4 and the empirical results shown in Table 6.


                                 Critical rules: Based on the integrated linear–nonlinear techniques from Table 4, the seven key attributes were used as input data to generate a decision rule set by the LEM2 algorithm. The three decision rules for sustained HAART were as follows:
                                    
                                       (a)
                                       IF (Sex = M) & (Code = A) & (CD4 = “(-Inf,174.0)”) = > Then, (HAART = Y (33))

IF (Sex = M) & (Code = A) & (Year = “(-Inf,3.5)”) & (CD4 = “(-Inf,174.0)”) = > Then, (HAART = Y (18))

IF (Sex = M) & (Code = A) & (Year = “(-Inf,3.5)”) & (Age = “(-Inf,21.5)”) = > Then, (HAART = Y (8)).

Summarizing (a)–(c) above, most of the patients using HAART medication are males who have had abnormal sexual intercourse or homosexual relationships with a duration of less than 3.5 years, are less than 21.5 years old, or have a CD4 count of less than 174.0. Specifically, if the AIDS patients are male with abnormal sexual intercourse/homosexual relationships and have a low 174.0 of CD4, then they must maintain sustained HAART medication.

The descriptive statistics and statistical tests are helpful to further determine the hidden information in the AIDS data set. Thus, the twofold contribution of this study becomes clear and can be divided into statistical techniques and odds ratios as follows.
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 Descriptive statistics and chi-squared test
                              

Descriptive statistics are used as a discipline to quantitatively describe the main features of a collection of given data [96], including the central tendency and variability. First, the data of the selected five attributes in Table 2 were calculated using descriptive statistics, and Table 7
                                  lists the related information in the AIDS data set. These analytical results are as follows: (a) No-one is within the normal value in the attribute PVL, and abnormal AIDS patients have a significantly high probability (70.0%) of taking unsustained HAART medication; (b) In CD4, abnormal AIDS patients have a significantly high probability (70.3%) of taking unsustained HAART medication. This meaningful issue will be explored in the following paragraph; (c) Regarding the cause of AIDS in patients, patients who continually engage in abnormal sexual behavior have a significantly higher probability (67.7%) of sustained HAART medication; however, injected drug users or people who share needles with others have a significantly higher probability (74.9%) of unsustained HAART medication; (d) for the Year, AIDS patients with 5–10 years have a significantly higher probability (72.8%) of unsustained HAART medication; however, patients with more than 10 years have a significantly higher probability (92.3%) of sustained HAART medication to abate the pain arising from HIV/AIDS; and (e) regarding the age (>50) of AIDS patients, they have a significantly higher probability (67.8%) of sustained HAART medication; however, there is a significantly higher probability (75.9%) of unsustained HAART medication in the age (30–50) of AIDS patients.

Furthermore, this study provides meaningful management implications from the above statements in Table 7 for interested parties.
                                    
                                       (a)
                                       
                                          The attribute PVL: Importantly, no AIDS patients are within the normal range of 40 copies/ml on the PVL count in this study. This suggests that the improvement from taking sustained HAART medication is not obvious for the PVL, or that patients may not be willing to continue to take HAART medication, resulting in a lower PVL.


                                          Attribute CD4: A high number of patients whose CD4 count is abnormal select unsustained HAART medication. After further in-depth analysis of the AIDS data set in Fig. 4
                                          , the 306/mm3 of the CD4 count forms the watershed between the two medication statuses. The 435 records of patients who have more obvious pain symptoms from HIV/AIDS show a greater willingness to maintain their medicine therapy when the CD4 count is less than 306/mm3 compared with the 885 records of patients whose CD4 count exceeded 306/mm3. Undoubtedly, the attribute CD4 is one of the most important indicators influencing HAART medication. Chanthaweethip and Guha [97] reported that AIDS patients will continue to take their medicine therapy because they feel uncomfortable at this time when their CD4 count is less than 350/mm3, but may interrupt the sustained medication when their CD4 count is over 350/mm3. Critically, such an empirical result for the CD4 count (Fig. 4) closely matches the study by Chanthaweethip and Guha [97].


                                          The attribute Code: To effectively control AIDS, patients who maintain their risky sexual behavior for reasons of employment, abnormal sexual intercourse, or homosexual relationships have a higher rate in maintaining continuous HAART medication compared with interrupted HAART medication; conversely, patients who are injected drug users or share needles with others have a higher rate of taking unsustained medication compared with sustained HAART medication. This phenomenon implies that HIV/AIDS cannot be efficiently controlled because these patients cannot break the habit of the addiction and continue to share needles with others.


                                          The attribute Year: Interestingly, 92.3% of patients whose disease duration is more than 10 years choose to take continuous medication of HAART. A reasonable explanation is that the patients may potentially be suffering from other illnesses in the lengthy HIV/AIDS disease; thus, they have to consistently take HAART to control these serious pain conditions. Thus, fewer patients select sustained medication compared with those taking unsustained medication for the first 10 years. This situation may be plausible.


                                          The attribute Age: Patients who are more than 50 years old have a higher rate of taking persistent medication compared with patients taking unsustained medication; conversely, patients younger than 50 years old have a higher rate of taking unsustained medication compared with patients who are taking sustained medication. This implies that older patients have a greater willingness to accept sustained medication of HAART compared with younger patients. Thus, it will be valuable to further explore the cause–effect relationship and differences between these patients in a subsequent study.


                                 Logistic regression analysis and odds ratio
                              

On the basis of the analysis of logistic regression, four attributes, Age, Sex, CD4, and PLT, were significantly correlated with HAART. Statistically, the odds ratio (OR) [98] is one method to quantify how strongly the presence or absence of property A is associated with the presence or absence of property B in a given population where both properties are appropriately defined, and a ratio can subsequently be obtained that quantitatively describes the association between the presence/absence of A and the presence/absence of B for individuals in the population. The logistic regression and OR results based on significant attributes of HAART are shown in Table 8
                                 , from which four key points can be determined. (a) In the Age attribute, patients aged < 30 years have more than four times (4.237 = 1/0.236) the odds of success compared with patients aged > 50 years when they accept sustained HAART medication; patients aged 30–50 years have more than five times (5.747 = 1/0.174) the odds of success compared with patients aged > 50 years when they accept sustained HAART medication. (b) In the Sex attribute, male patients have about two times (1.852 = 1/0.540) the odds of success compared with female patients. (c) In the CD4 attribute, patients with normal CD4 have more than four times (4.608 = 1/0.217) the odds of success compared with patients with abnormal CD4 when they accept sustained HAART medication. (d) For the PLT attribute, patients with normal PLT have about two times (1.949 = 1/0.513) the odds of success compared with patients with abnormal PLT when they accept sustained HAART medication.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The HIV/AIDS-related issue has given rise to a priority concern in which the potential new therapies are increasingly highlighted to lessen the negative effect of HIV/HAART. With this motivation, this study set out to develop a new framework and trial in the healthcare services with the purpose of increasing the quality of life (QOL) and quality of service (QOS) [99] for HIV/AIDS patients and their doctors, respectively. This study proposed a hybrid model based on the rough set classifier to integrate expert professional, linear–nonlinear feature selection techniques, the global discretization method, and the LEM2 algorithm, to identify the determinants influencing sustained HAART medication for AIDS patients and to improve the classification performance, and used organizations of different condition-attributes to study an evolving HIV/AIDS research. The proposed model uses a real-world data set from Taiwan's specialist medical center. These experimental results showed that the integrated linear–nonlinear feature selection technique is an effective tool when used to identify the PVL, CD4, Code, Age, Year, PLT, and Sex of seven core condition-attributes in Tables 4 and 6; this study highlights the importance of these factors and provides the rationale for the proposed model. In conclusion, the proposed model yields a satisfactory result that is superior to the listed methods in the AIDS data set. Thus, the proposed model proves to be an effective alternative to classify sustained HAART medication. In addition, the created decision rule set can be referenced as a knowledge-based healthcare service system that is optimal for evidence-based practice in the workflow of current clinical diagnosis, further explaining how all of the deduced rules can be used to document rules in clinical applications and can benefit self-service healthcare plans in advance. The study yields three advantages. (1) For interested parties, the study results describe the operation rules of taking medical therapy for follow-up studies or HIV/AIDS treatments in practice. (2) For HIV/AIDS patients, the deduced rules aid in the self-adjusting data measurement of conditional-attributes to provide good medication. (3) For HIV/AIDS physicians, the deduced rules aid in understanding the potential medication status of patients in advance to achieve good service. This study has important implications and findings that are worthwhile for both practitioners and academics who are interested in HAART medication for HIV/AIDS patients in the healthcare service.

Although this study yields satisfactory results, it still needs to raise the related properties of the HIV/AIDS problem in the future, including: (1) Other related attributes, such as the idea that CD8 (cytotoxic lymphocytes) [100], can be modeled in the condition-attributes as in this study. (2) Various decisional attributes, such as the PVL and the gp41 of synthetic inhibitors, can substitute the identified HAART medication to measure HIV/AIDS treatment. (3) Other hybrid models can be used to examine the AIDS data set. (4) Other data sets in various industries can be used to further verify the proposed model.

No conflicts of interest reported.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The author wishes to cordially thank the National Science Council (Ministry of Science and Technology) of the Republic of China, Taiwan, for partially financially supporting this research under Contract No. MOST 103-2221-E-146-003-MY2. In particular, the author cordially thanks the Editor-in-Chief and Managing Editor of Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine (CMPB) and the anonymous referees for their useful comments and suggestions, which led to the significant improvements in the presentation and quality of this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

