@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Tablet PC-enabled application intervention for patients with gastric cancer undergoing gastrectomy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A gap between hospital care and self-care at home.


                        
                        
                           
                           App provides a feasible solution for gastrectomy patients to do self-recording of postoperative information.


                        
                        
                           
                           With App support, the postgastrectomy patients had a lower proportion of body weight loss compared to traditional care.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Smartphone

Application

Gastric cancer

Surgery

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Gastric cancer is among the most common gastrointestinal cancers worldwide. Patients who have undergone surgery for gastric cancer may suffer from malnutrition and potential consequences such as gastrointestinal complications, surgical stress, and cancer cachexia. A tablet PC-based intervention via a mobile application might enhance the early recovery of postgastrectomy patients.
               
               
                  Objective
                  The aim of this study was to develop and test a tablet personal computer (PC)-assisted intervention to hasten the recovery of postgastrectomy cancer patients with respect to nutritional status.
               
               
                  Methods
                  This single-arm pilot study investigated a tablet PC application developed to serve the functions of nutritional monitoring, medical information management, drainage follow-up, and wound care. All services were delivered by medical professionals.
               
               
                  Results
                  Twenty consecutive gastrectomy patients at the National Taiwan University Hospital received perioperative care via this application (App group). During the study period, we retrospectively collected an additional 20 demographically matched gastrectomy cases as a control group. The App group had a lower body weight loss percentage relative to the control group during a 6-month follow-up period (4.8±1.2% vs. 8.7±2.4%; p
                     <0.01). However, the patients in the App group had more outpatient clinic (OPC) visits than did those in the control group (9.8±0.9 vs. 5.6±0.8; p
                     <0.01).
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study supported the feasibility of a tablet PC-based application for the perioperative care of gastric cancer subjects to promote a lower body weight loss and the collection of comprehensive surgical records.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Gastric cancer is the fourth-most common cancer [1] and the second leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide [2]. In most patients, gastric cancer is discovered at an advanced stage because of the occult early clinical presentation of this type of cancer. Moreover, patients who are diagnosed with advanced gastric cancer more frequently exhibit gastric outlet obstruction and cancer bleeding, which result in a poor general condition and malnutrition (60–85 percent of cases) [3]. Surgery is considered the only potentially curative treatment [4]. However, pre-operatively malnourished patients who undergo curative surgery (another physical stress and insult) may continue to experience body weight loss because of wound pain, surgical complications, and gastrointestinal digestion disorders, which are associated with both reduced food intake and the malabsorption of vitamins, fats, and proteins [5,6]. Patients in whom this malnourished status is not recognized will have inferior clinical outcomes and a decreased quality of life relative to those with good nutritional statuses [7,8]. Moreover, postoperative body weight loss is the most important risk factor associated with oral adjuvant chemotherapy compliance in gastric cancer patients undergoing curative gastrectomy, thus emphasizing the requirement for adequate perioperative nutritional intervention [9].

A poor discharge transition from the medical center to the home represents an important gap between evidence-based clinical practices and current health care delivery. For gastrectomy patients with gastrointestinal complications, some retained intra-abdominal drainage tubes are kept to monitor the leakage fluid with turbid contaminated characteristics. These drainage tubes caused patients or their families to hesitate with regard to returning home where they would be required to care for these tubes by themselves. If the intra-abdominal condition were to deteriorate, the drainage fluid may become turbid (new gastrointestinal leakage) or bloody (internal bleeding), which would imply a new medical emergency. Traditionally, medical professionals have not been able to immediately access the above-described information, thus potentially delaying a diagnosis or medical help. A major challenge to medical providers is the continued provision of postoperative care at home for patients with complications.

Telecare is becoming a feasible and helpful tool for perioperative patient care [10,11]. With the popularity of smartphones or tablet personal computers (tablet PCs), the methods used to accessing information have changed, which has revolutionized the original telecare concept. There is an increased interest in smartphone applications (apps) as tools with which medical professionals and patients can deliver medical information and provide care [12–15]. It has been reported that the market for mobile health apps for smartphones and tablets will reach US $26 billion by 2017 [16]. As of 2013, there are an estimated 40,000 medical apps available on the market. Previous studies have addressed the feasibility of smartphone apps for patient self-monitoring [17,18] or surgical cases [19]. However, app-facilitated perioperative care for gastrectomy patients is lacking.

We hypothesized that tablet PC application for gastrectomy patients compared with traditional care would be associated with less percentage of body weight loss, with that being associated with close follow-up and clinical rule support. To test our hypothesis, we designed one experimental pre/post single-arm study to investigate whether a 6-month intervention involving this application would contribute to a more rapid recovery after gastrectomy in gastric cancer patients (App group). The primary study outcome was the change in the percentage of body weight loss. Body weight is a reliable predictor of the general nutritional statuses of cancer subjects. Additionally, we prospectively collected age, sex, body mass index (BMI), operation method, and cancer staging-matched gastrectomy subjects during the same period to compare with the App group (Control group).

@&#METHODS@&#

The participants were recruited at the National Taiwan University Hospital (NTUH) in Taipei, Taiwan. The recruitment occurred through the health care provider. The inclusion criteria were an age >20 years, gastric cancer diagnosis, and treatment via curative gastrectomy. Participants were excluded if they or their caregivers experienced difficulties with accessing the app. The study was approved by the review board at NTUH, and all participants provided signed informed consent.

This app was developed using the objective-C language and iOS (previously iPhone OS) 6.1 SDK (Software Development Kit; Apple, Inc., Cupertino, CA, USA), which provides compatibility for iOS 5.1 and later platforms. We designed a client/server architecture to integrate the app service. The client side is the app itself for uploading images, inputting data and viewing personal history data. The app calls mobile web services provided by a web server to upload and store the image or data on the server side for medical professionals to evaluate personal query. Additionally, the application can store data on the client side temporarily and automatically synchronize with the server-side database by calling web services implemented in the C# language in a .NET framework. A Microsoft SQL server was utilized for server data storage. In order to improve security, the target system was designed to transmit data via the https protocol and the patient's name or personal ID was omitted. Instead, a temporary ID (the subject number) was provided by the physician to represent the patient. After keying in secret keys, only the physician is allowed access to the data transmitted by the patients on the website. Fig. 1
                         shows the architecture of the overall system.

To provide real-time remote care, we designed and developed a platform for the patients and medical staff to permit reviews of the entire historical upload record, including weight, drainage, symptoms, and patients’ wound images. In addition, the web service would automatically send a cell phone message to medical staff when a patient uploaded a wound image. Via this service, medical professionals could immediately determine the wound condition and notify the patient if the wound infection should be investigated. This feedback interaction led to significant improvements in the software developed for a previous trial and for our study in terms of reducing the gap between the medical staff members and patients [20].

We divided the major functions of this application into 6 interfaces: the home page, my weight, my drains, wound pictures, surgery, and symptoms. Screenshots of the tablet PC application are shown in Figs. 2–7
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                         along with the descriptions of each major function.

All values were expressed as means with associated standard deviations or as frequencies. The Mann–Whitney test was used to assess continuous variables, and Fisher's exact test was used for categorical variables. Differences in body weight changes (from the baseline to 6 months) were analyzed using a paired Student's t-test. Data analyses were performed using SPSS software (version 22.0, 2012; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). A 2-sided p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Twenty consecutive gastrectomy patients at National Taiwan University Hospital received perioperative care via this application (App group). During the same period, we retrospectively collected another 20 age, sex, BMI, operation method, and cancer staging-matched gastrectomy cases to serve as a control group. The demographics of both groups are illustrated in Table 1
                     .

Among the commonly reported types of postoperative discomfort, wound pain and malaise were the most common illnesses during the early postoperative stage. However, depression and insomnia were the most common types of discomfort during the late postoperative stage (Table 2
                     ).

Regarding the clinical results (Table 3
                     ), the App group had a lower body weight loss percentage relative to the control group during a 6-month follow up period (4.8±1.2% vs. 8.7±2.4%; p
                     <0.01). However, the patients in the App group had more outpatient clinic (OPC) visits than did those in the control group (9.8±0.9 vs. 5.6±0.8; p <0.01).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The app developed for this study was considered a feasible tool with which gastrectomy patients could record their daily clinico-physical changes and was found to significantly reduce postoperative body weight loss. The system facilitated by this app will inform both the patients and medical professionals of the event of a body weight loss >5% at 3 months after surgery, as such an event would imply that the patient might require a nutritional assessment and an intervention such as consultation with a dietician to overcome their malnourished status. Therefore, the App group patients in this study visited the OPC more times for nutritional evaluations and to receive early diagnoses and interventions. A previous study proved that intensive and individual dietary counseling was associated with better weight maintenance and nutritional statuses in subjects with cancer [21].

Tablet PCs or smartphones have become increasingly popular with individuals in recent years. For this reason, the number of associated apps has increased dramatically and even includes apps to meet medical needs [20]. However, some of the medical apps for cancer patients were not validated, which may endanger patient safety [22]. It is well documented that only 55.8% of these apps are associated with scientifically validated data, and better quality apps tended to be developed by healthcare professionals or organizations [22]. To develop our app, we enrolled both medical staff members and dietitians in a cooperative effort. Because of the above-described process, the information (education of patients and medical knowledge) provided to patients via this app was more accurate and necessary.

The term personal health record has been used to refer to both paper-based and electronic computerized systems. Most importantly, the patients must self-record and store their health information, which might previously have been ignored and unrecognized by medical staff members [23,24]. For example, depressed patients could realize that physically uncomfortable problems are sometimes associated with low moods. Further, medical professionals were apprised of their current health condition, helping them attenuate their discomfort. Using our app, the patients began to maintain their postoperative health records (surgical diaries), a task that was easily achieved with the support of electronic devices and associated software. According to our findings, 35% of the postgastrectomy cases suffered from insomnia and depression, a result that might remind medical staff members to do routine assessment of insomnia and depression through the brief questionnaires [25,26]. In addition, the patients with retained intra-abdominal drainage tubes worried about malodor from the bags, which contained leaked internal fluids. Under current care in Taiwan, patients discharged from the hospital call to enquire about their illness; this is not always interpreted effectively by purely verbal communications. With the support of this application, patients are able to send text messages or pictures to medical professionals, who provide real-time evaluation and suggestions. This application might therefore become a support tool to compensate the gap in perioperative care between the hospital and the home.

However, there are several limitations or special considerations associated with this study. First, this app has not been regulated by the medical authorities in Taiwan. The US Food and Drug Administration develop a set of regulations to oversee medical apps that include medical device accessory functionality or can transform mobile communication devices into medical intended uses [27]. Second, the retrospective study had some bias when compared with the prospective study. However, we tried to select comparable subjects by matching factors that contribute to the nutritional results. We plan to follow up this study with a prospective randomized study to investigate the clinical efficacy of the application. In the future, further work will be needed to integrate the medical records and communication services in this platform with the aim of augmenting the role of the care provider in healthcare process decisions. Moreover, this application may expand the functions of rehabilitation program and daily diet. The rehabilitation program may both provide information of post-operative chest, cardiac, or muscle training and implement three-dimension motion recognition algorithms to reflect the stages of physical recovery. The daily diet may provide the patient with not only record of daily calorie intake but also suggestion of post-gastrectomy menu. Other gastrointestinal surgical patients (such as surgery on esophagus, colon, pancreas, or small bowel) may benefit from this application, because these operations include both bowel resection and reconstruction inquiring similar post-operative cares. Furthermore, longer durations and increased numbers of cases will be required to determine whether this app will provide clinical benefits such as an improved quality of life or long-term improvements in the nutritional status.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This software app provides a feasible solution to the challenge of self-recording postoperative information and an alternative self-care tool for gastric cancer patients. With this support, the postgastrectomy patients in our study had a lower proportion of body weight loss relative to patients who received traditional care.

All authors disclosed no conflict of interests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank National Taiwan University Hospital for its financial support. The grant number was UN102-018.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

