@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Validity of an ankle joint motion and position sense measurement system and its application in healthy subjects and patients with ankle sprain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A novel measurement system can be used to measure ankle ROM and perception in multiple planes under weight-bearing condition.


                        
                        
                           
                           The programmable graphic user interface and data management for this developed system with excellent validity was established.


                        
                        
                           
                           The proprioception measures (JPS-DE, JPS-AE, and JPS-VE) for differentiating the ankle perception deficits were demonstrated.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Ankle sprain

Ankle instability

Range of motion

Proprioception deficits

Joint position sense

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and objective
                  Ankle motion and proprioception in multiple axis movements are crucial for daily activities. However, few studies have developed and used a multiple axis system for measuring ankle motion and proprioception. This study was designed to validate a novel ankle haptic interface system that measures the ankle range of motion (ROM) and joint position sense in multiple plane movements, investigating the proprioception deficits during joint position sense tasks for patients with ankle instability.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Eleven healthy adults (mean ± standard deviation; age, 24.7 ± 1.9 years) and thirteen patients with ankle instability were recruited in this study. All subjects were asked to perform tests to evaluate the validity of the ankle ROM measurements and underwent tests for validating the joint position sense measurements conducted during multiple axis movements of the ankle joint. Pearson correlation was used for validating the angular position measurements obtained using the developed system; the independent t test was used to investigate the differences in joint position sense task performance for people with or without ankle instability.
               
               
                  Results
                  The ROM measurements of the device were linearly correlated with the criterion standards (r = 0.99). The ankle instability and healthy groups were significantly different in direction, absolute, and variable errors of plantar flexion, dorsiflexion, inversion, and eversion (p < 0.05).
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The results demonstrate that the novel ankle joint motion and position sense measurement system is valid and can be used for measuring the ankle ROM and joint position sense in multiple planes and indicate proprioception deficits for people with ankle instability.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Ankle range of motion (ROM) and proprioception performances are important for movement control in the lower extremity and functional activities of daily living, such as standing balance and walking [1–4]. Furthermore, ankle sprain is a frequent injury in sports and daily activities, which affects the peripheral sensory receptors, and causes ankle instability [5–7]. These factors subsequently affect the feedback for the joint position sense and kinesthesia of muscle spindles, Golgi tendons, or mechanoreceptors in joint capsules [8], impairing ankle proprioception. Limited ankle proprioception and unstable motor control at the ankle joint can impair physical performance and functional stability of the lower extremity and substantially increase dependency in activities of daily living [9,10].

Many conventional tools and methods have been developed for measuring the ROM and proprioception at the ankle joint. For example, researchers and therapists have used pedal or conventional plastic goniometer and traditional measurement methods for evaluating the joint motion and proprioception performance at the ankle joint in a single plane [11–13]. In joint position sense tests, many studies have measured the proprioception performances in the single sagittal (dorsiflexion/plantarflexion) or frontal (Inversion/Eversion) plane by active or passive measurement protocols to gain information about the sensory feedback for motor control over the ankle joint [1–4,12,14–20]. However, from a biomechanical perspective, the talocrural, subtalar, and inferior tibiofibular joints are involved in ankle functional performance [21,22], and multiple axis motion of the ankle joint [19,22]. Furthermore, traditional measurements obtained using a crude ROM assessment can be used only for assessing joint movement and proprioception in a single plane, and data collection can be affected because of the between-clinician differences in how the measurements were carried out [1,11–17]. Therefore, a reliable system must be developed for accurately measuring ankle functional performance (the ROM and joint position sense) in multiple planes, facilitating the design of appropriate approaches for improving ankle proprioception and joint movement for patients with orthopedic or neurological diseases in the future.

Several kinematic measurement systems, such as FASTRAK and a motion analysis system, have been developed for evaluating three-dimensional joint motion and have an excellent reliability and validity for assessing joint movements [23,24]. However, these systems have several limitations, which include high cost, portability issue, being time-consuming, requiring skilled operation techniques, and being labor-intensive. As such, these systems cannot be used extensively in the clinical context. Additionally, ankle proprioception tests can be influenced by changes in positions and weight-bearing conditions because the ankle joint is involved in different movements and frequently in weight-bearing positions in most daily activities [25–27]. No study has investigated ankle proprioception performance in multiple planes (sagittal and frontal planes) under weight-bearing conditions, which simulates, to a greater extent, the actual conditions experienced by the ankle joints during functional tasks.

Therefore, the purpose of this study was to develop a system that accurately measures the ankle ROM and proprioception under weight-bearing conditions in multiple planes and investigate the changes in the joint position sense for subjects with or without ankle instability. First, we developed and validated a system for accurately evaluating the ankle joint ROM in a two-plane setting. Second, we used this system to investigate the difference in ankle proprioception between healthy subjects and patients with ankle instability.

Twenty-four subjects were involved in this study, including eleven healthy adults (11 men; mean age, 24.7 ± 1.9 years) and thirteen patients (8 women, 5 men; mean age, 24.4 ± 1.3 years) with unilateral ankle instability at the Department of Physical Therapy and Assistive Technology at National Yang-Ming University. The patients included 1 patient who was affected on the left side and 12 on the right side (Table 1
                        ). The inclusion criteria for healthy adults were as follows: (1) not having cognitive impairment that could restrict performance in the active joint proprioception test; (2) no medical problems or physical injury, such as those affecting the ROM, causing pain, and no neurological or orthopedic conditions (vertigo, epilepsy, or joint replacement) affecting leg and ankle movements in the past year; (3) anterior drawer and inversion talar tilt test results confirmed to be negative by a certified physical therapist; and (4) ability to engage in an active joint proprioception test without pain and a sense of ankle instability [26]. The inclusion criteria for patients with ankle instability were as follows: (1) at least one major ankle sprain (on the right or left side, but not both) in the past year before study enrollment; (2) no reported history of fracture at the ankle joint; (3) clinical evidence of mechanical instability as assessed by a certified physical therapist using the anterior drawer and inversion talar tilt tests; (4) feeling of ankle instability; and (5) ability to partially bear weight during the ankle proprioception test [28]. Exclusion criteria for the patients with ankle instability and healthy subjects were as follows: (1) history of ankle joint surgery, (2) central nerve system impairment, and (3) uncomfortable or severe pain in a lower limb during the joint position sense test [25]. All subjects signed an informed consent form before participating in the study. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of National Yang-Ming University.

The novel ankle ROM and joint position sense measurement system was designed to enable the subjects to perform ankle movements in multiple axes during partial weight-bearing position with one foot on solid ground and the other on an ankle haptic platform while executing the ankle proprioception test. To avoid compensatory movement, the lower extremity of the subjects was fixed using Velcro and lower extremity support, which had an adjustable length, width, and height of up to 63.5 cm, 50 cm, and 76 cm, respectively. The following device components were custom made by Rmax Company (Taipei, Taiwan): an ankle haptic interface composed of aluminum, two rotary potentiometers, and a lower extremity support (Fig. 1
                        ). The two potentiometers (100 K ± 0.05% Ω, Rmax Co.) were mounted under the ankle haptic interface and affixed to the rotational axes for measuring and recording the angular displacement in the sagittal and frontal planes during ankle movements (plantarflexion and dorsiflexion and inversion and eversion). All sensors were connected to a computer through an analog-to-digital converter (PCI-1710HG DAQ card and PCLC-8710 I/O Board) of the MATLAB Simulink data acquisition system (including Real-time Workshop and Real-time Windows Target programs); potentiometers with a recording capability of 0.001° were mounted on the device. The angular changes of the system pivoting from 0° to 70° axes caused a voltage output from the potentiometer. This output was then converted to a joint angle by a customized program (0.098 V = 1.0°). The angular displacement was acquired at a sampling rate of 1 kHz and was processed and stored in the MATLAB Simulink data acquisition system. The ROM of the ankle haptic interface was measured for a validity test by using a goniometer (recording capability, 1°) attached to the interface.

A procedural protocol was devised, and all investigators were asked to comply with the study protocol for ensuring consistency. The subjects were verbally instructed consistently to ensure procedural uniformity. The system was calibrated for each subject before data acquisition.

Concurrent validity was used for validating ROM measurements at two planes at the ankle joint (sagittal plane for ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion and frontal plane for ankle inversion and eversion), which were simultaneously collected to reflect similar behavior incidents [29]. The concurrent validity was examined by comparing the tilting degrees measured using the electric potentiometer with angles obtained using the goniometer [1]. The joint motion measurement methods were similar to those used in previous studies for validating the concurrent validity [30,31]. Clinically, goniometric measurement, which has high validity and reliability is the most commonly used method in crude ROM tests involving active measurements [30,32,33]. Concurrent angular positions were measured for 37 ankle joint positions (0°–70°) in this study. We selected 11 ankle plantarflexion positions (n = 11; 0°, 5°, 10°, 15°, 20°, 25°, 30°, 35°, 40°, 45°, and 47.5°), 15 ankle dorsiflexion positions (n = 15; 0°, 5°, 10°, 15°, 20°, 25°, 30°, 35°, 40°, 45°, 50°, 55°, 60°, 65°, and 70°), five ankle inversion positions (n = 5; 0°, 5°, 10°, 15°, and 18.5°), and six ankle eversion positions (n = 6; 0°, 5°, 10°, 15°, 20°, and 22.5°), which were randomly assessed. The system recorded the angular positions and averaged them for statistical analysis. Goniometry was also used for measuring the 37 ankle joint positions.

In this study, the active joint reproduction test was used for measuring the joint position sense and understanding the sensory feedback and natural control requires simultaneous coordination on the sagittal and frontal planes of the ankle joint during weight-bearing conditions of daily life [1–4,18,19,34]. Therefore, four target ankle proprioception testing positions were selected and measured: (1) ankle inversion of 10° with dorsiflexion of 10°, (2) ankle eversion of 10° with dorsiflexion of 10°, (3) ankle inversion of 10° with plantarflexion of 10°, and (4) ankle eversion of 10° with plantarflexion of 10°. These ankle proprioception test positions within functional ranges were used for avoiding any potential abnormal compensatory movements and reducing tissue or skin overstretching in the ankle joint [1,35,36]. For reducing the potential learning and biasing effects in repeated measures, four target testing positions were randomly selected by computer programs [1,29]. Before joint position sense assessment, the test foot of each subject was positioned in a starting position, with the hip joint in 90° flexion in the sagittal plane, the knee in 110°–120° flexion, and the ankle in a neutral position, so that the foot could easily execute the joint position test [37]. For testing, all subjects moved their test ankle joint (involved ankle for patient with ankle instability; dominate ankle for healthy subject) into the target position with their eyes open through voluntary movements and held that position for 10 seconds to experience the target position. The subjects then returned to the starting position. They then actively moved their test ankle to the same target angle with their eyes closed and pressed a button to indicate that they believed that they had reproduced the target position, and then returned to the starting position (matching the previous target position). Each target position was tested 10 times for each subject. Joint position reproduction performance angles from joint position sense assessment were collected and managed.

The joint position sense direction error (JPS-DE) of angles was calculated by comparing the target angles (collected angle value—target angle value), indicating the difference between the target position and reproduced angles and the tendency to achieve the target position [37–41]. A negative JPS-DE value indicated that a subject's joint position did not achieve the target angle. Furthermore, the JPS-DE value was positive if the subject's joint position exceeded the target angle. The joint position sense absolute error (JPS-AE) was also calculated and indicated the absolute difference between the target and reproduced angles, representing the accuracy in reproducing the target position (|collected angle value—target angle value|) [25,37–40]. Moreover, the joint position sense variable error (JPS-VE) was calculated and selected to indicate the overall ankle proprioception performance variance during multiple movements of the ankle joint 
                              
                                 
                                    (
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      (
                                                      
                                                         collected
                                                          
                                                         angle
                                                          
                                                         value
                                                         −
                                                         target
                                                          
                                                         angle
                                                          
                                                         value
                                                      
                                                      )
                                                   
                                                
                                                2
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                            
                           [39,41,42]. For preventing muscle fatigue, 30-second rests were implemented between each test (n = 40, 10 repetitions for each of the 4 target test positions). The three values (JPS-DE, JPS-AE, and JPS-VE) of the sagittal and frontal planes of the test ankle joint for each target test position measure were averaged and separately calculated for further statistical analysis [1].

The independent t test and Pearson's chi-square test were used for analyzing the differences in demographic data between groups. Pearson correlation was used for validating the angular position measurements of sagittal (dorsiflexion and plantarflexion) and frontal (inversion and eversion) planes obtained using the developed system (electric potentiometer) and goniometer. Differences in joint position sense task performance according to JPS-DE, JPE-AE, and JPE-VE values between the healthy subjects and patients with ankle instability were determined using the independent t test. SPSS Version 16.0 statistical software was used (Released 2007, SPSS for Windows, Version 16.0., SPSS Inc., Chicago). The alpha level of significance was set to 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The concurrent validity of the ankle joint ROM measurement was determined by comparing the measurements for ankle plantarflexion, dorsiflexion, inversion, and eversion using the developed system (electric potentiometer) and a goniometer. The measurement results of the 78 angular positions for ankle plantarflexion and dorsiflexion in the sagittal plane (r = 0.99, p < 0.05) and the 30 angular position for ankle inversion and eversion in the frontal plane (r = 0.99, p < 0.05) were strongly correlated.

Significant differences were observed between the healthy subjects and patients with ankle instability. The JPS-DE value in the joint position sense test for the healthy subjects (−0.6° to approximately 1.0°) was lower than that of the patients with ankle instability (−1.1° to 1.5°), particularly in target position IV (inversion: 1.0° ± 1.2° vs. 1.5° ± 2.8°, p < 0.05;dorsiflexion: −0.1° ± 0.9° vs. −0.5°±2.2°, p < 0.05) (Table 2
                        ). Moreover, the JPS-AE value in the joint position sense test for the healthy subjects was 0.7°–1.1° lower than that of the patients with ankle instability in single movement analysis, particularly in inversion (1.2° ± 0.5° vs. 2.0° ± 1.3°, p < 0.05), dorsiflexion (1.2° ± 0.4° vs. 1.9° ± 1.0°, p < 0.05), and plantarflexion (1.1° ± 0.4° vs. 2.2° ± 1.3°, p < 0.05) (Table 3
                        ). The JPS-AE value in the joint position sense test for the healthy subjects was 0.5°–1.1° lower than that of the patients with ankle instability in multiple axis motion analysis (combining the movements in the sagittal and frontal planes) among four target positions, particularly in target position I (0.9° ± 0.3° vs. 2.0° ± 1.3°, p < 0.05), target position II (1.0° ± 0.6° vs. 1.9° ± 0.9°, p < 0.05), and target position IV (1.0° ± 0.4° vs. 2.1° ± 1.4°, p < 0.05) (Table 4
                        ). The JPS-VE value in the joint position sense test for the healthy subjects (3.5°±0.8°) was significantly lower than that of the patients with ankle instability (6.6°±1.4°) in multiple axis motion analysis (p < 0.05).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This novel ankle joint motion and position sense measurement system was developed for obtaining accurate and reliable measurements of multiple axis ROM movements and joint position sense of the ankle joint. We contend that this system can be applied easily by the clinical therapists and sports trainers. This facilitates the understanding of ROM and proprioception changes among patients with ankle injury. The system design has two unique structures: a lower limb supporter and an ankle haptic interface. First, the lower limb supporter, which has an adjustable length, width, and height, was designed to fix the leg position appropriately and then prevent potential compensatory movement of the lower extremity during ROM measurements or joint position sense tests of the ankle joint because they might be affected by the muscle tension and contracture of two joint muscles, such as the gastrocnemius [43,44]. Moreover, the ankle joint typically performs many movements under weight-bearing conditions in daily activities [25–27,45,46]; therefore, the lower limb supporter enables patients to engage in joint motion and proprioception under partial weight-bearing conditions during ROM measurements and joint position sense tests, and the position between the lower limb supporter and ankle haptic interface can be adjusted. Second, we also developed a novel haptic interface system with a multiple axis movement platform for ankle ROM measurements and joint position sense tests because functional movement at the ankle joint involves many joints and combines sagittal (plantarflexion and dorsiflexion) and frontal plane movements in daily life [19,21,22]. The developed system combines a unique structural design (lower limb supporter and multiplane ankle haptic interface), a sensor utility (potentiometers), and programmable software; thus, it effectively evaluates ankle movements in multiple planes, and the obtained values exhibit excellent validity. Compared with the previously proposed FASTRAK and motion analysis systems for evaluating ankle joint movements in multiple planes, which have exhibited excellent reliability and validity [47–49], the present system enables programmable data management, has a user interface design, and is inexpensive. Thus, it can be used extensively in the clinical context for different types of patients.

In this study, two rotary potentiometers demonstrated excellent validity (0.99) in measuring the ROM for 37 angular positions in the sagittal plane (11 and 15 ankle plantarflexion and dorsiflexion positions, respectively) and frontal plane (5 and 6 ankle inversion eversion positions, respectively) between 0° and 70°; ankle ROM measurements obtained using the novel system were compared with a standard measure previously established based on goniometric measurements and examined by clinical physicians and researchers [11–13,17,30]. The results indicate that the system can be used to quantitatively and simultaneously evaluate ankle inversion and eversion, and plantarflexion and dorsiflexion ROM movements (multiple axis movements) during functional assessments of the ankle joint. Compared with previous studies that used several types of clinical equipment (goniometer and digital inclinometer) and a radiographic method for measuring joint motion (0.85–0.99) [31,32,50], the present study achieved excellent concurrent validity values (0.99). Thus, the system has been demonstrated to be valid via comparison with devices previously used for evaluating the ankle ROM. However, it remains difficult to compare the concurrent validity with that previously reported because no study has developed and used a multiple axis ROM measurement device at the ankle joint and validated ROM measurements of ankle plantarflexion and dorsiflexion, and inversion and eversion ROM simultaneously.

Measuring the JPS-DE, JPS-AE, and JPS-VE for elderly people and patients after ankle injury facilitates understanding the effects of aging, disease-related changes, or anesthetics on joint proprioception performance at the ankle joint [15,25,36,37,41,42]. Regarding DE values, several studies have reported that after ankle injury and following anesthesia, subjects underestimated the target angle by −2.28° and −5° for dorsiflexion and plantarflexion, respectively, and overestimated the target angle by 1.7° for inversion in single plane movements [37,41]. In this study, the patients with ankle instability underestimated the target angle by −0.1° for plantarflexion and overestimated the target angle by 1.2°–1.5° for inversion in multiple plane movements; these findings are in concordance with those previously reported [37,41]. Moreover, we demonstrated that the patients with ankle instability underestimated the target angle by −1.1° to −0.4° for eversion in multiple plane movements; this observation was not previously reported for tests of ankle joint proprioception in single plane movement. However, the JPS-DE for dorsiflexion (−0.5° to 0.9°) is different from those reported by previous studies possibly because of differences in the measurement protocol, such as the weight-bearing conditions, single or multiple plane testing movements, and combination of movements [37,41]. For example, the patients with ankle instability underestimated the target angle by −0.5° and overestimated it by 0.9° for dorsiflexion combined with eversion and inversion movements in multiple planes, respectively. The AE value is the most widely used outcome measure in joint perception testing for clinically investigating the joint proprioception performance of subjects with or without ankle instability [25,41]. In this study, we observed that the AE values were lower for the healthy subjects than for the patients with ankle instability in plantar flexion (1.1° ± 0.4° vs. 2.2° ± 1.3°; p = 0.002), dorsiflexion (1.2° ± 0.4° vs. 1.9° ± 1.0°; p = 0.032) and inversion (1.2° ± 0.5° vs. 2.0° ± 1.3°; p = 0.004) movements by 0.7°–1.1°. This finding is similar to that previously reported, and the AE value of the healthy subjects and patients with ankle instability differed by 0.8°–3.5° [25,41]. Another previous study showed that the mean JPS-VE value of healthy people (0.8° ± 0.2°) was 1.5° lower than that of people with impaired ankle proprioception (2.3° ± 0.3°) [51]. We also demonstrated that the VE values were 3.1° lower for the healthy adults (3.5° ± 0.8°) than for the patients with ankle instability (6.6° ± 1.4°). These findings indicate that the JPS-DE, JPS-AE, and JPS-VE measures for proprioception testing using the developed system enable differentiating the ankle proprioception performance of people with impaired ankle proprioception from that of people without impairment.

In this study, we developed a novel ankle joint motion and position sense measurement system with excellent validity and demonstrated proprioception deficits in patients after ankle sprain by using three proprioception indices (DE, AE, and VE); the system, evaluation methods, and proprioception indices can effectively assist researchers and therapists in understanding the ankle proprioception changes in patients with neurological or orthopedic diseases affecting ankle proprioception performance in the motion planes. However, this device can not measure movements in a horizontal plane (internal rotation and external rotation), which are partially movements during daily activities. Future research should design an additional structure that enables measuring the ROM of internal and external ankle rotation. Additionally, the selection criteria for chronic ankle instability were not in accordance with the criteria of International Ankle Consortium (IAC) [52] because these subjects were recruited before 2013, which might affect the results in the present study. We suggest that the future chronic ankle instability study can refer to the selection criteria of IAC in 2013 [52]. We also suggested that the future study can be designed to investigate the verification of the validity of this system comparing with several three-dimensional kinematic measurement systems and have an excellent reliability and validity for evaluating ankle joint movements. Finally, we also suggest that future research can use these parameters and evaluate protocols to understand the impaired ankle ROM and joint perception performance in specific populations, such as elderly people and patients with neurological disease or osteoarthritis. These measurement results would be extremely helpful for developing appropriate rehabilitation programs that will improve ankle and lower extremity functionality.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The contribution of this study is the development and validation of a system for simultaneously measuring the ankle ROM and joint position sense in multiple planes under weight-bearing conditions and investigating the changes in joint position sense performance in people with or without ankle instability.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (MOST 104-2218-E-038-003) and Taipei Medical University (TMU103- AE1-B24).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

