@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Load distribution on the radio-carpal joint for carpal arthrodesis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We analyze the load distribution through the wrist joint with several arthrodesis treatments.


                        
                        
                           
                           We used the rigid body spring model method on a 3D model of the wrist joint.


                        
                        
                           
                           We found the load distributions on each carpal articular surface of radius for each treatment.


                        
                        
                           
                           Obtained results allowed comparing the different treatments and their efficacy under static conditions.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Wrist analysis

Computational model

Arthrodesis

Hand loads

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and objective
                  Carpal fusions are useful for treating specific carpal disorders, maximizing postoperative wrist motion, hand strength, reducing pain and instability of the joint. The surgeon selects the appropriate treatment by considering the degree of stability, the chronicity of the injury, functional demands of the patient and former patient's outcomes as well. However there are not many studies regarding the load distribution provided by the treatment. So, the purpose of this study is to analyze the load distribution through the wrist joint with an arthrodesis treatment and compare the results with a normal wrist.
               
               
                  Method
                  To this end the rigid body spring model (RBSM) method was used on a three-dimensional model of the wrist joint. The cartilage and ligaments were simulated as springs acting under compression and tension, respectively, while the bones were considered as rigid bodies. To simulate the arthrodesis, the fused bones were considered as a single rigid body.
               
               
                  Results
                  The changes on the load distribution for each arthrodesis agree with the treatment objective, reducing load transmission through a specific articular surface. For example, for SLAC/SNAC II most of the treatments reduced the load transmitted through the radioscaphoid fossae, almost by 8%. However, the capitolunate (CL) arthrodesis was the treatment that managed to keep the load transmitted through the radiolunate joint closer to normal conditions. Also, in treatments where the scaphoid was excised (3-corner, 4-corner and capitolunate arthrodesis), the joint surface between the lunate surface compensates by doubling the transmitted force to the radius.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The common arthrodesis for treating SLAC/SNAC II-III, reduces, in fact, the load on the radioscaphoid joint. Alternative treatments that reduce load distribution on the radiocarpal joint should be three corner and capitolunate arthrodesis for treating SLAC/SNAC-II; and for SLAC/SNAC-III four corners with scaphoid excision. On Kienbock's disease. Scaphocapitate (SC) arthrodesis is more effective on reducing the load transmission through the radiolunate and ulnolunate joints. All arthrodesis treatment should consider changes on the load transmission, and also bones’ fusion rates and pain reduction on patient's outcomes.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Under high load conditions on the wrist, the cartilage that coat the bones can be compromised, affecting the functionality of the upper extremity, as in an osteoarthritis disease. Congenital wrist abnormalities can result in radiocarpal, ulnocarpal, and distal radioulnar joint incongruities, altering load patterns and cartilage degeneration [1]. There are several causes for wrist osteoarthritis, for example, an untreated case of avascular necrosis, as in Kienböck's disease, may lead to radiocarpal arthritis [1]. Congenital wrist abnormalities can result in radiocarpal, ulnocarpal, and distal radioulnar joint incongruities, altering load patterns and cartilage degeneration [1]. Another form of wrist osteoarthritis occurs at the Scaphotrapezium-trapezoid joint, which may befall without compromising all of the other joints of the wrist [1]. In addition, traumatic events could produce wrist arthritis, e.g., an injured ligament could produce intercarpal instability, altering wrist kinematic and joint loading, and degeneration of the radiocarpal joint [1]. Scapholunate advance collapse (SLAC) and scaphoid nonunion advance collapse (SNAC) are the most common patterns of wrist osteoarthritis (SNAC is caused by a trauma, whereas SLAC wrist may result from pseudogout and can appear without a history of injury), both of these are osteoarthritic diseases that involve an arthritic changes on the radioscaphoid fossae, and evolve until the capitolunate and radiolunate joint is affected [2]. Partial intercarpal arthrodesis are useful for treating specific carpal disorders [3]. Fusion of specific carpal bones can maximize postoperative wrist motion and hand strength while reducing pain and instability of the joint [3]. Hence, this arthrodesis has remained as an important alternative for the hand surgeon as a salvage procedure for patients with a wrist pathology [4], but there is still controversy regarding the appropriate surgical technique [5].

The hand surgeon must take into account several factors when selecting an appropriate treatment option; the degree of stability, the chronicity of the injury, and functional demands of the patient [6]. The decision is also based on former patients’ outcomes, which provide useful data on pain reduction, final mobility, and fusion rates [2,3,5,7–10]. There are several studies on biomechanical behavior and force/pressure distribution on the articular surfaces for a normal wrist and one with arthrodesis [11,12]; one approach uses ex vivo specimens of the joint and pressure sensitive films [13]. Computational models are also applied to explore biomechanical behavior of joints contact forces and are useful to determine the efficacy of various surgical procedures and their performance [12].

Traditionally, biomechanical computational models of the wrist have been based on finite element analysis (FEA), a useful methodology that, however, requires computational power, which limits its clinical applicability [11,12]. Depending on the problem at hand, more simplified analyses can be performed based on appropriate assumptions to determine solutions, e.g., rigid or deformable bones [12]. This is the basis of surface contact modeling (SCM) and rigid body spring modeling (RBSM); both of them without the need for a complex volumetric analysis [12]. With SCM it is possible to evaluate the joint mechanics from surface contact mechanics data alone [12]. On RBSM, which is an effective low computational cost approach, force distribution on static and kinematic analysis can be achieved when deformations are small [11]. This discrete element analysis method is useful as a tool for comparative purposes (normal vs. pathological, or pre- vs. post-op) when the aim of the study is analyze the contact area or contact stress profiles [14].

Therefore, the aims of this study is to compare and evaluate the biomechanical effect of different wrist arthrodesis, and correlate this results to possible clinical outcomes; thereby establishing a relationship between surgeon choices and treatment results. For this end, a 3D-computational rigid body spring model – RBSM of the wrist joint under static equilibrium conditions was developed. Then the force distribution on the radiocarpal joint was analyzed and compared between treatments applied for the same disease. This study outlines predictions on the radiocarpal joint mechanics, and may be useful as a complement when weighing the suitable treatment option for a patient.

3-D rigid body spring models (RBSM) of the hand were built following the methodology provided by a former study [15]. Then this model was modified in order to simulate different arthrodesis treatments on the wrist, and determine the force distribution on the radius articular surface. The results of each treatment were compared with those in normal conditions. The multi-body dynamic analysis software RecurDyn (Software based on CAE tools for multi-body dynamic analysis-MBD, by Functionbay, Inc. Seoul, Korea [16]) was used to analyze the models on static conditions.

The geometry of the wrist was the same as in Márquez et al. [15], which was from the computer tomography of a living subject's (adult male with type II lunate) wrist, who volunteered and gave informed consent. The wrist was in a neutral pose with no alteration or disease on his joint and which was subsequently processed in Mimics 10.01 (Materialize, Belgium); the study was approved by the University's Ethics Committee. Then the meshes of the bones were imported on RecurDyn (Functionbay, Inc., Seoul, Korea), considering each bone as an independent rigid solid body. For anatomical references, check the hand and wrist bone anatomy shown in Fig. 1
                        .

A total load of 136.4N was distributed on the metacarpal distal tips, along each longitudinal axis, from distal to proximal. The magnitude of load applied on the metacarpal I, II, III, IV and V were 21.5N, 34.3N, 42.2N, 25.9N and 18.1N (Fig. 2
                        ), respectively, as in former studies [15,17–20], whose works also determined the load distribution on the radio-carpal joint. These values were based on theoretical calculations from reported literature [21–23], and simulate grasp maneuver of the hand [17,18], although the modeled position of the hand not necessarily reflects this movement. Cartesian components of the forces applied to each metacarpal were calculated based on the global system (Fig. 2), with origin on the average height of the metacarpals and near the palmar part of the radius, with the x-axis pointing medially, the y-axis pointing dorsally, and the z-axis on the proximal to distal direction.

The boundary conditions were applied the same manner as in Márquez et al. [15]; the Ulna fixed on its proximal end, the Radius could only move over the arm's transverse plane, Metacarpals only moved on their longitudinal axis direction, and carpal bones were restricted to only move and rotate along the hand dorsal-palmar plane (Fig. 2).

The cartilage was modeled as in Márquez et al. [15], i.e., as discrete elements (springs) distributed in the joints surfaces. The springs were placed so that their length would be the minimum possible, and perpendicular as possible to both surface. Also their stiffness was determined considering expression (1) 
                        [15,24,25]:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       k
                                       i
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          (
                                          1
                                          −
                                          ν
                                          )
                                          E
                                       
                                       
                                          (
                                          1
                                          −
                                          2
                                          ν
                                          )
                                          (
                                          1
                                          +
                                          ν
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                    *
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             A
                                             i
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             h
                                             i
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where h
                        
                           i
                         is the average distance between the elements connected for a joint i, E is the cartilage Young's modulus (E
                        =5MPa) [26–29]; v is the Poisson's modulus (v
                        =0.45) [26,27]; A
                        
                           i
                         is the average area of all the interconnected elements for a joint. On the other hand, the force of each spring j of the joint i was proportional to changes in its length and calculated by Eq. (2):
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       F
                                       j
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                       k
                                       i
                                    
                                    (
                                    
                                       L
                                       0
                                    
                                    −
                                    
                                       L
                                       1
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                           
                        where k
                        
                           i
                         is the spring constant, L
                        0 is the resting length and L
                        1 the final length. All models had elements with average area of0.18mm2, with a total of 14,410 cartilage springs for the normal wrist model.

The triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) was assumed to be interacting with the triquetrum, and modeled as springs connecting the ulna with the lunate and the triquetrum. The properties of this cartilage complex were computed in a similar way as those of the other articular cartilage on the wrist joint.

The ligaments were modeled as in Márquez et al. [15], one spring per ligament, and the anatomic insertions of the 50 modeled ligaments on previous anatomical studies [30–32], as well as their stiffness [17,30], Table 1
                        . The resting length of the ligaments was considered as the same when placed on the insertion points with the hand in neutral position, and their wrapping on the bones was not considered.

On this study, the arthrodesis used as treatment for several the osteoarthritis diseases. This was achieved by considering the bones fused as a single body, by merging their meshes as a single .STL file format, and then importing these in RecurDyn as a single body. The cartilage and ligaments springs between the fused bones were not considered (Fig. 3
                        ).

Below is shown the abbreviations used to refer to each treatment:
                           
                              -
                              3Corner: Fusion of the lunate, capitate and hamate bones.

3CornerNoS: Fusion of the lunate, capitate and hamate bones with scaphoid excision.

SCL: Fusion of the scaphoid, capitate and lunate bones.

4Corner: Fusion of the lunate, capitate, hamate and triquetra bones.

CL: Fusion of the capitate and lunate bones.

CLNoS: Fusion of the capitate and lunate bones with scaphoid excision.

4CornerNoS: Fusion of the lunate, capitate, hamate and triquetra bones with scaphoid excision.

SL: Fusion of the scaphoid and lunate bones.

RSL: Fusion of the radius, scaphoid and lunate bones.

SC: Fusion of the scaphoid and capitate bones.

LTri: Fusion of the lunate and triquetral bones.

STT: Fusion of the scaphoid, trapezium and trapezoid bones.

@&#RESULTS@&#

We analyzed the load distribution through the radiocarpal joint for 12 different wrist arthrodesis treatments. All models were solved on RecurDyn, as a static problem with time consumption of 13–32.5s. The force transmission through each articular surface was also analyzed; for that purpose the Cartesian components of the force through each spring was determined based on the coordinate system shown in Fig. 2, and a total spring force on each direction (x,y,z) was determined for each articular surface, these values were weighed as a percentage of the components and magnitude of the external applied load (Table 2
                     ). All models showed that a 103% of the external applied load was transmitted through the distal radiocarpal and ulnocarpal joints together, but for those models with scaphoid excision the total transmission through the same joints was 112% (Table 2). These 3% of load excess in the distal radius and ulna may be due to error of the method itself, or due to the boundary conditions assumed in the models. However, it could also be a consequence of internal moments and changes on the direction of the applied load when reaching the radius and ulna, as well as in those models where the scaphoid is excised.

Arthrodesis options for a SLAC/SNAC Stage II wrist (3Corner, 3CornerNoS, SCL, 4Corner, CL and CLNoS arthrodesis) were analyzed. In all models the force through the radioscaphoid fossae was reduced more than 7%, compared to a normal wrist, except on the SCL arthrodesis which only reduced the force in 0.8% (Fig. 4
                        ). This decrease on the load transmission through the radioscaphoid joint, was compensated with an increase on the force transmitted through the lunate fossae of almost the same 7% (Fig. 4). Finally, the total load through the radius was similar to the normal wrist (Table 2). However, on the models with excision of the scaphoid, the lunate surface compensates by doubling the transmitted force to the radius (Fig. 4), compared to the normal wrist.

Analyzing the load transmitted through the ulnolunate joint in the treated wrists, there is not much variation compared to the normal wrist, just about 1.4%, except for those models with scaphoid excision where the ulna compensates the force that is not transmitted through the radius (Fig. 4). A similar result is seen on the load transmitted through the ulnotriquetral joint; being the three-corner fusion (3Corner) arthrodesis that reduces the load the most the, about 3.4%, and the capitolunate (CL) fusion tends to keep the same distribution as in the normal joint.

The contact pressure distribution was also compared between models (Fig. 5
                        ), these were obtained by dividing the load on each spring by the element's area and then plotting the results using the “cell data to point data” function in ParaView. In all of them the pressure was transmitted through approximately the same areas, the main difference lies on how much load is concentrated per unit area. The peak pressure on the radioscaphoid joint in all treatments is lower than on the normal configuration (Fig. 5). Additionally, on the radiolunate fossae, the peak pressure is higher than on the normal wrist, in order to compensate the missing scaphoid (Fig. 5). However, the load transmitted through the ulnolunate joint increased on all SLAC/SNAC II and III treatments, but with a uniform pressure distribution (Fig. 5). Additionally, on those models with scaphoid excision there is an increment on load transmission through the ulnolunate joint, but still with a uniform pressure distribution (Fig. 5).

Some other common arthrodesis are also analyzed (SL, RSL, SC, LTri, STT), on all of them the implied bones on the osteoarthritic disease are fused, except on the STT fusion which is generally used on the Kienböck's disease.

Most of the arthrodesis tends to reduce the force transmitted through the radiolunate fossae, except for the Lunotriquetral arthrodesis (LTri) (Fig. 6
                        ). The triscaphoid (STT) and the scaphocapitate (SC) arthrodesis reduced most of the force transmitted through the radiolunate joint, about 4% compared to the normal wrist, compensated with an increment on the force transmitted through the radioscaphoid joint and through the ulnolunate joint (Fig. 6). Finally, on the RSL arthrodesis the total force that reached the base of the radius and ulna was analyzed, and it was found that this arthrodesis reduced the load transmitted on through the ulna, generating an overload on the radius (Table 2).

Additionally, pressure distribution for the arthrodesis treatments was determined (Fig. 7
                        ). The obtained pressure maps agree with the increments and reduction of the load percentages transmitted through each joint.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

On this study we developed three-dimensional RBSM wrist models in order to evaluate load distribution the radio-carpal joint after some carpal arthrodesis treatments. A similar work was done by Iwasaki et al. [33], who determined which intercarpal fusions for Kienböck's disease treatment reduced most of the loads on the lunate. Iwasaki et al. [33] analyzed 3 fusions applied for Kienbock's disease, capitate-hamate (CH), scapho-trapezio-trapezoid (STT), and sacapho-capitate. (SC), concluding that capitate-hamate fusion is ineffective in reducing lunate compression [33]. Viegas et al. [34], also analyzed the load distribution on the radio-carpal joint for arthrodesis used for treating stage III perilunate instability, by means of using pressure sensitive film on a cadaver wrist. They found that scapho-trapezio-trapezoid (STT) and scapho-capitate (SC) fusions reduced load transmission trough the lunate fossae on the radius. Moreover, Viegas et al. [34] concluded that scapho-lunate (SL), scapho-capito-lunate (SCL) and capito-lunate (CL) fusions distributed the load in a more proportional way through the radio-scaphoid and radio-lunate fossae.

Regardless some cut backs done for simplicity's sake, the models developed provide insights into the biomechanical effects that the arthrodesis treatments can generate on the load distribution over the radiocarpal joint surfaces. These limitations include the fact that the insertion places of the ligaments have been reduced to points and not regions, as actually happens, also the fact that no account was taken of the effect of preload in the ligaments. Additionally, the elastic properties of the ligaments and the cartilage are approximated, so any alteration in the ligaments insertion points or in the material properties can change somehow the load distribution. Furthermore, the restrictions and mechanical loads have simulated physiological conditions but with limitations in the exact form that those are applied, e.g., the restrictions applied to the carpal bones, meant to simulate the joint capsule, may not behave as the actual physiological capsule, therefore the restriction could be altering somehow the load distribution on each articular surface. However, since the principal aim of this study is to compare and have an insight of the outcomes of different arthrodesis treatments (normal vs. post-op), the employed method is suitable to meet this task.

We analyzed arthrodesis options for a SLAC/SNAC Stage II wrist (Table 2), where there is an arthritic change of the scaphoid facet of the distal radius [6], so a reduction on load transmission through the radioscaphoid fossae is needed. The results show that all treatments for these diseases achieve the goal of reducing load on the radioscaphoid joint (Fig. 4), except for the scaphocapitolunate (SCL) arthrodesis, which only reduces the load through this joint by 0.8%, while the other treatments manage to reduce it by almost 8%. This means that scaphocapitolunate (SCL) arthrodesis should not be considered as an option for treating SLAC/SNAC Stage II, when there is the possibility of applying any other treatment.

Furthermore, any arthrodesis applied as a treatment must preserve a normal articulation with adjacent bones [4], so load conditions on the remaining joints have to stay close to those on normal configuration. Hence, if the load transmitted through the radioscaphoid joint is reduced as a treatment for SLAC/SNAC Stage II, then the load through the radiolunate joint must be as near as possible to normal conditions. Although all arthrodesis for treating SLAC/SNAC Stage II increase the load transmitted through the radiolunate joint, the capitolunate (CL) arthrodesis is the one that less increases it, only by 6.2% (Fig. 4).

The load on the ulnolunate joint increases similarly on all treatments (Fig. 4). But, on the capitolunate (CL) arthrodesis the load transmitted through the ulnotriquetral joint remains the same as in normal conditions, while on other arthrodesis it is reduced, except on the arthrodesis with scaphoid excision (Fig. 4). Moreover, scaphocapitolunate (SCL) arthrodesis sacrifices range of motion for pain relief [10], although the load distributions are close to the normal wrist, with a relative low load reduction through the radioscaphoid fossae, but more uniformly distributed.

The arthrodesis for treatment with scaphoid excision increases the load considerably through the remaining radiocarpal and ulnocarpal joints. The load distribution is similar between them, so other factors must be taken into account when weighing treatments, such as the patient's functional demands, state of the wrist, surgeon's experience and preferences, and bone fusion rates [35].

For SLAC/SNAC Stage III, the common treatment is the four corner (4corner) arthrodesis with scaphoid excision, a procedure with a high complication rate [7]. On this treatment, the load through the radiolunate and ulnolunate joint increases considerably due to compensation in the absence of the scaphoid, but close to those other treatments with scaphoid excision (Fig. 4). Though three corner and four corner fusions have almost the same load distribution through the radiocarpal and ulnocarpal joints (Figs. 4 and 5), and they have the same postoperative range of motion, the fusion rates should be considered as determining factors for treatment decision [36]. Four corner has proven to have high fusion rates [37,38], and to provide reliable pain relief [39]; but when the scaphoid is excised, degenerative osteoarthritis could occur due to high load per unit area on the radiolunate fossae [10].

Additionally, we have analyzed other common arthrodesis, where bones involved in the osteoarthritic disease are fused, so the degraded joint surface is eliminated; this, except on the triscaphe (STT) and scaphocapitate (SC) fusions that are applied on the Kienböck's disease, where there is avascular necrosis of the lunate [33].

The STT arthrodesis stabilizes the radial column of the carpus, transmitting the load through the radioscaphoid joint, thus unloading the radiolunate joint [9]. The model of STT arthrodesis developed on this study showed that the load transmitted from the lunate to the radius and ulna reduced 4% and 0.6%, respectively (Figs. 6 and 7); these findings agree with those found by Iwasaki et al. [33] (10% reduction through the radiolunate joint). Therefore, the triscaphe (STT) arthrodesis could be a recommended treatment for Kienböck's.

On the other hand scaphocapitate (SC) arthrodesis, could also be suggested as a treatment for Kienböck's disease since it reduces the load transmitted through the radiolunate and ulnolunate joints the most (Fig. 6), reducing pain in patients with Kieböck's disease [33] (15% reduction through the radiolunate joint). However, surgeons should consider that the load reduction on the lunate articular surfaces generated by the STT and SC arthrodesis produces an increase of the load transmission of the radio-scaphoid joint in comparison to the normal wrist (Fig. 6).

The other arthrodesis (scapholunate-SL and Lunotriquetral-LTri) tends to maintain the load through the radiocarpal and ulnocarpal joints close to the normal configuration, and other factors should be taken into account. For example, although fusion of the scaphoid to the lunate (SL) treats the anatomical site scapholunate instability and has an attractive load distribution (Figs. 6 and 7), bony fusion is difficult to achieve [33]. Moreover, lunotriquetral arthrodesis is a demanding procedure with complications on the fusion, demanding bone graft to ensure it [33], but with a minimal effect on wrist range of motion [40].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

On this study models of the radiocarpal joint were created, and conditions of arthrodesis treatments were simulated applying the rigid body spring model method (RBSM). Twelve arthrodesis treatments were simulated. The arthrodesis for treating SLAC/SNAC disease stages II–III, tends to reduce the load on the radioscaphoid joint, which is the purpose of the treatment.

When scaphoid excision is needed, three corner and capitolunate arthrodesis should be considered for treating SLAC/SNAC-II; and for SLAC/SNAC-III four corners with scaphoid excision. For Kienbock's disease, triscaphe (STT) and scaphocapitate (SC) arthrodesis are suggested as a treatment, being the latter more effective on reducing the load transmission through the radiolunate and ulnolunate joints. All arthrodesis treatments should consider changes on the load transmission, as well as the bone fusion rates and the pain reduction of patient's outcomes.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

