@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Emergency department utilization can indicate early diagnosis of digestive tract cancers: A population-based study in Taiwan

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           It is the first population-based study to identify patients whose ED visits prior to diagnosis of digestive tract cancer.


                        
                        
                           
                           Certain examinations and blood transfusion in ED from 4 to 15 months prior to diagnosis was the significant predictors.


                        
                        
                           
                           We proposed a screening method of potential patients with digestive tract cancer by clinical decision support system in ED.


                        
                        
                           
                           Implementation of informatics system in ED can provide an opportunity for early detection of occult digestive tract cancer.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cancer

Diagnosis

Emergency department

Predictor

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and objective
                  Patients who visit emergency department (ED) may have symptoms of occult cancers.
               
               
                  Methods
                  We studied a random cohort of one million subjects from Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database between 2000 and 2008 to evaluate the ED utilization of individuals who were subsequently diagnosed with digestive tract cancers. The case group was digestive tract cancer patients and the control group was traumatic fracture patients. We reviewed record of ED visits only from 4 to 15 months before the cancer diagnoses.
               
               
                  Results
                  There were 2635 and 6665 in the case and control groups respectively. Patients’ adjusted odds ratio with 95% confidence interval for the case group were 1.36 (1.06–1.74) for Abdominal ultrasound, 2.16 (1.61–2.90) pan-endoscopy, 1.72 (1.33–2.22) guaiac fecal-occult blood test, 1.42 (1.28–1.58) plain abdominal X-rays, 1.20 (1.09–1.32) SGOT, 1.27 (1.14–1.40) SGPT, 1.66 (1.41–1.95) total bilirubin, 2.41 (1.89–3.08) direct bilirubin, 1.21 (1.01–1.46) hemoglobin and 3.63 (2.66–4.94) blood transfusion, respectively. Blood transfusion in the ED was a significant predictor of the individual subsequently diagnosed with digestive tract cancer.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The health system could identify high risk patients early by real-time review of their ED utilization before the diagnosis of digestive tract cancers. We proposed a follow-up methodology for daily screening of patients with high risk of digestive tract cancer by informatics system in the ED.
               
            

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Although significant advances have been made in cancer treatment, cancer is still an important medical problem that threatens the health of individuals, even in developed countries [1]. The early diagnosis of cancer in adults has been recognized as one of the most important factors in determining survival [2]. In some areas of Asia, the incidence of digestive tract cancers is high. Moreover, in many cases these cancers have already progressed to a late stage by the time of diagnosis, making the prognosis poor [3,4]. Community-based screening programs for gastric cancer have been performed in Taiwan between 1995 and 2004 by using serum bio-marker measurements as well as C-urea breath tests [5,6]. Evaluating serum bio-markers for screening high risk patients with hepatocellular cancer has also been implemented in several communities [7]. For colorectal cancer, the Bureau of Health Promotion launched a national mass screening project in 2010 using the guaiac fecal occult blood test [8,9]. Using endoscopy to screen patients at high risk for esophageal cancer has been reported recently [10].

Cancer is the leading cause of death in Taiwan. In 2012, 43,665 people died of malignancies, accounting for 28.4 percent of all deaths that year [11]. In 2010, 90,649 people were newly diagnosed with cancer, 34.4 percent with digestive tract cancer. Colorectal cancer has the second highest incidence among all cancers, hepatocellular cancer the third highest, and gastric cancer the seventh highest in 2010. Therefore, the digestive tract cancer is an important health problem in Taiwan [12].

Since the launch of National Health Insurance (NHI) in Taiwan in 1995, 99.7% of the population is insured. The low visit fee and easy access to emergency departments (ED) after implementation of NHI have encouraged the public to use the services of the ED [13], and many patents resort to the ED for management of chronic illness out of convenience. Some chronic conditions and diseases increase the risk of malignancy [14]. Although the busy ED is not an ideal setting to diagnose of cancer, there are more than 200,000 cases of cancer diagnosed each year in the ED in the United States [15]. Thus, emergency physicians must be aware of the possibility that cancer may be the cause of the presenting symptom in the ED. Further, the health system must develop methods to identify these patients early.

We performed a case–control study using data from a cohort of 1,000,000 subjects randomly selected from the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) between 2000 and 2008 to evaluate which examinations and treatments provided to patients in the ED were significantly associated with the subsequent diagnosis of digestive tract cancers in order to develop a method to identify these patients early.

The National Health Insurance (NHI) program was initiated in Taiwan in 1995. In 1998, the National Health Research Institute (NHRI) established an NHI research database, released by the Bureau of National Health Insurance (BNHI). One special kind of dataset is the “cohort dataset”, that contains the claims data of one million persons chosen by random sampling from the population insured in 2005. The distributions of age, gender and other demographics of the cohort were confirmed to be representative of the Taiwanese population [16]. All medical examinations and treatments in our study were derived from claims data for these one million persons between 1997 and 2008 [17]. Because the dataset in our study consisted of de-identified secondary data released by NHRI to public for research purposes, our study was exempt from full review by the Institutional Review Board [18].

To avoid evaluating visits caused by the diagnostic work-up of suspected cancer in the ED, the three month period before the cancer diagnosis was excluded in our study [15]. Thus, only the ED records from 4 to 15 months prior to the diagnosis of digestive tract cancer were evaluated. The diagnosis of digestive tract cancer was defined as the first appearance of ICD-9 codes 150.0–150.9 (esophageal cancer), 151.0–151.9 (gastric cancer), 153.0–153.9, 154.0–154.1 (colorectal cancer) and 155.0 (hepatocellular cancer) in the individual patient's record in NHIRD regardless of the clinical setting.

The sampling process of the case and control group is shown in Fig. 1
                     . The case group consisted of patients with esophageal cancer, gastric cancer, colorectal cancer and hepatocellular cancer. The exclusion criteria were: diagnosis made before the year 2000, to ensure that patients enrolled were diagnosed with cancer for the first time; age 20 years or younger; unclear gender; concurrent fractures associated with the initial cancer diagnosis.

Because traumatic fracture patients and cancer patients represented distinct population, we chose patients with traumatic fracture unrelated to cancer as the control group in order to reduce the effect of confounding. Accordingly, ICD-9 codes 800–829, which best fit these criteria, were chosen as the control group. The exclusion criteria for the control group were: diagnosis with fracture before the year 2000; age 20 years or younger; and unclear gender.

The dependent variable was the diagnosis of digestive tract cancer by ICD code; the independent variables for the model were the binary variable of whether there was an order in the medical record for selected examinations or treatments in the ED from 4 to 15 months prior to the diagnosis of cancer. Thirteen examinations and treatments clinically related to digestive tract cancer were selected for study, including abdominal ultrasound, pan-endoscopy, colonoscopy, guaiac fecal occult blood test (gFOBT), plain chest X-ray, plain abdominal X-ray, computed tomography (CT), serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (SGPT), total bilirubin (TB), direct bilirubin (DB), hemoglobin, and packed red blood cells (P-RBC) transfusion. These examinations and treatments were evaluated in both the case and control groups. The covariants for adjustment were age, gender, Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), hospital level, ownership and location, as well as number of ED visits. The inclusion of the CCI was intended to control for complications from chronic diseases. The Taiwan Joint Commission on Hospital level Accreditation (TJCHA) assigned the hospital as a result of the independent hospital accreditation process [19].

Data analysis was performed with SAS 9.2 statistical software. Logistic regression analysis was used to analyze the extent of ED services given in the case and control groups by means of odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). The covariates were used to adjust the OR. Stratification analysis for the individual cancers was then performed. Finally, the total study period of 12 months was divided into 2 stages: early, 10–15 months prior to the diagnosis, and recent, 4–9 months prior to diagnosis. The degree of ED services rendered in the two periods was compared. A p value of <05 was considered to be statistically significant.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Based on the above inclusion criteria, a total of 9299 subjects (2635 in the case group and 6665 in the control group) were included in this study. Table 1
                      shows a comparison of the demographics, clinical characteristics, and hospital features of the case and control groups. The gender ratio was close to 1:1 in both groups. The case group had a higher incidence of individual greater than 65 years of age; the control group was primarily in the age group 20–44 years of age. The majority of patients in both groups had only one prior ED visit. Most patients in the case group scored greater than or equal to 3 points on the CCI; the control group had CCI scores that varied from 0 to greater than 3 points. For the case group, the hospitals were primarily located in northern Taiwan, were private, and were regional hospitals or medical centers; the majority of patients in the control group visited regional or district hospitals.


                     Table 2
                      reports the adjusted logistic regressions for the two groups with examinations and treatments in the ED. The adjusted OR with 95% CI for the case group was 1.36 (1.06–1.74) for abdominal ultrasound, 2.16 (1.61–2.90) for pan-endoscopy, 1.72(1.33–2.22) for gFOBT, 1.42 (1.28–1.58) for plain abdominal X-rays, 1.20 (1.09–1.32) for SGOT, 1.27 (1.14–1.40) for SGPT, 1.66 (1.41–1.95) for TB, 2.41 (1.89–3.08) for DB, 1.21 (1.01–1.46) for hemoglobin and 3.63(2.66–4.94) for P-RBC transfusion. The result of logistic regression analyses for the individual types of digestive tract cancers are shown in Table 3
                     . For esophageal cancer, gastric cancer, colorectal cancer and hepatocellular cancer patients, who were significantly more likely to receive at least one P-RBC transfusion with an ED visit before diagnosis (adjusted OR with 95% CI were 3.13 (1.31–7.44), 5.20 (3.02–8.95), 2.55 (1.71–3.82), and 4.57 (3.17–6.58), respectively).

The number of patients receiving examinations and treatments in the early and later time-periods was compared for the individual digestive tract cancers (Table 4
                     ). More patients in the case group received evaluations and treatments in the recent time period. SGPT showed significant differences for all digestive cancers except gastric cancer. No significant differences were seen in gastric cancer patients between these two time periods.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Previous reports evaluating utilization of the ED before making the diagnosis of cancer are rare [15,20,21]. This is in part because the diagnosis of cancer has generally been made in outpatient clinics or health examination centers. The reliability and validity of data from the NHIRD used in this study has been confirmed in previous studies [22,23]; however, because there are no data to identify the clinical setting where the diagnosis of cancer was made, we were not able to identify which cases were diagnosed in the ED. According to a study in Michigan, 23 percent of the colorectal cancer patients were diagnosed in the ED [15]. Another study indicated that 5.4% of cancer patients were diagnosed in the ED [15,21].

The increase in the aging population and the inadequate screening for cancer in the general population may prompt individuals to visit the ED for alleviation of symptoms of unclear origins [24,25]. Two studies have reported that the ED has become an important setting for diagnosing cancer [15,20]. Further, another study determined that the aging population and lack of health insurance are risk factors for colorectal cancers that present as acute surgical emergencies, indicating advanced disease [26]. In the context of the unique health insurance system in Taiwan that mandatorily covers more than 99.7% of population, the convenience of ED utilization has contributed to the problem of non-emergent ED visits. One study noted that nearly 35% of all ED visits in Taiwan could have been managed by general practitioners [27]. Further, non-emergent patients were more likely to have a history of chronic illness associated with an increased risk of cancer [13]. Thus, the possibility of occult cancer patients visiting ED should not be underestimated.

Our study shows that evaluation of the hemoglobin and delivery of P-RBC transfusions were prescribed significantly more frequently in the case group than the control group (adjusted OR with 95% CI=1.21 (1.01–1.46) and 3.63 (2.66–4.94), respectively). P-RBC transfusion was also the single risk factor which was significant among esophageal, gastric, hepatocellular and colorectal cancer (Table 3), indicating that unexplained anemia requiring P-RBC transfusion in the ED was a significant predictor of the individual subsequently being diagnosed with digestive tract cancer. In cancer patients, anemia can be caused by hemolysis, blood loss, or impaired red blood cell production. Our findings are consistent with recent studies that have reported anemia is a common complication in cancer patients, especially digestive tract cancers [28].

In contrast, patients subsequently diagnosed with colorectal cancer were more likely to have undergone evaluation with pan-endoscopy and plain abdominal X-rays [29]. This was likely due to unrelenting dyspepsia or symptoms of abnormal bowel function. These patients also had a higher incidence of P-RBC transfusion in the ED suggesting anemia is an early symptom of colorectal cancer.

Patients with hepatocellular cancer may also be seen in the ED as a consequence of protracted symptoms due to liver cirrhosis. The number of abdominal ultrasound examination in these patients was significantly higher than that of the control group. This result is reasonable, as hepatocellular cancer is usually preceded by chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis, which can cause digestive tract symptoms [30]. The number of pan-endoscopy examinations, gFOBT, plain abdominal X-ray, SGOT, SGPT, TB and DB measurements were also significantly higher in patients who subsequently developed hepatocellular cancer than in controls.

In contrast, there are few early alarming symptoms of esophageal cancers that might lead the patient to visit the ED [31]. DB was significantly associated with the subsequent diagnosis of esophageal cancer; however, it is not clear whether an increase in the DB is an early sign of localized disease or a consequence of liver metastases. More research will be required to clarify this issue.

When patients who subsequently develop gastric cancer visit the ED, the number of pan-endoscopy examinations, gFOBT, plain abdominal X-ray, SGOT, SGPT, TB and DB is increased compared to controls. Pan-endoscopy and gFOBT are typical choices for evaluating upper gastrointestinal symptoms. These two tests as well as other liver function tests are also utilized at a similarly higher rate in our study for patients who subsequently developed hepatocellular cancer, suggesting that some symptoms may be shared by gastric cancer and hepatocellular cancer patients early in the course of the disease.

CT scans are commonly used to diagnose unexplained or serious abdominal symptoms; however, no significant difference in the number of CT scans was found in our study (Table 2). Only 6 percent of patients who were subsequently diagnosed with digestive tract cancers underwent CT scanning 4–15 months prior to the diagnosis indicating that there were no major abdominal symptoms that caused the emergency physicians to order these tests. Further, there was no significant difference in the use of pan-endoscopy in patients who were subsequently diagnosed with esophageal cancer suggesting that there is a lack of specific symptoms during the period prior to diagnosis. The number of CT scans among patients who subsequently developed esophageal cancer was also not increased compared to the control group. This may be due to the small number of patients with esophageal cancer in this cohort or due to the lack of specific symptoms at the early stage. Although the early symptoms of colorectal cancer are nonspecific, only 0.68 percent of patients who subsequently developed colorectal cancer underwent colonoscopy. The low rate of colonoscopy may be due to the fact that a colonoscopy requires 1–2 days for colon preparation, and thus, is rarely performed in the EDs in Taiwan.

A comparison between the early period and the period closer to the diagnosis (Table 4) shows that a significantly higher number of patients receive examinations and treatments during the period closer to the diagnosis of digestive tract cancer. After stratification, no significant difference was noted for gastric cancer, suggesting that there was no obvious progression of symptoms during the investigative period, from 4 to 15 months prior to the cancer diagnosis. The number of SGOT and SGPT determinations in patients who subsequently developed esophageal and colorectal cancer significantly increased in the period closer to the diagnosis suggesting that the symptoms of cancer were progressing. More data are necessary to clarify whether this increase utilization of SGOT and SGPT is related to early liver metastases [32].

In Taiwan, the frequency of ED visits is increasing due to the rise in the aging population and the low ED visit fee [13]. Therefore, it is likely that occult cancer will increasingly present to the ED and be diagnosed there. Patients often presented to the ED with ambiguous symptoms, such as abdominal pain, dyspepsia, vomiting, constipation or body weight loss. Emergency physician have the opportunity to prescribe evaluations and treatments for the patients to avoid the risk of delayed diagnosis of cancer. Our study identified some diagnostic and therapeutic services given to the patients who subsequently developed digestive tract cancer. Interestingly, esophageal cancer had the least specific symptoms as judged by the number of diagnostic measures prescribed. P-RBC Blood transfusion was strongly associated with the subsequent diagnosis of digestive tract cancer.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

There are several limitations of our study. First, our analysis was conducted using a database that did not provide complete socioeconomic data, family history, vital signs and reports of examinations, as well as the information regarding health behaviors. Although we adjusted for several possible confounding factors, such as age, gender, CCI, hospital characteristics and number of ED visits, there are still may be potential confounding variables. Second, exclusion of patients’ ED activity from 1 to 3 months prior to the diagnosis of cancer precluded some potentially useful information about how the ultimate diagnosis was established; however, it reduced the bias of potentially including ED procedures that were used to diagnose cancers. Patients with traumatic fracture were chosen as the control group in order to decrease confounding effects; however, traumatic fracture patients are younger than cancer patients. Perhaps, additional information would have been discovered if the control group had been made up of patients who visited the ED for digestive tract discomfort but did not subsequently develop digestive tract cancer.

We used a randomized dataset from NHRI with proved validity, therefore our interpretation can be generalized to other hospitals in Taiwan. Since the National Health Insurance System in our country is unique, the application of our results outside of Taiwan should be verified by further investigations conducted in other countries.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Emergency physician should be aware that unexplained anemia requiring P-RBC transfusion is significantly associated with digestive tract malignancy [2], and gFOBT is also the significant data to get patients to alert at ED. Our data further suggest that a review of the evaluations and treatments utilized in the ED in real time shortly after the ED visit may result in earlier diagnosis of occult digestive tract cancer and improved prognosis. We proposed a follow-up methodology for daily screening of patients with high risk of digestive tract cancer by informatics system as the clinical decision support system as safety reinforcement in the ED. We believe that implementation of this system in ED can provide an opportunity for early detection of occult digestive tract cancer.

None.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We would like to thank Cancer Center of Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University for providing data.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

