@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Integrating HL7 RIM and ontology for unified knowledge and data representation in clinical decision support systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We develop a semantic healthcare knowledge base to support the practical use of CDSS.


                        
                        
                           
                           We propose a unified representation of healthcare domain knowledge and patient data based on HL7 RIM and ontology.


                        
                        
                           
                           We encode semantic rules and queries for data-driven and knowledge-based inference.


                        
                        
                           
                           We design a semantic CDSS to enable data interoperability and knowledge sharing for patient-specific clinical decision support.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Semantic Web Technologies

Ontology

Knowledge base

CDSS

HL7 RIM

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and objectives
                  The broad adoption of clinical decision support systems within clinical practice has been hampered mainly by the difficulty in expressing domain knowledge and patient data in a unified formalism. This paper presents a semantic-based approach to the unified representation of healthcare domain knowledge and patient data for practical clinical decision making applications.
               
               
                  Methods
                  A four-phase knowledge engineering cycle is implemented to develop a semantic healthcare knowledge base based on an HL7 reference information model, including an ontology to model domain knowledge and patient data and an expression repository to encode clinical decision making rules and queries. A semantic clinical decision support system is designed to provide patient-specific healthcare recommendations based on the knowledge base and patient data.
               
               
                  Results
                  The proposed solution is evaluated in the case study of type 2 diabetes mellitus inpatient management. The knowledge base is successfully instantiated with relevant domain knowledge and testing patient data. Ontology-level evaluation confirms model validity. Application-level evaluation of diagnostic accuracy reaches a sensitivity of 97.5%, a specificity of 100%, and a precision of 98%; an acceptance rate of 97.3% is given by domain experts for the recommended care plan orders.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The proposed solution has been successfully validated in the case study as providing clinical decision support at a high accuracy and acceptance rate. The evaluation results demonstrate the technical feasibility and application prospect of our approach.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A clinical decision support system (CDSS) is a computer-based information system developed specifically for clinical decision-making, in which the characteristics of an individual patient are matched to a computerized clinical knowledge base, and patient-specific assessments or recommendations are then presented to the clinician or the patient for a decision [1]. A large body of evidence suggests that CDSSs can be helpful in improving clinical practice [2,3]. However, to this day, CDSSs have not found wide use outside of a handful of mostly academic medical centers, and their impact on patient outcome is marginal [4]. A major impediment to their wide adoption is the lack of standard knowledge representation models and data models [5].

The knowledge in CDSS is primarily derived from healthcare process models such as clinical guidelines (CGs) and care plans (CPs). CGs are systematically developed statements to assist practitioners’ decision making about appropriate healthcare for specific clinical circumstances [6], while CPs can be viewed as detailed CGs that typically include locally tailored care activities recommended by one or more CGs with explicit procedures, schedules, conditions, and goals [7]. Several process-oriented representation languages have been proposed to formulate these models, such as GLIF, GUIDE, Asbru, EON, PRODIGY, and PROforma [8]. Although these languages provide a complete set of control flow structures to describe the procedural knowledge of healthcare processes, most of them are designed with limited expressivity of institution-specific organizational knowledge and domain-specific medical knowledge, which are equally important for their practical execution where a highly complex and changeable clinical context frequently occurs.

A number of studies suggest the use of ontologies to encode CGs or CPs [9]. The ontology, originally defined as “a formal, explicit specification of a shared conceptualization” [10], can formally define the terms, relations, and constraints of commonly agreed upon concepts that constitute different aspects (procedural, organizational, and medical) of CDSS knowledge. The static knowledge in the ontology can also be dynamically updated and utilized by an inference engine when combined with rules and fact data. However, work in this area is faced with the challenge brought by the heterogeneity of healthcare knowledge and the lack of a standard paradigm for ontology engineering, leading to a proliferation of ontologies that themselves create obstacles to integration [11].

Another critical factor that impacts the successful implementation of CDSSs is their seamless integration into the organizational workflow. Despite the plentiful patient data standards available to date, including standard models such as openEHR [12] and CEN/ISO 13606 [13] and standard terminologies such as those compiled in UMLS [14], there is little consensus on their usage within CDSSs. A recent review from Ahmadian et al. [15] reveals that the diversified data models and terminologies adopted by CDSSs and healthcare information systems lead to problems in semantic interoperability. Therefore, a generic data model to align these standards is required.

The HL7 version 3 Reference Information model (RIM) is such a model that covers all aspects of healthcare information [16]; it is compatible with existing data standards and knowledge models, and thus can serve as the foundation for information integration across platforms and systems. There have been some ongoing efforts in RIM modeling and application, most of which focus on ontological engineering of the RIM [17,18,19], clinical data interoperability [20,21] and domain knowledge representation [22,23], while few seek to develop and validate the RIM for CDSS knowledge and data integration [24].

To meet the abovementioned challenges to CDSS implementation, this paper proposes a novel approach to the unified representation of CDSS knowledge and data based on Semantic Web Technologies and HL7 RIM. A semantic healthcare knowledge base has been developed, whose core components include:
                        
                           •
                           A generic ontology constructed based on HL7 RIM to represent healthcare domain knowledge and clinical data.

A repository of semantically encoded rules and queries for dynamic and personalized clinical decision making.

We validate our solution in a prototype semantic CDSS to provide patient-specific recommendations on the management of inpatients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Ontology-level and application-level evaluations are conducted to demonstrate its technical feasibility and application prospect.

Our work advances the state of the art by (1) developing an ontological framework for multi-faceted CDSS knowledge integration, sharing, and reuse, (2) designing a semantic CDSS environment for dynamic and personalized clinical decision making, and (3) bridging the gap between CDSSs and heterogeneous healthcare information systems to support the practical use of CDSSs.

@&#METHODS@&#

We designed a four-phase knowledge engineering cycle to develop the semantic healthcare knowledge base (SHKB), as shown in Fig. 1
                     . The knowledge being modeled is under continual maintenance and kept up to date through systematic capturing, modeling, operationalizing and evaluation. We describe each phase in detail in the following Sections 2.1–2.4.

We studied the method of cognitive analysis by Patel et al. [25] and summarized a three-step process for knowledge acquisition: knowledge identification, knowledge extraction, and knowledge authentication. In knowledge identification, we generalize the healthcare process knowledge from three types of knowledge sources:
                           
                              •
                              Published medical literature on CGs and CPs, standard terminologies and clinical information models.

Patient data from healthcare information systems, such as the electronic medical record (EMR).

Experiences from domain experts in clinical practice and medical informatics.

First, concepts and relationships describing the healthcare activities are identified and categorized into semantic networks with informal concept links; we then started knowledge extraction by mapping the semantic networks to HL7 RIM UML class diagrams to formalize their semantic roles; finally, we represented the formal semantic networks using the meta-ontology approach [26]: concepts are expressed as ontological classes, and relationships are expressed as properties. Fig. 2
                         depicts a partial meta-ontology to define T2DM CP.

Knowledge authentication proceeded in parallel with the previous two processes; close cooperation between domain experts and knowledge engineers is involved to examine the correctness, completeness, and redundancy of the acquired knowledge.

Knowledge representation focuses on the formalization of the acquired meta-ontology to construct SHKB, including the semantic healthcare knowledge ontology (SHKO) and the semantic healthcare expression repository (SHER).

SHKO is the backbone ontology of SHKB and represents healthcare domain knowledge and clinical data. We used Protégé [27] for ontology development and web ontology language (OWL) [28] as its expression language. We followed the ontology developing guide proposed by Noy and McGuinness [29]:
                              
                                 1.
                                 Defining the domain and scope. SHKO is to be used for clinical decision making, and it should cover clinical diagnosis and treatment knowledge of a specific problem domain (certain diseases, syndromes or social issues).

Considering reusing existing ontologies. We reused the medical terminology ontologies published by the National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO) BioPortal [30], including SNOMED CT, ICD, and LOINC, to populate the vocabularies of SHKO. Following a top-down pattern, only sub-classes representing coded concepts relevant to the meta-ontology terms are imported with the help of Protégé BioPortal plugin.

Enumerate relevant terms. The terms used to describe the meta-ontology directly constitute the term corpus of SHKO.

Defining classes, properties, and instances. Following a top-down design pattern, we started with the most general classes in the meta-ontology and then created their specializations. Three root classes are created: Model, Data and Expressions.

(1) Model. Model represents the six backbone classes of RIM, i.e., Act, Role, Entity, ActRelationship, Participation and RoleLink. SHKO derives its ability to represent both abstract domain knowledge and concrete clinical data mainly from the structural properties of Model. For example, actClassCode determines the kind of an Act instance, such as an observation or an encounter, while actMoodCode distinguishes whether an Act instance has happened, is a request or a goal. As defined by RIM, an Act instance must only have one actClassCode, and its value must come from the HL7-defined vocabulary for actClassCode; accordingly, we applied the following property constraints on Act: the cardinality of actClassCode is set to be exactly one, and the range of actClassCode is set to be ClassCode, a sub-class of Data.

(2) Data. Data is the root class of the standard data types as defined in HL7 Version 3 Data Types Abstract Specification [31]. Vocabularies are treated as specialized data types whose values are fixed and standardized coded values. Different vocabularies are mapped to each other through hasCodeTranslation, a property that coordinates multiple coded values from different coding systems.

(3) Expression. Expression is the medium class to interrelate SHKO and SHER. This class also realizes semantic typing of the expressions with sub-class hierarchy according to their functional roles, so that maintainability of the expressions is ensured when they grow in size and complexity. For each expression in SHER, we created its counterpart ontology instance in SHKO and assigned the following properties: hasExprId, the unique identifier of the expression in SHKO; hasTriggerSource, instances that trigger the expression – the trigger source is either time-based or event-based, thus supporting dynamic invocation and execution of the expression; and hasExpression, the expression body.


                           Table 1
                            summarizes some important sub-class definitions in SHKO. Detailed sub-classes and instances are created when applied in a specialized problem domain. All the above mentioned steps are executed in an iterative manner, and a more refined and detailed ontology is obtained after each repetition.

SHER was built to combine the static knowledge in SHKO with practical patient data for dynamic and personalized clinical decision making. Two forms of expressions are defined: queries formatted in simple protocol and RDF query language (SPARQL) [32] and rules encoded in Jena rule format [33]. The queries and rules are based on SHKO modeling artifacts, which conform to the structure and semantics of HL7 RIM. Therefore, they are compliant with the following conventions:
                              
                                 •
                                 Every happening is an act (instance of Act), which means every healthcare activity in the rule or query is expressed as some instance of Act with a set of constraints.

Each act may have any number of participations (instance of Participation), which are roles (instance of Role) played by entities (instance of Entity).

Acts are related to each other through act relationships (instance of ActRelationship).

Roles are related to each other through role links (instance of RoleLink).

Query-1 is an example SPARQL query to retrieve patient basic information from all confirmed cases, which can be interpreted as the following: select the patient ID (?p_id), name (?p_name), gender (display name:?p_gender, code:?gender_cd), date of birth (?p_dob), and principal diagnosis (display name:?p_diag, code:?act_cd) of the patient (role:?p_role, entity:?p) on condition that the patient is participating in an act (?act, display name:?p_diag, code:?act_cd) through a participation (?ptn) as the record target (shko: ptnType of?ptn equals shko:SBJ) and the act is marked as the
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         Query-1
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         SELECT DISTINCT?p_id?p_name?p_gender?p_dob?p_diag
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         WHERE{
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?p_role shko:roleId?p_id.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?p_role shko:hasPlayer?p.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?p shko:admGenderCode?gender_cd.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?gender_cd shko:CSdisplayName?p_gender.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?p shko:entityName?p_name.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?p shko:birthTime?p_dob.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?p_role shko:hasRolePtn?ptn.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?ptn shko:ptnType shko:SBJ.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?ptn shko:hasPtnAct?act.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?act shko:actCode?act_cd.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?act_cd shko:displayName?p_diag.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?act_cd shko:qualifier shko:principal_diagnosis.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            ?act shko:actMoodCode shko:EVN.
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         }
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       

Rule-1 is an example Jena rule to specify the eligibility criteria for a CP, which
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         Rule-1
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            (?p shko:hasRolePtn?ptn)(?ptn shko:ptnType shko:SBJ)
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            (?ptn shko:hasPtnAct?diag)(?diag shko:actCode?diag_cd)
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            (?diag shko:actMoodCode shko:EVN)(?cp shko:actMoodCode shko:DEF)
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            (?cp shko:hasOutRel?rel)(?rel shko:ptnType shko:PRCN)
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            (?rel shko:hasActRelTgt?tgt)(?tgt shko:actCode?tgt_cd)equal(?diag_cd,?tgt_cd)
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            →(?cp shko:hasActPtn?cp_ptn)(?cp_ptn shko:hasPtnRole?p)
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                            (?cp_ptn shko: ptnType shko:SBJ)
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       

Likewise, we can create other expressions that are targeted at a specialized problem domain. Patient data binding and execution of the expressions are realized on the knowledge application platform, as discussed in the following Section 2.3.

We developed a prototype semantic-based clinical decision support system (S-CDSS) in Eclipse IDE [34] to implement SHKB functionalities. Patient data were extracted from standard clinical documents in HL7 Clinical Document Architecture (CDA), Release 2.0 format [35]. The technical architecture of S-CDSS is presented in Fig. 3
                        . Major modules of S-CDSS include the following:
                           
                              •
                              SHKB, the knowledge base for clinical decision support;

Data knowledge convertor (DKC), a software tool designed to convert input data in XML format from CDA documents into a data format usable by S-CDSS (ontology instances). As HL7 CDA is a comprehensive standard that encapsulates complex structures of clinical data and semantics of clinical documents, designing DKC as a generic converter for all sorts of CDA documents is not practical. In our current design, we adopted templates from HL7 Implementation Guide: CDA Release 2 – Continuity of Care Document (CCD) to narrow down the scope of HL7 CDA to consultation note, which contains the core data set of the most relevant administrative, demographic, and clinical information facts about a patient's healthcare. Sharing the common semantics of HL7 RIM, CCD document body contains sections corresponding to SHKO components. The mappings are pre-defined in SHKO (see the description of ActDocumentation in Table 1). To start a conversion, the DKC first navigates through the document and searches for the input data to be converted with XML Path Language (XPath) [36], and then it identifies the corresponding class in SHKO and creates or updates an instance of that class based on the input data; this process is illustrated in Fig. 4
                                 . The DKC is designed on DOM4J, an open-source Java XML API [37] and facilitated with relevant knowledge base utilities;

Knowledge base utilities, a set of semantic APIs provided with a Jena semantic framework [38], including an ontology API to edit OWL ontologies for manual SHKB maintenance, a SPARQL API to query SHKB with SPARQL queries, and an inference API to reason over the ontology and patient data with Jena rules for clinical decision making and automatic SHKB update;

User portal, authorized interfaces for user interactions with S-CDSS.

An application scenario starts with the clinician importing CDA documents containing patient data into S-CDSS through the user portal; the DKC then converts the structured XML data into ontological patient data for semantic reasoning; a set of rules will be triggered based on the triggering mechanism defined in the Expression class of SHKB; given valid patient data and relevant rules, the Jena inference engine is then fired via the inference API to derive new facts about the patient; the new facts as well as the original knowledge in SHKB can be queried through the SPARQL API; automated (by inference) or manual (by the user) updates to SHKB are realized on the ontology API.

Following a task-based approach [39], we instantiated SHKB with the domain knowledge on T2DM inpatient management and conducted a two-level evaluation with the help of domain experts in clinical practice and medical informatics:
                           
                              •
                              Ontology-level evaluation, which evaluates the formal definition of SHKB in terms of consistency, taxonomy, and other criteria for the coherency of the modeled knowledge, such as correctness, completeness, and conciseness [40]. Consistency and taxonomy is automatically checked by Pellet [41], the OWL reasoner integrated with Protégé. Manual evaluation on other criteria was conducted by domain experts.

Application-level evaluation, which evaluates the practical performance of SHKB in realistic clinical decision making scenarios. We designed experiments to provide clinical decision support based on real patient data. Domain experts were invited to complete the experiments with the help of S-CDSS. Once completed, a quantitative assessment on accuracy and the acceptance rate was conducted. The collected evaluation results will be captured in the next knowledge engineering cycle for continuous maintenance of SHKB and S-CDSS.

@&#RESULTS@&#

SHKB was instantiated with the domain knowledge from the Chinese medical guidelines for prevention and treatment of T2DM [42] and the standards of medical care in diabetes from the American Diabetes Association (ADA) [43]. A total of 127 classes, 196 properties, 123 queries and 426 rules were created. Fig. 5
                         is a partial overview of SHKO class diagram. Fig. 6
                         is a partial overview of SHKO instance diagram to define the T2DM CP, which can be viewed as a formalization of the meta-ontology as discussed in Section 2.1. Note that standard vocabulary codes are represented by their instance identifiers in SHKO rather than title strings. Only the top-level classes, major sub-classes and properties are shown for concise illustration. Table 2
                         summarizes the expressions in SHER based on the Expression class hierarchy of SHKO. Example expressions of each category are listed in Figs. 7–9
                        
                        
                        .

Ontology-level evaluation by the Pellet reasoner reported valid ontology consistency and ontology taxonomy. Manual evaluation by domain experts in clinical practice (1 diabetes specialist and two clinicians from endocrine department) and medical informatics (Kenji Araki, Jing-Song Li) revealed rational domain knowledge representation. The major results are shown in Table 3
                        ; different opinions are discussed until consensus comments are reached.

We obtained 100 anonymous case patient records in HL7 CCD format from the endocrine department of the collaborating hospital as our testing datasets. The dataset contains basic personal data and T2DM-related clinical data for 100 patients, including the plasma glucose concentration, related medical history and diabetes symptoms. The experiment consists of five consecutive steps:
                           
                              •
                              Select patients suspected of having T2DM by S-CDSS.

Confirm the diagnosis by domain experts in endocrinology (the gold standard).

Suggest an appropriate CP for the correctly diagnosed patients by S-CDSS.

Adjust the CP for personalization by S-CDSS.

Evaluate the CP by domain experts on T2DM management.

Application-level evaluation was conducted quantitatively by calculating the diagnostic accuracy and CP acceptance rate. In Table 4
                        , true positive (TP) represents the number of patients diagnosed by both the gold standard and S-CDSS; false positive (FP) is the number of patients diagnosed by the S-CDSS but not the gold standard; false negative (FN) represents the number of patients diagnosed by the gold standard but not the S-CDSS; and true negative (TF) is the number of patients not diagnosed in either case.

Formula (1)–(3) is used to determine diagnostic accuracy:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    Sensitivity
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          TP
                                       
                                       
                                          (
                                          TP
                                          +
                                          FN
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                    ×
                                    100
                                    %
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    Sensitivity
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          TN
                                       
                                       
                                          (
                                          FP
                                          +
                                          TN
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                    ×
                                    100
                                    %
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              (3)
                              
                                 
                                    Precision
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          (
                                          TP
                                          +
                                          TN
                                          )
                                       
                                       
                                          (
                                          TP
                                          +
                                          FP
                                          +
                                          FN
                                          +
                                          TN
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                    ×
                                    100
                                    %
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

Accordingly, S-CDSS reached a sensitivity of 97.5%, which represents the ability to accurately identify all patients with T2DM. Specificity equals 100%, which represents the ability to accurately identify all patients without T2DM. The overall precision is 98%. To calculate the CP acceptance rate, we used Formula (4):
                           
                              (4)
                              
                                 
                                    CP acceptance rate
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          (
                                          Total number of CP orders from S-CDSS that the domain expert agreed
                                          )
                                       
                                       
                                          (
                                          Total number of CP orders from S-CDSS
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

After examining the 1848 S-CDSS recommended CP orders for the 78 accurately diagnosed testing patients, the domain expert approved 1798 of them, giving an acceptance rate of 97.3%.


                        Fig. 10
                         shows the S-CDSS CP management interface, displaying the basic CP profile, standard CP expressions and orders, which allows the clinician to browse, edit, or create CPs in SHKB. Fig. 11
                         presents the S-CDSS patient CP management interface, where the clinician can obtain a unified view of practical patient data (Case Profile panel and Acts Overview panel) and recommended CP orders (Care Plan Overview panel). S-CDSS supports the clinician in managing the patient medical record, controlling and monitoring the patient healthcare process from the comprehensive aspects through a rich set of filtering conditions, such as Class (e.g., SBADM for medication, OBS for observation, and PROC for procedure), Mood (e.g., RQO for request, EVN for event, and GOL for goal), and Status (e.g., new, active, or completed).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The complex, multi-layered characteristics of ontology make it more practical for evaluation on different levels separately rather than directly as a whole [44]. In our study, we evaluated SHKB from two points of view. First, ontology-level evaluation demonstrated the correctness of the ontology definition; second, application-level evaluation verified the practical performance of SHKB in realistic clinical decision making scenarios.

We examined the two false negative cases that result in a reduction in diagnostic accuracy; the diabetes symptoms were found as free text in the narrative block instead of a structured data entry of the input document. Such data is currently not accessible by our system. In order to overcome this limitation, we are now working on a Natural Language Processing (NLP) module to be integrated within S-CDSS to meet this demand. In terms of the CP acceptance rate, the main affecting factors are related to uncertainties such as personal experience and preference, as well as administrative issues such as resource availability and cost-effective considerations. Related works on fuzzy knowledge representation [45] have great signification for improving our system adaptability.

Our system relies on HL7 CDA as the standard input data format. In practice, input data may arrive in other non-HL7 CDA formats such as CEN/ISO 13606 and openEHR. In that case, HL7 CDA developing tools can be used either to create a new HL7 CDA-compliant document [46–48] or to apply a document mapping schema [49]. As the HL7 version 3 messages keep evolving into a mature data communication standard, they will serve as the real-time input data source to enable dynamic data acquisition.

Compared to other works on CDSS knowledge representation schemes, our RIM-based approach avoids the direct coupling between the standard knowledge base and heterogeneous EMRs. In most cases, only instance-level (ontology instances and rules) changes in the SHKB ontology are involved to represent required data and knowledge. Each instance is assigned a specific knowledge role (ontology class) to facilitate navigation and revision. Under special circumstances where the local EMR updates or the HL7 RIM framework evolves, minor class-level changes in the original ontology such as sub-class specialization can be performed to maintain flexible knowledge-data mappings. One underlying limitation of our approach is due to the inherent complexity of the RIM, which requires excessive amount of work on the comprehension and modeling of its associated classes and properties. We plan to simplify this model to improve design-time and run-time efficiency based on future evaluation of its practical use.

Among the 8 emerging topics of CDSS research works as summarized by Mor Peleg [50], our main contribution lies in multi-faceted CDSS knowledge representation, sharing, and reuse, based on which dynamic and personalized clinical decision making can be made. Taking advantage of advanced techniques such as intelligent agents [51] and service-oriented architecture (SOA) [52], the decision support is accessible through web-based user interfaces over heterogeneous healthcare information systems, which promotes the practical use of CDSSs and contributes to improving patient-centered care quality.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study proposed a novel approach to promote the practical use of CDSS by developing SHKB, a unified information model to represent healthcare domain knowledge and patient data. The core model was constructed based on ontology and the HL7 RIM. The common structure of the RIM classes and ontology laid the foundation for their integrated use.

Taking advantage of the rich semantics provided by the HL7 RIM, we are able to express patient data, terminologies, healthcare workflow, and multidisciplinary medical domain knowledge in a single model. In addition, the use of ontology offers possibilities for knowledge reuse and sharing in a formal, explicit, and consistent way. An expression repository of decision making rules and consultation queries was also built to extend the ontology with operational abilities. We evaluated the validity and usability of SHKB in a prototype CDSS. The evaluation results demonstrated the technical feasibility and application prospect of our method. Future work will focus on the following aspects:
                        
                           1.
                           Continuously refine SHKB through the knowledge engineering cycle based on more case studies and experimental use in real clinical settings.

Bridge the gap between SHKB and existing knowledge representation models as well as patient information models for knowledge reuse and sharing.

Develop data-mining modules within CDSS to acquire knowledge from the rapidly increasing medical big data to enable automatic knowledge acquisition.

We declare that we have no actual or potential competing financial interests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. 61173127), National High-tech R&D Program (No. 2013AA041201, No. 2015AA020109) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

