@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Infection risk in patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with etanercept or adalimumab

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A head-to-head cohort study involving a nationwide population has been performed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Etanercept users have higher risk of infection than adalimumab users.


                        
                        
                           
                           Infection-free survival is significantly lower in etanercept users.


                        
                        
                           
                           The difference of infection risk is significant in subgroup analysis.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Etanercept

Adalimumab

Rheumatoid arthritis

Infection

Tumor necrosis factor-α antagonist

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Objectives
                  To compare the risk of infection for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients who took etanercept or adalimumab medication in a nationwide population.
               
               
                  Methods
                  RA patients who took etanercept or adalimumab were identified in the Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database. The composite outcome of serious infections, including hospitalization for infection, reception of an antimicrobial injection, and tuberculosis were followed for 365 days. A Kaplan–Meier survival curve with a log-rank test and Cox proportional hazards regression were used to compare risks of infection between the two cohorts of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α antagonists users. Hazard ratios (HRs) were obtained and adjusted with propensity scores and clinical factors. Sensitivity analyses and subgroup analyses were also performed.
               
               
                  Results
                  In total, 1660 incident etanercept users and 484 incident adalimumab users were eligible for the analysis. The unadjusted HR for infection of the etanercept users was significantly higher than that of the adalimumab users (HR: 1.93; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.09–3.42; p
                     =0.024). The HRs were 2.04 (95% CI: 1.14–3.65; p
                     =0.016) and 2.02 (95% CI: 1.13–3.61; p
                     =0.018) after adjusting for propensity scores and for propensity scores in addition to clinical factors, respectively. The subgroup analyses revealed that HRs for composite infection was significantly higher in patient subgroups of older age, female, as well as patients who did not have DM, COPD, and hospitalization history at the baseline.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  In this head-to-head cohort study involving a nationwide population of patients with RA, etanercept users demonstrated a higher risk of infection than adalimumab users. Results of this study suggest the possible existence of an intra-class difference in infection risk among TNF-α antagonists.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Pharmacovigilance risk assessment and management are important with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α antagonists, a new group of biological agents for treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and autoimmune diseases. In May 2008, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a safety alert regarding adding infection and tuberculosis (TB) to the black box warning for etanercept. Despite infection becomes the leading cause of death in RA patients [1], clinical outcomes and benefits of these biological agents are still attracting use by clinicians. Determining how to implement an effective medication risk management plan, an apparently better strategy than total withdrawal of TNF-α antagonists from the market, requires understanding the infection risks of these agents.

Conflicting data were found on the association between the infection risks and TNF-α antagonists. Clinical trials with limited sample size were insufficient to compare the infection risk among TNF-α antagonists [2–6]. Several observational studies have provided evidence that TNF-α antagonists are associated with an increased risk of infection. Two large cohort studies from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs health system [7] and Swedish registers [8], respectively, demonstrated that risk of hospitalization due to infection was significantly higher for patients who took TNF-α antagonists. The British Society for Rheumatology Biologics Register also showed that the risk of serious infection during the “at- risk” windows could be as high as 4.6-fold [9] at the first 90 days of TNF-α antagonists therapy, and could be lowered to 1.8-fold during the first 6 months [10]. However, results of several other cohort studies of TNF-α antagonists did not show an increase in risk of infection [11–15].

It is even more unclear that which TNF-α antagonist is safer. A cohort study showed that adalimumab and etanercept were of similar level of infection risk [7]. Grijalva et al. also reported that the risk of adalimumab causing serious infections insignificantly differed from that of etanercept [11]. However, a case-control study reported that adalimumab was associated with 6.4- fold higher risk for non-tuberculosis opportunistic infections than etanercept [16]. Another registry-based prospective cohort study from van Dartel and colleagues reported that the risk for serious infection of adalimumab was 1.83-fold higher than that of etanercept [17]. These studies used different outcome definition, study design and follow-up period. Therefore the results were significantly different with large variation in the odd ratios.

This observational study aimed to compare the risk of infection between adalimumab and etanercept, the two TNF-α antagonists marketed in Taiwan, using Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD). The direct head-to-head comparison was performed to investigate tuberculosis and infections associated with TNF-α antagonists in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. This study was prompted by the need of awareness on the difference in risk of infection between TNF-α antagonists, and on which patient population could benefit the most from the specific medication.

@&#METHODS@&#

This study was conducted in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. The current research proposal was reviewed and approved by the Taipei Medical University Joint Institutional Review Board (TMU-JIRB), with waiving of informed consents.

Taiwan's National Health Insurance (NHI) is a nationwide insurance program which had enrolled 98% of Taiwan's population by 2005 [18], and covers inpatient care, ambulatory care and prescription medications with 10–20% copayments [19]. The NHIRD is an encrypted secondary database derived from the NHI maintained by National Health Research Institutes, Taiwan (NHRI). The data are available to scientists in Taiwan for research purposes upon application. Files obtained from the NHRI include expenditures, date and detail of medical orders and drug prescriptions, as well as basic characteristics of patients. A complete longitudinal profile of patients’ health care histories can be obtained by adequate linkage of files. Because the prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis in Taiwan was 97.5 cases per 100,000 population [20], this study used a dataset provided by the NHRI on encrypted bases that contained data of patients with rheumatoid arthritis only.

Patients with RA (the ICD-9-CM codes 714.xx, but excluding 714.3, 714.4 and 714.9) who received an etanercept or adalimumab prescription between January 1, 2005 and December 31, 2008, were identified and included in this study. The positive prediction value (PPV) to identify RA patients by computerized diagnosis along with at least one disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) prescription was reported to be 81% [21].

Cohort entry was defined as the date when a patient received the first TNF-α antagonist prescription (index prescription). Patients were grouped into an incident etanercept user cohort or an incident adalimumab user cohort according to the index prescription. The NHI reimbursement guidelines specify that only patients who meet the criteria for a diagnosis of RA issued by the American College of Rheumatology in 1987 with a disease activity score (DAS28) of >5.1 assessed twice more than 1 month apart, as well as having failed treatment with two traditional DMARD medications, are eligible to receive TNF-α antagonists. Patients aged <18 years at cohort entry or who had cancer, a solid organ transplant, or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection were excluded. Furthermore, patients whose data could not prove the absence of TNF-α antagonist therapy for 180 days prior to the cohort entry and patients who had no NHIRD record after cohort entry were also excluded.

The primary outcome was serious infections, including (1) hospitalization for infection; (2) prescription of an antimicrobial injection; and (3) TB. The secondary outcome was to compare the above-described three events indicating a serious infection between etanercept and adalimumab users individually.

Hospitalization for infection was defined as being hospitalized with an infection according to ICD-9-CM codes as one of the principal discharge diagnoses. ICD-9-CM codes identifying all infections were published in a previous study [13]. Prescription with antimicrobial injection was defined as injectable medications with the first three codes of J01 (antibacterials for systemic use), J02 (antimycotics for systemic use), J04 (antimycobacterials) and J05 (antivirals for systemic use) according to the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system [vers. 2013, the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, World Health Organization (WHO) Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics Methodology].

Adalimumab and etanercept were contraindicated under NHI in patients with active or latent tuberculosis when applying precertification of using these medications. Tuberculosis prophylaxis was not recommended under NHI for adalimumab or etanercept use. Physicians were required to report any active infection associated with adalimumab or etanercept use after 6 months of therapy and every 3 months thereafter. However, culture results of Mycobacteria tuberculosis were not available in NHIRD. In order to identify the tuberculosis cases, an operational definition was adopted from the WHO tuberculosis (TB) guideline: a patient who had tuberculosis (defined as ICD-9-CM 011.xx to 018.xx in any inpatient or outpatient diagnosis) and who was treated with a full course of antituberculosis treatment (defined as at least 2 prescriptions contained at least 2 out of the 4 first-line antituberculosis medications including rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol, and were administered 3 months apart). This definition was modified from a previously published algorithm [22,23], which showed low positive predictive value, by adding a 3-month period between the two prescriptions. The purpose of this design was to avoid overestimation of tuberculosis when it was possible that the physician used anti-tuberculosis medications in patients with negative acid fast bacilli culture results as a trial therapy or for diagnosis purpose.

The treated-exposure was employed to estimate the short-term post-exposure effect, and the constant model for long-term post-exposure effect (Fig. 1
                        ). Both models followed subjects from cohort entry. The treated-exposure model followed the subjects until the occurrence of an event-of-interest, a switch of study medications, the last record in the NHIRD database, or 5 half-lives after the last prescribed dose, or December 31, 2008, whichever came first. After 5 half-lives, more than 90 percent of the drug can be eliminated pharmacokinetically, and considered to exert no direct pharmacological effects. The constant model followed subjects until the occurrence of an event-of-interest, a switch of study medications, the last record in NHIRD database, or December 31, 2008, whichever came first regardless of discontinuation of study medication to determine the long-term post-exposure effect [9].

Previous studies demonstrated that the infection risk was the highest during the first year after TNF-α antagonist therapy [7,9,10]. The risk window was thus defined as cohort entry to 365 days after therapy. Nevertheless, sensitivity analyses which expanded the risk window to the end of database for both treated-exposure model and constant model were performed to confirm the result.

To ensure that subjects were incident users, we defined the 6-month period prior to cohort entry as the baseline. Covariates obtained at the baseline included demographics (age at cohort entry and gender), comorbidities, Charlson–Deyo's comorbidity score, health care utilization (any hospitalization prior to cohort entry and number of physician visits), medical procedures (orthopedic surgery, an intra-articular injection, and rheumatoid factor tests), and concomitant medications (DMARDs, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), cyclooxygenase (COX)-II inhibitors, and proton-pump inhibitors).

Concurrent use of corticosteroids is the most potential confounding factor which represents control of RA disease and also increases the risk of infection during the treatment period with etanercept and adalimumab. The study cohort was thus divided into two subgroups, according to the average corticosteroid exposure in a prednisone equivalent daily dose at the baseline. The effects of TNF-α antagonist in each subgroup were tested to control for the influence of glucocorticoids.

To understand baseline differences in covariates, the proportion or means of each characteristic between the two cohorts were compared using χ
                        2 tests and independent t-tests, respectively.

Propensity score methods were performed to estimate the probability of receiving one TNF-α antagonist over the other one based on covariates. Factors used to fit the logistic regression model for the propensity score were either an imbalance between cohorts (a history of peptic ulcers, number of physician visits, test for rheumatoid factor, and concurrent medication of methotrexate and NSAIDs), or were associated with infection (age, gender, diabetes mellitus (DM), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, daily steroid dose, orthopedic surgery, an intra-articular injection, any hospitalization, and Charlson–Deyo's comorbidity score). The propensity score was then entered into the Cox proportional hazard model as a continuous variable to adjust for confounding by medication selection [13].

The Cox proportional hazards model was fitted, and the hazard ratio (HR) was adjusted by the propensity score with or without other clinical factors that are prone to increase infection risk, including being aged ≥55 years, DM, COPD, any hospitalization, orthopedic surgery, and an intra-articular injection. All variables were included in the Cox proportional hazards model. A Kaplan–Meier survival curve was plotted, and a log-rank test was performed to compare survival distribution functions between etanercept and adalimumab users.

A subgroup analysis was performed to estimate HR in the following different subgroups: aged <55 years vs. aged ≥55 years; male vs. female; different corticosteroids levels; and with or without a DM, COPD, or baseline hospitalization history. SAS for Windows (vers. 9.1.3; SAS Institute, Cary, NC) was used for data analysis. A value of p
                        <0.05 was accepted as statistically significant.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In total, 3337 patients were identified as having a diagnosis of RA and received a TNF-α prescription from the NHIRD. Among them, 104 patients were excluded for being aged <18 years, 210 for having cancer, 5 for having a solid organ transplant, 836 for having insufficient records to prove the absence of TNF-α antagonist therapy for 180 days prior to cohort entry, and 38 for having no records after cohort entry. The final enrollment was 2144 patients (1660 incident etanercept users and 484 incident adalimumab users), and all of these were included in the study analyses.

Patient characteristics are compared in Table 1
                     . There was no significant difference in most characteristics between the two groups. A higher proportion of adalimumab patients had a history of peptic ulcers (173, 35.7% vs. 414, 24.9%; p
                     <0.001) and rheumatoid factor tests (402, 83.1% vs. 1186, 71.5%; p
                     <0.001). The number of physician visits was also significantly higher in adalimumab than in etanercept users (21.6±13.9 vs. 20.0±12.4, p
                     =0.031). Higher proportions of etanercept users had received MTX therapy (1529, 92.1% vs. 426, 88.0%; p
                     =0.005) and NSAID therapy (1183, 71.3% vs. 308, 63.6%; p
                     =0.001). The average steroid use, Charlson–Deyo's comorbidity scores, and proportions of hospitalization in 180 days prior to cohort entry, receipt of an intra-articular injection, and comorbidities were statistically insignificant between the two groups.

In the primary outcome analysis, the risk of infection was surprisingly higher for etanercept users than for adalimumab users (Fig. 2
                     ; Table 2
                     ). In Fig. 2, the infection-free survival of etanercept users was significantly lower than that of adalimumab (log-rank test, p
                     =0.022). The unadjusted HR of the primary outcome for etanercept users was significantly higher compared to that of adalimumab users (HR: 1.93; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.09–3.42; p
                     =0.024). The adjusted HRs were 2.04 (95% CI: 1.14–3.65; p
                     =0.016) after adjusting with propensity scores and 2.02 (95% CI: 1.13–3.61; p
                     =0.018) with propensity scores and clinical factors. In the sensitivity analysis (Table 3
                     ), the point estimates of the HR for the composite infection outcome were similar and consistent across different follow-up models and adjustment methods (Table 3). However, the difference between treatment groups became insignificant in the constant follow-up model.

The multivariate analysis (Table 2) showed that being aged ≥55 years (HR: 1.54; 95% CI: 1.11–2.15; p
                     =0.010), having the comorbidity of DM (HR: 1.84; 95% CI: 1.17–2.88; p
                     =0.008) or COPD (HR: 2.60, 95% CI: 1.24–5.45; p
                     =0.012), and having history of hospitalization prior to cohort entry (HR: 1.87; 95% CI: 1.27–2.73; p
                     =0.001) were statistically significant risk factors independent of the TNF-α blocker treatment groups.

None of the individual secondary outcome events of interest significantly differed between the two treatment groups (Table 3). The unadjusted HRs of hospitalization for infection and of injection with antimicrobials were 2.58 (95% CI: 0.61–10.90; p
                     =0.197) and 1.71 (95% CI: 0.94–3.12; p
                     =0.078), respectively. Although the etanercept group had a borderline significantly higher HR for injection of antimicrobials in the treated-exposure model until the end of data (HR: 1.86, 95% CI: 1.01–3.41; p
                     =0.045), the significant effect was not consistent in all follow-up models and adjustment methods. However, point estimates of HRs of hospitalization for infection and of injection of antimicrobials in all follow-up models with all adjustment methods implied that etanercept users might have a higher risk of infection than adalimumab users.

Not surprisingly, the TB incidence was extremely low with our restricted study definition, which rendered the statistical analysis unable to be applied in the treated-exposure follow-up models. Although the HRs in various constant follow-up models implied that a higher TB risk might exist in the etanercept group in the point estimate (Table 3), the extremely large 95% CI negated any interpretation to be drawn out from those analyses.

In the subgroup analysis, the unadjusted HRs for the composite infection outcome were statistically significant in the senior subgroup aged ≥55 years (HR: 2.15; 95% CI: 1.04–4.45; p
                     =0.040), female subgroup (HR: 1.90; 95% CI: 1.02–3.55; p
                     =0.043), subgroup of patients who did not have diabetes (HR: 2.28; 95% CI: 1.05–4.95; p
                     =0.038), those who did not have COPD (HR: 2.11; 95% CI: 1.10–4.04; p
                     =0.024) and those who had not been hospitalized during the baseline period (HR 1.81; 95% CI 1.02–3.21; p
                     =0.043). Furthermore, these risks remained significant under different adjustments methods (Table 4
                     ). However, none of the unadjusted HRs or adjusted HRs for the composite infection outcome in both the high- and low-dose steroid subgroups achieved statistical significance.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

To our knowledge, this is the first direct comparison study that demonstrated a significant higher risk of infection in etanercept users compared to adalimumab users in a nationwide cohort study. Consistently, in different follow-up models and with different adjustment methods, RA patients who received etanercept were at significantly higher risk of composite infection events compared to those who received adalimumab. Infection-free survival for etanercept users was significantly lower than that for adalimumab users. The risk of infection varied according to clinical risk factors such as age, DM, COPD, and hospitalization. A subgroup analysis revealed that the HR for composite infection with etanercept vs. adalimumab was significantly higher in subgroups of senior patients, female patients, and patients who did not have DM, COPD, or a hospitalization history at the baseline.

TNF-α, a cytokine mainly derived by functioning monocytes and macrophages, acts as a central mediator in activating T helper cells and promotes further humoral and cellular immune responses [24]. Both etanercept and adalimumab can block cytokine signaling of the host immunodefense system and thus increase the susceptibility of patients receiving them to infection. However, differences exist between their precise mechanisms of action. Adalimumab is a monoclonal antibody that directly neutralizes a specific region of the secreted TNF-α molecule and has a higher specificity for TNF. Etanercept is a soluble recombinant fusion protein that destroys TNF receptors. It also has an affinity for both TNF-α and lymphotoxin-α. It possibly introduces more-complicated effects on the immune system and leads to higher risks of infection.

The HR in our study revealed a 2-fold higher risk for any infection events in etanercept compared to adalimumab users. This study did not allow cohort re-entry or switch biologics between cohorts, and could bring out a clearer comparison between etanercept and adalimumab. On the contrary, with 20.1% of the study subjects switched biologics from one to another, Favalli et al. found no significant difference in risk of infection between adalimumab and etanercept users [25]. Another registry-based prospective cohort study observed the risk of infection within 5 years and resulted in the incidence rate for first serious infections was low as 2.59 per 100 patient-years [17]. Our study focused on the risk for infection within 365 days with a higher incidence rate of composite infections (14.2 per 100 patient-years). It could have more reasonable suggestion of causal effect for TNF-α antagonist-associated infection. In addition to that, our study used a composite outcome to reveal broader aspect of infection risk and thus reflect the overall infection risk more clearly than an individual outcome, such as non-tuberculosis opportunistic infections [26].

With the incidence of tuberculosis in Taiwan (62 per 100,000 population) [27] and the restricted definition of TB, the comparative analyses on risk of tuberculosis between groups yielded no statistical significance in the constant follow-up model in present study. The accuracy of using ICD-9-CM code to identify tuberculosis cases varied between facilities [23]. It was difficult to identify tuberculosis cases according to ICD-9-CM code alone (positive predictive value, 1.3%; 95% CI, 0.5–2.9%) or in combination with pharmacy data (positive predictive value, 25.0%; 95% CI, 3.2–65.1%) [22]. Moreover, our restricted definition of TB was an attempt to resolve the problem of low accuracy when defining TB with ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes alone and even with antituberculosis medication. Although the reliability of the TB definition was not tested in this study, the definition represents current TB guidelines used globally. Further studies with larger sample size are needed to explore the answer.

The of infection risk difference between etanercept and adalimumab users was shown to be significant in the treated-exposure follow-up model, yet, insignificant in the constant follow-up model. The point estimates of hazard ratios were lower in the constant follow-up model when compared to those in the treated-exposure follow-up model. This phenomenon suggested that the risk of infection was more related to the short-term suppression of cytokine-based immunity resulted from the TNF-α antagonists exposure [28]. Furthermore, the infection risk was less likely to be caused by prolonged inhibition of immunity after discontinuation of medications.

For patients without diabetes mellitus or COPD, the etanercept users had higher risk of infection when compared to the adalimumab users. However, this phenomenon was not observed in diabetic or COPD patients. One possible reason for this phenomena would be because the population in the diabetic patient subgroups were too small (n
                     =127 etanercept users and n
                     =42 adalimumab user), thus the risk difference was too insignificant to be observed [29]. The similar reasoning can also be applied to the COPD subgroup, where the sample sizes were also small (n
                     =25 in etanercept users and n
                     =15 in adalimumab user). Additionally, a strong risk factor of infection, such as diabetes or COPD, might be more influential than the selection of TNF-α antagonists. Thus the difference between agents became insignificant with the existence of a stronger risk factor such as DM or COPD [30–33].

The findings of this study should be interpreted in the context of limitations of a claims database. First, corticosteroid is the major confounding factor when investigating risk for infection [13]. However, there was no difference at baseline corticosteroid dose between etanercept and adalimumab users in this study. Second, some variables were not included in the NHIRD claim database, such as alcoholism and smoking, familial and occupational exposure, hygienic practices, socioeconomic status, nutrition status, and laboratory data. However, with the population number of this study, the two groups were considered to be equally confounded. Furthermore, patients were presumed to be exposed to the study medication when they were prescribed those medications. This assumption is commonly seen in study designs of database analyses; given the expensiveness, parenteral administration route, and low dosing frequency of TNF-α antagonists, we expected the patient adherence to these medications to be high. Because the event rate was low and the majority of patients were censored, time to events was underestimated in this study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This head-to-head cohort study using a nationwide claim database of patients with RA demonstrated that etanercept users had a higher risk of infection than adalimumab users. Although no robust conclusion could be draw by a single cohort study, this study suggests the possible existence of an intra-class difference in infection risks between these two TNF-α antagonists. Moreover, the background incidence of infectious diseases may differ among nations. Further research efforts are warranted to investigate the association between biologics use and various mortality and morbidity outcome variables of infection.

The authors declare that no competing interest exists.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by a research grant from the National Science Council Taiwan (98-2410-H-038-002) and from Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University (100-WF-EVA-21). The study was based on partial data from the National Health Insurance Research Database provided by the Bureau of National Health Insurance (BNHI) and managed by the National Health Research Institutes (NHRI). However, the interpretation and conclusions described herein do not represent policies of the BNHI or NHRI.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

