@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Impact of a computerized provider radiography order entry system without clinical decision support on emergency department medical imaging requests

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The main objective of this study was to investigate the impact of implementing a computer-based order entry system without clinical decision support on the number of radiographs ordered for patients seen in the emergency department.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our results show a decrease in the number of radiographs ordered after computer-based order entry system implementation, despite an increase in the number of emergency department admissions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our study also shows that the time interval between emergency department admission and medical imaging was not affected by this new workflow.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Diagnostic imaging

Emergency service

Hospital

Medical order entry systems

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and objective
                  The adoption of computerized physician order entry is an important cornerstone of using health information technology (HIT) in health care. The transition from paper to computer forms presents a change in physicians’ practices. The main objective of this study was to investigate the impact of implementing a computer-based order entry (CPOE) system without clinical decision support on the number of radiographs ordered for patients admitted in the emergency department.
               
               
                  Methods
                  This single-center pre-/post-intervention study was conducted in January, 2013 (before CPOE period) and January, 2014 (after CPOE period) at the emergency department at Nîmes University Hospital. All patients admitted in the emergency department who had undergone medical imaging were included in the study.
               
               
                  Results
                  Emergency department admissions have increased since the implementation of CPOE (5388 in the period before CPOE implementation vs. 5808 patients after CPOE implementation, p
                     =.008). In the period before CPOE implementation, 2345 patients (44%) had undergone medical imaging; in the period after CPOE implementation, 2306 patients (40%) had undergone medical imaging (p
                     =.008). In the period before CPOE, 2916 medical imaging procedures were ordered; in the period after CPOE, 2876 medical imaging procedures were ordered (p
                     =.006). In the period before CPOE, 1885 radiographs were ordered; in the period after CPOE, 1776 radiographs were ordered (p
                     <.001). The time between emergency department admission and medical imaging did not vary between the two periods.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our results show a decrease in the number of radiograph requests after a CPOE system without clinical decision support was implemented in our emergency department.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

The adoption of electronic health records and computerized physician order entry (CPOE) is an important cornerstone of health care policy. Computer-based order-entry systems are well suited to provide clinical decision support (CDS) to physicians during their regular work flow. In a systematic review, Georgiou et al. [1] revealed the potential for CPOE to contribute to effectiveness gains in imaging services. Computer-based order-entry may be a means to improve quality and its use in clinical practice has been associated with improvements in physician ordering patterns [2]. Evidence has been presented that 10–20% of medical imaging procedures are unnecessary [3] and CPOE has a positive effect in reducing unnecessary exams [4]. However, these studies were performed on CPOE with embedded CDS to remind physicians of the rules of good practice. Georgiou et al. [1] have shown that the studies reporting on the impact of CPOE without CDS were not as conclusive. It remains unknown whether a CPOE implementation without CDS changes clinicians’ ordering patterns.

Changes in our emergency department (ED) have evolved from using a paper imaging form, written in a few seconds, to submission of an electronic request, which requires medical information to be completed by the requester. Although the electronic requirement was not considered burdensome and was easily completed, the electronic request took longer than the paper form to submit [5]. Indeed, it is often easier to ask for medical imaging than to critically think through the diagnosis [6]. Moreover, indications for radiographs like abdominal radiographs (AXRs) are rare (free intra-peritoneal air, air fluid levels in obstruction) [7] and guidelines found AXRs are of limited use in the evaluation of acute abdominal pain in the ED [8]. Our hypothesis is that the implementation of this new computer form might result in a decrease in requests for medical imaging, particularly radiographs.

The main objective of this study was to investigate the impact of implementing a CPOE system without CDS on the number of radiographs ordered for patients seen in the ED. Secondary objectives were to investigate the impact on the number of CT scans, ultrasounds, and MRIs, and on the time taken between admission and medical imaging.

@&#METHODS@&#

This single-center pre-/post-intervention study was conducted in January, 2013 (pre-intervention period) and January, 2014 (post-intervention period) at the ED at Nîmes University Hospital. Our facility consists of an 870-bed (medicine, surgery, and obstetrics), university-affiliated tertiary care hospital with 76,000 inpatient admissions, 317,000 ambulatory visits, 75,000 ED visits, and 120,000 patient visits per year in the department of medical imaging.

All patients seen in the ED who had undergone medical imaging were included in the study. We did not have access to databases for examinations performed by non-radiologists, Doppler, scintigraphy, PET scans, or PET–MRI studies, hence they were not included. Since interventional procedures often require direct consultation with radiologists, these examinations were also not included in the analysis.

Before medical imaging CPOE system implementation (pre-intervention period), all medical imaging was ordered by the physician using paper forms. The requests were done in a few seconds (the time to write two or three sentences), and often contained little medical information. In June 2013, the ED and the Department of Medical Imaging went live on a Web-enabled CPOE system (Cyberlab, MIPS, Gent, Belgium). Emergency department physicians and residents are able to request imaging orders using the CPOE, which requires more medical information to be completed for each imaging request. The new requests take longer to complete—approximately 2–4min (cf. Annexes 1 and 2). Upon entering a password-protected login, the physician or resident creates an order for specific medical imaging from predetermined structured menus. The export of clinical data between software programs is not automated.

Before medical imaging CPOE system implementation (pre-intervention period), all medical imaging was ordered by the physician using paper forms. The requests were done in a few seconds (the time to write two or three sentences), and often contained little medical information. In June 2013, the ED and the Department of Medical Imaging went live on a Web-enabled CPOE system (Cyberlab, MIPS, Gent, Belgium). Emergency department physicians and residents are able to request imaging orders using the CPOE, which requires more medical information to be completed for each imaging request. The new requests take longer to complete—approximately 2–4min (cf. Annexes 1 and 2). Upon entering a password-protected login, the physician or resident creates an order for specific medical imaging from predetermined structured menus. The export of clinical data between software programs is not automated.

For our study, the data collected were: age, gender, mode of arrival to ED, Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) on arrival, type and number of medical images, and time between ED admission and medical imaging performed. Medical and administrative information concerning the admission of each patient was collected using the patient care tracking software (Clinicom, InterSystems, Cambridge, USA). Data on electronic order creation were collected using the CPOE system database (Centricity PACS, GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK and Xplore, EDL, Marseille, France). A picture archiving and communication system (PACS) was already in place prior to CPOE implementation. Between the before and after periods, there was no change in staffing and no change in the way tests were counted.

The primary end point, defined a priori, was the number of radiographs ordered for patients seen in the ED. Only orders for performed studies were counted, using a single unique examination identifier as the unit of measure. Secondary end points were the number of ultrasounds, CT scans, MRIs, and the time between ED admission and medical imaging. Depending on the organs studied, we arbitrarily categorized exams as first-line medical imaging (chest radiographs, CXRs; AXRs; abdominal ultrasounds; brain CT scans) or advanced medical imaging (chest and abdominal CT scans, brain MRIs).

We considered a difference (D) of 2.5% between both groups as significant. In a preliminary study, in our hospital, 45% of the patients seen in the ED had medical imaging performed. Based on these data and considering alpha=.05 and beta=80%, 4868 exams in each group were necessary.

Patient characteristics were described using categorical variables (using frequencies and percentages) and quantitative variables (using means and standard deviation or medians with inter-quartiles, depending on the type of distribution). Qualitative variables were compared using the Fisher exact test. Quantitative variables were compared using the Mann–Whitney test. Latency between ED admission and medical imaging for the two groups of patients were compared using a multivariate analysis and p-values were adjusted for characteristics found statistically significant in the univariate analysis. All statistical tests were two-sided. A p-value less than .05 was considered significant for all analyses. Analyses were performed with the use of R (R Core Team 2013, R: A language and environment for statistical computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). The authors had full access to and take full responsibility for the integrity of the data.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A total of 11,196 patients were seen during before and after CPOE periods. Overall, 4651 (42%) patients who had undergone medical imaging during their consultation in the ED were included. 2446 (53%) patients were men and the median (IQR) age was 55 (28–79) years. Overall characteristics of patients and the number of medical imaging procedures ordered are shown in Table 1
                        . The patient flowchart is shown in Fig. 1
                        .

Emergency department admissions have increased by 8% since the implementation of CPOE: 5388 in the period before CPOE implementation and 5808 patients after CPOE implementation (p
                        =.001). The median ages (IQR) were 57 (30–81) years during the period before CPOE and 54 (26–78) years during the period after CPOE implementation (p
                        <.001). In the period before CPOE implementation, 2345 patients (44%) had undergone medical imaging; in the period after CPOE implementation, 2306 patients (40%) had undergone medical imaging (p
                        =.008). In the period before CPOE implementation, 2916 medical imaging orders were placed; in the period after CPOE implementation, 2876 medical imaging orders were placed (p
                        =.006). In the period before CPOE implementation 1885 (65%) radiographs were ordered; in the period after CPOE implementation 1776 (62%) radiographs were ordered (p
                        <.001). The univariate analysis between the two periods is shown in Table 1. Types of medical imaging and organ orientations are shown in Figs. 2 and 3
                        
                        , respectively. Between the before and the after periods, the ED representation rates at 30 days remains stable from 8.2% to 7.3% (OR=0.88 [0.76–1.01]; p-value=0.08) (Table 2
                        ). The time lapse between ED admission and medical imaging did not differ between the two periods as shown in Table 3
                        .

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The objective of our study was to investigate the impact of implementing a CPOE system, without CDS, on the number of X-rays ordered. Our results show a decrease in the number of radiographs ordered after CPOE implementation, despite an increase in the number of ED admissions. Indeed, the decrease of 4% of the medical imaging, taking into account the increase of 8% of admissions, represents a relative decrease of 9%. Even if the differences of radiography ordered between before and after periods was an absolute value of just 39 studies, the admissions to the ED increase from 5388 to 5808 patients during the same time. The results of our study not only confirm our hypothesis but also show that the time interval between ED admission and medical imaging was not affected by this new workflow. We assume that the reduction in the number of studies did not affect the quality of care as the ED representation rates at 30 days remains stable.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

This study has limitations that should be considered when interpreting our findings. First, it was conducted at a single ED, which limits the generalizability of our findings, and was a before–after study. Indeed, the absence of a comparison group makes it impossible to know what would have happened without the intervention. Some of the particular problems with interpreting data from uncontrolled studies include susceptibility to problems with confounding. Second, the reason for the reduction remains partially unclear. The main proffered explanation for this seems to be that the increased time to create a request was a deterrent. This is a reasonable explanation, but does not mean that the reduction in tests was the result of a reduction in inappropriate requests. Our study has not looked at whether any examinations were unnecessary or at the exams ordered but not performed. Third, ultrasounds performed by emergency physicians were not included. These ultrasounds are often performed at the very time of the clinical exam. Fourth, between the two periods, patient age (57 vs. 54 years), CTAS levels, and the number of transportations by the fire department's rescue services were different. We assume that this difference, which is sparsely relevant clinically, does not affect the interpretation of our results. Lastly, we cannot exclude that the physicians’ practices slightly change, even there was no change to internal policies regarding the use of imaging between the before and after periods.

The decrease in the number of medical imaging ordered was primarily due to a decrease in the number of CXRs and AXRs. Our first finding, replicates the findings from several previous works who shown that indications for AXRs are infrequent [7,8] of useless in the diagnosis of most of the acute abdominal pains [8]. Chest radiographs in the ED are sometimes made out of habit. Specialist consultants sometimes also request CXRs even when ED physicians do not find it relevant. We assume that the implementation of a CPOE has helped reduce the unnecessary CXRs and AXRs, because of the inconvenience of using the CPOE system. Often, a CT scan is performed after a radiograph. This radiograph is not very useful for the final diagnosis and serves only as first-line medical imaging. Another aspect is that CPOE reduced these serial examinations, which are detrimental to the patient both in term of radiation and time. Another element that reinforces the hypothesis that these radiographs were not helpful is that there was no increase in the number of advanced medical imaging workflow (mainly CT scan). Thus, due to the slightly more rigid nature of the CPOE, it seems that doctors have preferred not to request unnecessary radiographs rather than wasting their time filling in the CPOE form. The emergency physicians were more inclined to request more advanced medical imaging.

Our first finding, that CPOE implementation was associated with a decrease in the number of radiographs ordered, was consistent with a previous study that sought to determine whether a CPOE system can influence ordering practices. In that study, Rosenthal et al. [4] showed the percentage of low utility examinations decreased from 6% to 2% overall. Collin et al. [9] aimed to assess, with a before and after study, the impact of a National Health Service program for information technology on efficiency measures. Authors reported that the CPOE implementation was associated with a reduction in repeated radiographs at outpatient appointments and a decrease in inpatient CT scans. Conversely, it was associated with increases in CT scans requested at outpatient appointments and CT scans repeated within two days in the case of patient hospitalization. Knight et al. also observed that medical students at hospitals using CPOE reported placing significantly fewer of their patients’ follow-up orders compared with students at hospitals using paper orders (25% vs. 50%, p
                        <0.01) [10].

Our second finding that advanced medical imaging did not increase after CPOE, replicates the findings from a previous study. In this study, Hwang et al. [11] reported on the effect of a CPOE, without CDS, on the number of medical imaging orders placed per day for patients with liver or kidney disease, or those undergoing simple mastectomy or gastrectomy. Results were collected in three periods: before the CPOE; three months after the CPOE implementation; and six months after the CPOE implementation. The results showed no significant changes in the mean number of daily orders before and after CPOE implementation, either at three or six months. Previous studies have produced opposite results. Indeed, Adam et al. [12] compared the impact of a CPOE, without CDS, on the number of CXRs ordered for adult patients with a primary complaint of chest pain between a 3-month period prior to CPOE and the same 3-month period after CPOE implementation in the following year. Results for 150 randomly selected patients from each data collection period were reviewed. Results showed a significant increase in the number of CXRs ordered.

The introduction of a new tool, especially computers, sometimes leads to longer care episodes for patients [13]. This increase was not found in our study and it appears that the implementation of a CPOE system has taken place in our ED without any real organizational problems. In fact, in our study, the time between admission and medical imaging did not change following CPOE implementation. This result is in agreement with several studies [14,15]. Although the time required for writing the request is slightly longer using computers, transmission time and imaging department organization is easier, thus compensating for this drawback.

Many references [16,17] highlight the fact that CPOE can yield many significant benefits and that CPOE is an important platform for the health care system. Alkasab et al. [18] compared the level of information provided by ED practitioners for abdominal CT examinations before and after the introduction of CPOE without CDS. The authors reported positive findings, including that computerized requests were more likely to contain clinical questions. Thus, a computerized radiology requisition system can result in more clinical history information being provided. Loy et al. [19] reported in a systematic review that diagnostic tests are more accurate when read with clinical information. By facilitating clinical information availability, CPOE can improve the pretest probability of the diagnosis and then the diagnostic accuracy. Moreover, we assume that the CPOE system, even without CDS, can improve the quality of care by decreasing medical imaging orders with low information value. In developed countries, many universities’ EDs already have a CPOE system for medical imaging. However, smaller EDs and EDs in developing countries are less computerized. For these EDs, the cost of a CPOE with CDS is important. Our study shows that for such EDs, a CPOE system without CDS may be helpful.

It would probably be necessary to conduct a second study to verify that old habits do not reappear. Moreover, the mechanisms of the decrease in radiograph orders need to be determined. Finally, it is necessary to assess the impact of this decrease on the quality of care and the costs. Qualitative research methods can help to better understand how physicians experience CPOE systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Our results show a decrease in the number of radiograph orders after a CPOE system without CDS was implemented in our ED. Further studies are needed to analyze and understand the mechanisms and the consequences of this decrease.

The study was performed in compliance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki on Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects. This study was reviewed and approved by our institutional review board. Moreover, this present study was approved by the National Commission for Data Processing and Civil Liberties (CNIL). According to the French Law (Law 88-1138 pertaining to Biomedical Research of 20 December 1988 modified on 9 August 2004), this non-interventional study did was exempt of informed signed consent from patients.

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest in the research.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We gratefully acknowledge the members of our hospital information system department, Christian Czeschan and Remi Sanz, for their help. The authors also wish to thank Candace G. Pettus, PhD, who assisted in the proof-reading of the manuscript. PGC, XB, AS and AM conceived the study and wrote the manuscript. JELC was the director of this research project and participated to the writing of this manuscript. PGC was responsible of the statistical analysis. FM and JPB established the organization of CPOE and define parameters in the database. FM and JPB contribute to the improvement of the manuscript. FM, as the coordinator for the emergency department in the department of medical imaging, was the main person who established relationship between radiologists and emergency department physicians. All authors have given final approval of the version to be published and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.03.006.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           Annex 1
                           
                              Items to complete with the CPOE.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Annex 2
                           
                              Screenshots of the CPOE.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

