@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Simulation study of PET detector configuration with thick light guide and GAPD array having large-area microcells for high effective quantum efficiency

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study proposed and examined a new approach employing the light sharing PET detector configuration with thick light guide and GAPD array having large-area microcells for high effective quantum efficiency.


                        
                        
                           
                           The number of counted photons was considerably increased and the LCE of 40% could be obtained with the detector configuration. The flood histogram showed good separation and wide margins between the spots of the scintillators. Moreover, a considerable improvement in the energy linearity performance was observed, and severe saturation effects could be clearly avoided.


                        
                        
                           
                           This study demonstrated that GAPDs with large-area microcells, which have not been actively studied as PET photosensors because of their non-linearity properties, could be utilized for PET applications and even high photon flux regime.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Geiger-mode avalanche photodiode

Photon detection efficiency

Light guide

Light sharing PET detector

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and Objectives
                  Light sharing PET detector configuration coupled with thick light guide and Geiger-mode avalanche photodiode (GAPD) with large-area microcells was proposed to overcome the energy non-linearity problem and to obtain high light collection efficiency (LCE).
               
               
                  Methods
                  A Monte-Carlo simulation was conducted for the three types of LSO block, 4 × 4 array of 3 × 3 × 20 mm3 discrete crystals, 6 × 6 array of 2 × 2 × 20 mm3 discrete crystals, and 12 × 12 array of 1 × 1 × 20 mm3 discrete crystals, to investigate the scintillation light distribution after conversion of the γ-rays in LSO. The incident photons were read out by three types of 4 × 4 array photosensors, which were PSPMT of 25% quantum efficiency (QE), GAPD1 with 50 × 50 µm2 microcells of 30% photon detection efficiency (PDE) and GAPD2 with 100 × 100 µm2 of 45% PDE. The number of counted photons in each photosensor was analytically calculated. The LCE, linearity and flood histogram were examined for each PET detector module having 99 different configurations as a function of light guide thickness ranging from 0 to 10 mm.
               
               
                  Results
                  The performance of PET detector modules based on GAPDs was considerably improved by using the thick light guide. The LCE was increased from 24 to 30% and from 14 to 41%, and the linearity was also improved from 0.97 to 0.99 and from 0.75 to 0.99, for GAPD1 and GAPD2, respectively. As expected, the performance of PSPMT based detector did not change. The flood histogram of 12 × 12 array PET detector modules using 3 mm light guide coupled with GAPDs was obtained by simulation, and all crystals of 1 × 1 × 20 mm3 size were clearly identified. PET detector module coupled with thick light guide and GAPD array with large-area microcells was proposed to obtain high QE and high spatial resolution, and its feasibility was verified.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study demonstrated that the overall PET performance of the proposed design was considerably improved, and this approach will provide opportunities to develop GAPD based PET detector with a high LCE.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Positron emission tomography (PET) allows the visualization of in vivo radiotracer distribution with high sensitivity and acceptable spatial resolution for molecular imaging study. Since there has been growing interest in small animal imaging and organ specific imaging applications, it is important to develop a PET detector module that can provide high energy-, time- and spatial-resolution. One possible method is to use high light output scintillators like LSO, LaBr3, LFS and LuI to overcome scarce photon statistics [1–4]. Another method is to utilize the photosensor with higher quantum efficiencies (HQE) [5–8]. More than 80 years after its development, the photomultiplier tube (PMT) is regarded as one of the most useful photosensors in various radiation detection applications. This is due to its outstanding features of very high gain (>106), low noise and fast response relative to other photosensors. Also, it can provide energy linearity with a wide dynamic range such that the amount of photoelectrons is proportional to the number of incident photons striking the photocathode for the high flux regime. Recently, a promising Photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) employing super bialkali (SBA) and ultra bialkali (UBA) photocathodes have been introduced for superior quantum efficiency. It has been reported that the respective quantum efficiency (QE) of SBA and UBA photocathodes has improved to the level of ~33% and ~37% at 420 nm wavelength, compared to the level of ~25% for conventional bialkali (BA) photocathodes [9,10].

Geiger-mode avalanche photodiodes (GAPDs) have been studied actively as the next generation PET photosensor, and many groups have demonstrated the usefulness of GAPDs in PET applications [11–14]. GAPDs consist of hundreds or thousands of microcells operating independently in a Geiger mode and its multi-microcell structure can provide a proportional output for moderate photon flux. The output of individual microcells is connected in parallel to form a GAPD pixel, and the total number of activated microcells reflects the number of incoming photons. Photon detection efficiency (PDE) is assessed based on combination of the QE, the geometric efficiency, and the Geiger-mode discharge probability, due to its particular operating mode. A finite number of microcells could induce a significant deviation of energy linearity when the number of photons entering the photosensor is larger than the number of microcells. Light collection efficiency (LCE) might also be decreased due to the saturation effects, and these non-linearity properties may render implementation of GAPDs with large-area microcells impractical for high photon flux detection and PET application [15–17].

A common approach is the utilization of GAPDs with small-area microcells allowing implementation of larger number of microcells to solve the linearity problem for the development of LSO based PET detector [18–20]. However, there are apparent drawbacks that small microcell GAPD has lower photon detection efficiency (PDE) due to the lower fill factor and also has lower gain due to smaller microcells.

We, therefore, propose a new approach employing the light sharing detector configuration: GAPD array having large-area microcells coupled with thick light guide. The incident photons (10000 ~ 15000 scintillation light) generated by interaction of 511 keV γ-ray with LSO were spread to neighboring GAPD pixels by light guide. After that, only a fraction of photons entered in each GAPD which could be operated linearly. Therefore, this method allows the operation of the GAPDs with large-area microcell size, without saturation effect (Fig. 1
                     ). The main advantage of this method is the increase in the available number of microcells detecting the photons employing light sharing configuration without modification of microcell size of GAPD; hence, it will improve the energy linearity and light collection efficiency (LCE), and preserve PDE and gain of GAPD with large-area microcell size.

The aim of this study is to investigate the advantages of a light sharing PET detector configuration based on thick light guide and GAPDs with large-area microcells. The performance of direct coupling with LSO and photosensor was compared to that of light sharing detector configuration based on GAPDs with large-area microcells. The performance of PET detector, LCE, linearity, and flood histogram, were evaluated using Monte-Carlo simulation and analytical assessment.

Ninety-nine PET detectors, consisting of different LSO crystal arrays, photosensor arrays, and light guides, were modeled. Three types of LSO crystal arrays, 4 × 4 array of 3 × 3 × 20 mm3 discrete crystals, 6 × 6 array of 2 × 2 × 20 mm3 discrete crystals, and 12 × 12 array of 1 × 1 × 20 mm3 discrete crystals, were modeled and each crystal was polished and separated by white reflectors (RC = 0.98). Three types of photosensors [21], PSPMT with 25% QE, GAPD1 with 30% PDE having small-area microcells (3600 microcells, 50 × 50 µm2), and GAPD2 with 45% PDE having large-area microcells (900 microcells, 100 × 100 µm2) consisting of 3 × 3 mm2 pixels, were modeled. Then, 12 × 12 mm2 monolithic optical guides with a refractive index of 1.52 and 11 different thicknesses, ranging from 0 to 10 mm with a 1 mm step, were modeled so as to allow the scintillation light to spread to neighboring photosensor pixels (Fig. 2
                        ).

A Monte-Carlo simulation using DETECT2000 was conducted to investigate the light distribution after conversion of the γ-ray in LSO crystal using a light yield of 27 photons/keV [22,23]. Each of the 1000 γ-ray interactions per discrete crystal for the LSO crystal blocks was simulated with a different random number, and the average incident photons was predicted to impinge on the photosensor entrance surface. Although the recovery time needed to recharge a cell after a breakdown could depend on the microcell size and have an effect on the number of fired cells, these phenomena was not modeled in this study. The variations in uniformity caused by inhomogeneities in scintillation crystals, light guide, and photosensor pixels, and nonuniformities in white reflectors and amplifier circuits were not modeled in this study.

The photons impinging on the GAPD entrance surface were simulated and recorded for each interaction event. The number of collected photons for PMT (N collected photons) and fired cells for GAPD (N fired microcells) was calculated using Eq. (1) 
                        [24] and Eq. (2), respectively.
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       N
                                       
                                          collected
                                           
                                          photons
                                       
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                       N
                                       
                                          photons
                                       
                                    
                                    ×
                                    Q
                                    E
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       N
                                       
                                          fired
                                           
                                          microcells
                                       
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                       N
                                       
                                          total
                                           
                                          microcells
                                       
                                    
                                    ×
                                    
                                       [
                                       
                                          1
                                          −
                                          
                                             e
                                             
                                                
                                                   (
                                                   
                                                      −
                                                      ε
                                                      ×
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               N
                                                               
                                                                  photons
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               N
                                                               
                                                                  total
                                                                   
                                                                  microcells
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   )
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       ]
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        Where ε (PDE) = Quantum efficiency × Fill factor × Geiger-mode avalanche probability.

In order to evaluate whether or not the LCE of the PET detectors with light guide would be improved in comparison with the direct coupling of the crystal and photosensor, the number of counted photons (fired cells for GAPD or collected photons of PMT) for 511 keV γ-rays were investigated. The LCE was calculated using Eq. (3).
                           
                              (3)
                              
                                 
                                    L
                                    C
                                    E
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          Number
                                           
                                          o
                                          f
                                           
                                          counted
                                           
                                          photons
                                       
                                       
                                          Number
                                           
                                          o
                                          f
                                           
                                          entered
                                           
                                          photons
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

To examine the linearity as a function of energy and number of counts, the linearity performance was characterized as a function of light guide thickness. The linearity was investigated for γ-rays with 7 different energies ranging from 100 to 700 keV, with 100 keV intervals.

Flood map images were obtained to characterize the effect of light guide thickness on crystal identification, in which it is possible to separate the individual crystal pixel and provide good spatial resolution. The interaction position of the 511 keV photons was determined by discretized position chain (DPC) network [25,26].

@&#RESULTS@&#

The number of incident photons entering the photosensor surface gradually decreased as a function of the light guide thickness, and this could be caused by light loss (i.e. reflection or absorption) through the light guide. The average number of entering photons decreased from 5894 to 5699 photons as a function of light guide thickness in the range of 0–10 mm in the PET detector with a 4 × 4 crystal array of 3 × 3 × 20 mm3 discrete crystals, as shown in Fig. 3
                        . Also, similar trends were observed as the average number of photons decreased from 5361 to 5203 photons and from 4401 to 4284 photons, with the 6 × 6 crystal array of 2 × 2 × 20 mm3 and with the 12 × 12 crystal array of 1 × 1 × 20 mm3 discrete crystals, respectively.

The number of counted photons was slightly decreased for PSPMT due to a decrease in the impinging photons, while it was markedly increased by using the thicker light guide to spread the light to neighboring microcells for both GAPDs. Fig. 3 shows the number of counted photons when 511 keV γ–rays interacted with LSO crystal at three different positions (#1, #2, and #6) in 4 × 4 array crystal blocks. The number of counted photons was rapidly increased at the center of crystal blocks (#6, #7, #10, and #11), whereas it was slowly increased at the edges (#1, #4, #13, and #16) due to less geometrical spreading of the scintillation light to neighboring photosensor pixels. However, an increased number of counted photons could be obtained with PET detector modules based on GAPDs with light guide of >2 mm thickness, compared to PMT-based modules. Moreover, the LCE of PET detectors based on thick light guide and GAPDs with 100 × 100 µm2 microcells was considerably improved (Fig. 4
                        ).


                        Fig. 5
                         shows the average number of counted photons (a) and LCE (b) at 16 different positions using the PET detector coupled with 4 × 4 array crystal blocks, as a function of the light guide thickness ranging from 0 to 10 mm with a 1 mm step. The number of collected photons for PMT (□) continuouslydecreased from 1473 to 1424 photons. The number of fired cells for GAPDs with 50 × 50 µm2 microcells (△) tended to increase from 1397 to 1700 photons as light guide thickness increased in the range of 0–5 mm, but slightly decreased to 1683 photons in the range of 5–10 mm. A considerable increase from 853 to 2344 photons in the number of fired cells as a function of light guide thickness was observed with the PET detectors based on GAPDs with 100 × 100 µm2 microcells (○).

The LCE of PET detectors based on GAPDs coupled with the thick light guide was improved from 24% to 30% and from 14% to 41%, with 50 × 50 µm2 and 100 × 100 µm2 microcells, respectively (Fig. 5(b)). It was also observed that the average number of counted photons was increased, showing similar trends as a function of light guide thickness in PET detectors coupled with 6 × 6 (Fig. 6
                        (a)) and 12 × 12 array crystal blocks (Fig. 6(b)). Moreover, the LCE of both these PET detectors was very similar to that of PET detectors coupled with 4 × 4 array crystal blocks (data not shown in the paper).


                        Fig. 7
                         shows the average number of counted photons at 16 different positions with the PET detector coupled with 4 × 4 array crystal blocks and different light guide thickness, as a function of γ-ray energy ranging from 100 to 700 keV. The energy linearity was slightly improved by using the light guide, and the estimated coefficient of determination (R2) of the linearity curve was increased from 0.97 to >0.99 starting from 2 mm of light guide thickness for PET detectors having 50 × 50 µm2 microcell GAPDs (Fig. 7(a)). There was a considerable improvement in PET detectors using a thick light guide between the scintillation crystal and GAPDs with 100 × 100 µm2 microcells, and the estimated R2 was increased from 0.75 to >0.99 starting from 4 mm of light guide thickness in 4 × 4 array crystal block (Fig. 7(b)). These trends in improved energy linearity providing the estimated R2 of >0.99 starting from 4 mm of light guide thickness were similar for both 6 × 6 and 12 × 12 array crystal blocks.


                        Fig. 8
                         shows the flood map images of 6 × 6 array PET detector modules using 3 mm light guide coupled with PSPMT, 50 × 50 µm2 and 100 × 100 µm2 microcell GAPD. Each crystal was clearly separated by the light guides ranging from 2 to 9 mm in thickness.


                        Fig. 9
                         shows the flood map image of 12 × 12 array PET detector modules using 4 mm light guide coupled with photosensors. All 144 crystals were clearly identifiable on the resulting flood histograms by using the light guides ranging from 3 to 7 mm in thickness. The pincushion distortion was observed for 6 × 6 and 12 × 12 array PET detector modules based on 100 × 100 µm2 microcell GAPD due to insufficient light distribution at the 4 corners.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study proposed and examined the light sharing PET detector configuration with thick light guide and GAPD array having large-area microcells for high effective quantum efficiency. The number of counted photons was considerably increased for the proposed detector design using the thick light guide between photosensor and scintillation crystal, and it was 700–900 photons (38–64%) more than that for the PET detector based on PMT or based on GAPD having small-area microcells (Figs. 4, 5, and 6).

LCE was significantly increased for PET detector modules based on GAPDs with large-area microcells having thick light guide, while it was slightly increased for PET detector modules based on GAPDs with small-area microcells or it did not change for PMT. The LCE of 40% could be obtained with the detector configuration, GAPD having large-area microcells coupled with light guide of >4 mm (Fig. 5(b)). Recently, the through silicon via (TSV) or back-side readout GAPD (BSR-GAPD) [27,28], which reads out the signal from each micro-pixel on the back-side allowing a relatively large fill factor for light detection on the front-side, was introduced for improving intrinsic photon detection efficiency (PDE). The LCE could be easily increased by more than 50% with the slightly modified detector configuration using TSV-GAPD having large-area microcells coupled with a thick light guide.

The flood histogram showed good separation and wide margins between the spots of the scintillators (Fig. 8 and Fig. 9). Moreover, a considerable improvement in the energy linearity performance was observed with the proposed detector design, and severe saturation effects could be clearly avoided with the PET detector having 100 × 100 µm2 microcell GAPDs and a thick light guide of >4 mm (Fig. 7 (b)). These results were in agreement with those of earlier studies investigating the non-linearity of MPPC with high PDE of 55% at higher operating voltage [19]. This study demonstrated that GAPDs with large-area microcells, which have not been actively studied as PET photosensors because of their non-linearity properties, could be utilized for PET applications and even high photon flux regime.

It was confirmed that our detector design could provide outstanding effective quantum efficiency of >40%. It is well known that better QE could lead to better PET detector performance by reducing the statistical variation [29]. Also, recent studies have shown that promising improvement in detector performance including energy resolution for low light detection application, spatial resolution for small animal application, and time resolution for TOF could be achieved by adopting PMTs with high QE of 33% or 37% compared to conventional PMT with normal QE of 25% [9,10]. Therefore, it is reasonable to suppose that the proposed detector design using GAPDs with large-area microcells and a thick light guide for providing high effective QE allows for the development of a high performance PET detector.

This study had some limitations. First, pincushion distortion, which is attributable to the linear Anger-logic scheme used to readout a nonlinear charge dispersion in photosensors, was relatively strong in flood map images of proposed PET detector modules (Fig. 8 and Fig. 9). These phenomena can be easily corrected by alternative flood histogram formulae or positioning algorithms [30–33], and they will be implemented in further experimental studies. Second, the identification error that made it difficult to unambiguously discriminate the crystal pixels in four corners or along the edges, as seen in Fig. 9, can cause problems in further experimental studies on high resolution detector with fine pixel pitch (~1 mm). However, this problem could be solved by implementing the segmented light guide design with different cut depths at expense of less light sharing effect [34,35].

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this study, Monte-Carlo simulation and analytical evaluation were performed for light sharing PET detector configuration based on a thick light guide and GAPDs with large-area microcells. Our results demonstrated that overall PET performance of the proposed design was considerably improved, and this approach will provide opportunities to develop GAPDs based PET detector with a high LCE of >40%.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (No. 2015R1C1A1A01051983) and by the Commercializations Promotion Agency for R&D Outcomes (COMPA) grant (No. 2014K000296) funded by the Korea Government (Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

