@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#LabPush: A pilot study of providing remote clinics with laboratory results via short message service (SMS) in Swaziland, Africa – A qualitative study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study seeks to assess factors facilitating as well as factors hindering the adoption of mobile devices in the Swazi healthcare.


                        
                        
                           
                           This study evaluated the end-users of the LabPush system in Swaziland.


                        
                        
                           
                           This study provides end-users perspective, prompt patient care, reduced bouncing of patients, technical support, better communication, willing participant and social influence were facilitators of the adoption m-health in the Swazi healthcare.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Qualitative study

Remote clinics

Laboratory results via short message service (SMS)

Swazi healthcare

Turnaround time (TAT)

LabPush

mhealth

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Developing countries are confronting a steady growth in the prevalence of the infectious diseases. Mobile technologies are widely available and can play an important role in health care at the regional, community, and individual levels. Although labs usually able to accomplish the requested blood test and produce the results within two days after receiving the samples, but the time for the results to be delivered back to clinics is quite variable depending on how often the motorbike transport makes trips between the clinic and the lab.
               
               
                  Objective
                  In this study, we seek to assess factors facilitating as well as factors hindering the adoption of mobile devices in the Swazi healthcare through evaluating the end-users of the LabPush system.
               
               
                  Methods
                  A qualitative study with semi-structured and in-depth one on one interviews were conducted over two month period July–August 2012. Purposive sampling was used; participants were those operating and using the LabPush system at the remote clinics, at the national laboratory and the supervisors of users at Swaziland. Interview questions were focused on perceived of ease of use and usefulness of the system. All interviews were recorded and then transcribed.
               
               
                  Results
                  This study had aimed its primary focus on reducing TAT, prompt patient care, reducing bouncing of patients and defaulting of patients which were challenges that the clinicians have always had. Therefore, the results revealed several barriers and facilitators to the adoption of mobile device by healthcare providers in the Swaziland. The themes Shortens TAT, Technical support, Patient-centered care, Mindset, Improved communication, Missing Reports, Workload, Workflow, Security of smart phone, Human error and Ownership are sorted by facilitators to barriers.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  Thus the end-users perspective, prompt patient care, reduced bouncing of patients, technical support, better communication, willing participant and social influence were facilitators of the adoption m-health in the Swazi healthcare.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Developing countries are confronting a steady growth in the prevalence of the infectious diseases, along with a raising burden from chronic diseases like HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis [1–3]. HIV cases have been reported in almost all parts of the world, a majority of the cases reported are in sub-Saharan Africa. Swaziland is one of the countries in this region and it has the highest prevalence of HIV at 26.3% [4]. There is considerable interest worldwide to explore the challenges and opportunities of digital health care solutions, often referred to as ehealth – the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) to enhance the quality and safety of health care. In 2005, the World Health Assembly (WHA 58.28) passed an ehealth resolution that acknowledged, “ehealth is the cost-effective and secure use of information and communications technologies in support of health and health-related fields, including health-care services, health surveillance, health literature, and health education, knowledge and research,” and urged member states to develop and implement ehealth technologies [5,6]. Since then, implementing ehealth technologies has become a main priority for many countries. ehealth is said to be improving quality and safety of healthcare and there is now considerable international interest in exploiting its potential in healthcare solutions [7,8].

On the one hand, the Electronic Health Record systems (EHRs) are increasingly being used in many developing countries and the benefits of e-health are becoming more obvious [9]. On the other hand, researchers are investigating the potentials of the mobile health (mhealth) – the use of mobile devices such as cellular phones, tablet PC that allows guidelines, checklists and protocols to be hardcoded onto mobile devices. This facilitates coordination of care, care standardization and evidence based medicine (EBM) into the hands of community health workers. Mobile technologies are widely available and can play an important role in health care at the regional, community, and individual levels [10,11].

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

In 2008 the Taiwan Medical Mission (TMM) was established with the vision of improving medical services and hospital management efficiency in Swaziland by transferring appropriate medical concepts and techniques. Taipei Medical University (TMU) has led the Taiwan Medical Mission in Swaziland since 2009. In February 2010 TMU sent a group of medical professionals to the Kingdom of Swaziland. During the visit governmental officers from the Ministry of Health expressed interest in implementing Medical Informatics System (MIS) in order to improve medical services in Swaziland. TMU and TMM thus proposed conducting MIS projects in Swaziland according to the local needs and requirements.

During these visits it was revealed that reporting of lab results was a major problem that could possibly be supported through the use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). The current system for transportation of blood samples and test results utilizes motor bikes between clinics and the central lab.

Although the lab is able to accomplish the requested blood test and produce the results within two days after receiving the samples, the time for the results to be delivered back to clinics is quite variable depending on how often the motorbike transport makes trips between the clinic and the lab. The official statistics have not been collected regarding the turnaround time (TAT) for lab results, doctors working in clinics reported during the visit that it typically takes around 2–3 weeks until a motorbike with more blood samples arrives, however, one clinic usually fetching the results within 2–3 days. The staff of laboratory will place the results in a pigeon box while waiting to be picked up by the staff from clinics.

After the visits to the clinics and discussions with health staff, the team member involved in the information and requirements gathering returned to Taiwan and provided input to a software development team at TMU. A mobile phone with a SIM card was provided to each participating clinic, and the use of this mobile phone was restricted to only receiving laboratory results via SMS. The message language was decided to be English, the official language of Swaziland. The SMS content also included the patient name, bar-code number sent when the test was ordered, and the results of the tests.

A LabPush system was developed with the aim to reduce the TAT of blood results from the national laboratory (NL) to the clinics [12]. This project was implemented as a pilot project to investigate its effectiveness by comparing lab results delivered by SMS to the current paper based system.

Health clinics in Swaziland are not equipped with computers or Internet access however; the clinics do located within range of cellular phone networks. Considering the infrastructure at the clinics, a decision was made to equip the clinics with cellular phones to receive lab results via SMS. The character limitations of SMS did not make it possible to send all the lab results that the clinics required over SMS. After consulting with physicians and nurses at the clinics, ten lab tests were chosen that were considered to be essential for the physicians to take clinical decisions, and make treatment plans, before the paper results arrived. The 10 tests selected to send via SMS are; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotranferease (ALT), indirect bilirubin (I-bil), total bilirubin (t-bil), serum creatinine (Cre), heamoglobin (Hb), platelets (Plt), white blood corpuscles (WBC), absolute CD4 count (CD4), the percentage of CD4 count (CD%) and the percentage of lympocytes (LY%). Because SMS can only use 140 characters the abbreviations noted above for each of the blood tests were used to cut the number of the SMS characters (see Fig. 1
                     ) [13]. Because paper records are still an integral part of the overall information infrastructure at the clinics and laboratories, a decision was made that paper records would still be sent from the labs to the clinics while the LabPush system is in use. Therefore the LabPush system was specified to supplement rather than replace paper records.

The LabPush system was reported to be one of the best methods of receiving results when compared to the traditional paper based system [12,14]. This study reported a significant reduction is the missing lab results via SMS based system when compared with paper-based system. There are studies [15,16] strongly encouraging and highlighting the importance of ehealth projects to be subjected to rigorous, multidisciplinary and independent evaluation. In addition, there is weak empirical evidence that ehealth projects are helpful [17]. Studies available in literature have concluded that sociocultural challenges are as daunting as the technical and logistical ones, and felt these were often neglected and therefore recommend that program managers prioritize strategies to improve communication with, and to gain the cooperation of front line staff [18,19].

Since, there is a clear lack of interpretive evaluation of ehealth projects, creating paucity of empirical evidence of effectiveness of ehealth projects, this research therefore seeks to assess factors facilitating as well as factors hindering the adoption of mobile devices in the Swazi healthcare through evaluating the end-users of the LabPush system.

@&#METHODS@&#

In this study the focus was on the challenges and facilitators confronted by end users while using the LabPush system. Semi-structured and in-depth one on one interviews were conducted over two month period July–August 2012. Purposive sampling was used; participants were those operating and using the LabPush system at the remote clinics, at the national laboratory (NL) and the supervisors of users. There were eleven participants as shown in Table 1
                     .

Inspired by literature available on the technology acceptance model (TAM) a semi-structured interview guide with an open ended questions was developed, Table 2
                      below shows the questions asked as well as during the interviews emerging issues were also welcomed. Interview questions were focused on perceived of ease of use and usefulness of the system.

All interviews were recorded and then transcribed. Data analysis was done using the grounded theory which allows themes to emerge from the data [20]. A list of themes categorized as barrier or facilitator to mobile device adoption were selected from the transcribed data. This process involved immersion in the data, which was achieved by iterative reading of interview transcripts.

The LabPush study protocol was approved by the Scientific and Ethics Committee of Swaziland (REF: MH/599C). For the evaluating this system a letter permitting the interviews was sort from the LabPush co- Principal investigator. Each participant signed a concert form and the purpose of the study was explained to all participants, identity of participants is kept confidential. Permission to record the interviews was asked from each participant.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The analysis revealed several barriers and facilitators to the adoption of mobile device by healthcare providers in the Swaziland as listed in Table 3
                     . The themes are sorted by facilitators to barriers.

Ten out of eleven responders agreed this project has shortens the TAT in their clinics. They would promote the project to other clinics especially which are located far from the national laboratory and also clinics with fewer patients.
                           “Yes I strongly recommend this project to be implemented, especially in those clinics that are far from Mbabane (city where national laboratory is located). Because they (staff from clinics) would not be able to travel as often as they would like to make it possible for patients to get results quicker” (Nurse)
                        
                     

The nurses at the clinics those receiving the lab results and recording it in a log book were supported by their supervisors. Participants felt supported by their supervisors while operating the LabPush. Whenever they had challenges their supervisors were always available to assist them.
                           “Whenever I had problems, my supervisor was available to assist me” (Nurse)
                        
                     

Furthermore, whenever it was necessary the supervisor would contact the national laboratory (NL) staff for assistance and they too were always helpful. For instance, if nurse by mistake deleted the results from the cell phone, they would call the NL and the results would be resent to the cellphone. Another type of support was among the users of the LabPush. They met during the training and kept in touch whenever they faced any challenges related to the project. They shared tips and thus were supportive to one another. The responders felt this project has provided an opportunity for interacting and social networking among participants.

The primary aim of the LabPush system was to reduce TAT and it successfully achieved that in this pilot study [12]. Nine of the participants in this study expressed satisfaction with the project as it made the possibility to initiate treatment sooner to the patients with the help of LabPush as compared to when it was with the paper-based method of receiving results.
                           “Physicians had to wait 2–3 weeks for the lab results… now they could make clinical decisions faster” (supervisor)
                        
                     

Nine of the responders were happy to participate in the project as they interpreted the LabPush to be “related to their clinical work” and they “did not expect any financial incentive” as it didn’t swerve from their job obligations. They further mentioned how time consuming it is to get results from the national laboratory (NL). Therefore the LabPush was appreciated; otherwise gathering results was a colossal challenge. They also expressed the desire to be involved in innovations and were willing to overlook the extra work load (to copy SMS lab results into log book) caused by the LabPush and did not expect any extra incentives. However, two of the participants expected to get extra pay for using the LabPush system as they saw it as an extra work and it required repletion as the old system was still being used.

Seven of the participant expressed that the LabPush system has improved the communication among staff of the clinics and the NL. With the LabPush in progress they could contact the NL staff if they found there were missing results. Then NL used to send them. Prior to this project there was no way to know about it and also the staff at clinics were not aware whom to report about missing results. Thus this project provided an opportunity to “link” them with the NL which facilitated a better communication between the clinics and the laboratory which did not exist before the LabPush. One of the nurses at the clinic said:
                           “Now we know whom to contact if we found incomplete results. Before LabPush, we have to wait until we get results. Also we were not aware whom to contact, we used to collect sample again and re-send the blood examination request” (Nurse)
                        
                     

Before the LabPush, patients would come to receive their results (after waiting for 2 weeks, the normal turnaround time with the paper-based system) and finding that the results are not yet available, they used to return to their homes without getting any help from the hospital, while the staff at clinic is trying to trace where the results are, sometimes they would trace them successfully however, sometimes they would not be able to get hold of the results. The patient would come back a week later only to find if he/she needed to give another sample and wait for another 2 weeks. That would delay treatment unnecessarily.

However, after LabPush was implemented, the nurse will know that some patient's results are missing and immediately call the laboratory then they send the results thus the patients would not need to wait longer for physician to initiate treatment. Participants further described that it was easy to lose patients for follow up, because they would keep bouncing not finding their results and they end up not receiving treatment.
                           “…the patient did not have to make too many visits, to the clinic unnecessarily” (Supervisor)
                        
                        
                           “…we had to be in an awkward situation when we needed to collect blood sample twice, whenever we missed the results” (Phlebotomist)
                        
                     

Effort required to use the LabPush was discussed both as a facilitator and a challenge to the adoption of m-health. Participants who used the LabPush appropriately reported the effort required to operate the lab push to be very little. They described it as a simple way of receiving results. On the other hand users who misunderstood how to use the LabPush described the effort to be “too much” as they found it to be hard to download and copy the results from the phone to the log book.

Users who read results from the cell phone in the presence of patients described the process as “challenging” and “delaying”. One user said:
                           “…I needed to scroll on the phone searching for results (SMS); it was not straight forward and required so much effort.” (Nurse)
                        
                     

Participants had different expectations from what the LabPush was offering. These expectations included ability to “automatically retrieving and printing out results from the laboratory rather than writing SMS results in a log book”. LabPush system was not meant to be like that thus their expectations were not met. For these reasons they describe the LabPush as “difficult” and “error-prone”. Some users misunderstood how the LabPush is designed;
                        “I will tell you for a fact the trust was low, because it was a person who was imputing the results manually; it was not something that it was electronically being picked up from the system.” (Data clerk)
                     
                  

The quote above shows that this user did not understand that in the laboratory the person did not write the results manually but used the computer to send the results to the cell phones in the clinics.

Participants described the LabPush as being destructive to their usual way of doing things; they find it to be “requiring you to have plenty of time when doing it”. LabPush did not allow for paper record keeping.
                           “…health systems in Africa do not allow electronic use as yet because electronics are time consuming, yet we need lots of time to attend to patients than attend to electronics, it takes too much time, having said all that I personally like it but our health systems are not ready yet”. (Nurse)
                        
                     

On other hand, some users choose a less busy time of the day to transcribe the results into the log book so that when clinicians needed the results, they found results in the log book
                           “…the system is similar to what we were doing before; there was nothing too different because even before we still were receiving results and recording them down”. (Nurse)
                        
                     

Two of the clinics involved in this project lost their phones. Users expressed a challenge in keeping the phone safe. Users felt a phone was “too easy to lose”.

Users who used the LabPush appropriately saw no room for errors. However, some users, who did not understand the LabPush, expressed this system could create additional errors when reading the results from the screen. Results were mixed up; users felt it was easy to make mistakes by reading a wrong figure thus they described the system might generate more human errors.

Some of the participants expressed lack of their involvement in the implementation of the project. Users were involved only after its implementation. Thus they felt no ownership of the project but rather as a user. They saw it as a project that they had to “just” carry out. Users further expressed wish of rather being informed about the project earlier and prepare themselves for the change that was coming, but all that was not done. One participant said
                           “….It wasn’t good; ….it's good to know if any changes are coming so that we can also participate.” (Technician)
                        
                     

Another participant said;
                           “I think there needs to be more involvement of other people (users), to know, what do they think, how can this be done better, what are their inputs rather than pushing it down and ask them just to use the system” (supervisor)
                        
                     

The LabPush had aimed its primary focus on reducing TAT, prompt patient care, reducing bouncing of patients and defaulting of patients which were challenges that the clinicians have always had [21]. Primary focus on outputs is recommended by Fraser HS et.el [15] to be an important factor facilitating adoption of health IT projects [22,23].

During software development of the LabPush there was a good interaction between the researchers and the TMM staff in Swaziland [12]. Experts have recommend participatory design processes to be used in developing MIS [24,25]. Were M.C. & Meslin E.M in 2011 suggested collaborative partnership of all stakeholders as a very important point and further highlight that involvement of stakeholders should be before, during and after implementation of the system, in this project involving the users before and during development of the lab push would have allowed for ownership of the project [9,26].

Some of the users misunderstood the LabPush that led to different expectations from what the LabPush had offered. User's misunderstanding is also evident in the way the lab push was used. Printing the results, using results directly from the cell phone for clinical decisions. Direct use of results from the cell phone raised the challenge of human error. All these led to inability to fit the lab push into the workflow, with difficulty of work flow there was need for extra effort to operate the lab push. Had the users correctly understood the system there wouldn’t be any of these problems. Fraser HS in 2005 emphasizes that while implementing EHR's effective training is especially important and that local staff need to have real stake in the process from initial planning to full operation [15].

Inconsistency of receiving the results was one issue hindering the adoption of m-health in Swaziland. Different reasons contributed to the inconsistency, in relation to the lab push is that there was one personnel in the laboratory operating the lab push if absent there was nobody to send the results even if results are available. The other reasons were reasons out of the scope of the lab push, which were lack of reactants in the laboratory.

Limitation of the study is that interviews were done only once.

From the end-users perspective, prompt patient care, reduced bouncing of patients, technical support, better communication, willing participant and social influence were facilitators of the adoption m-health in the Swazi healthcare. Misunderstanding of the LabPush lead to incongruent expectations, difficulty to incorporate lab push in the workflow, too much effort and chance for human error.

As the LabPush was a pilot it would be recommended that training be more than once to make sure users understand it correctly and in turn use it correctly. Users may also be involved in earlier stages than only during implementation.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research is sponsored in part by Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW), Taiwan, under grant MOHW103-TD-B-111-01, Taipei Medical University under grant 101TMU-SHH-21 and Taipei Medical University and Taipei Medical University Hospital (101-TMU-TMUH-03).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

