@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A study on EEG-based brain electrical source of mild depressed subjects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           An experiment measure eye movement and EEG simultaneously.


                        
                        
                           
                           Apply EEG source location to detect abnormal regions of mild depression.


                        
                        
                           
                           Different data to analyses difference between mild depressed subjects and health people.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Mild depression

EEG

Eye movement

sLORETA

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and objective
                  Several abnormal brain regions are known to be linked to depression, including amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) etc. The aim of this study is to apply EEG (electroencephalogram) data analysis to investigate, with respect to mild depression, whether there exists dysregulation in these brain regions.
               
               
                  Methods
                  EEG sources were assessed from 9 healthy and 9 mildly depressed subjects who were classified according to the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) criteria. t-Test was used to calculate the eye movement data and standardized low resolution tomography (sLORETA) was used to correlate EEG activity.
               
               
                  Results
                  A comparison of eye movement data between the healthy and mild depressed subjects exhibited that mildly depressed subjects spent more time viewing negative emotional faces. Comparison of the EEG from the two groups indicated higher theta activity in BA6 (Brodmann area) and higher alpha activity in BA38.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  EEG source location results suggested that temporal pole activity to be dysregulated, and eye-movement data analysis exhibited mild depressed subjects paid much more attention to negative face expressions, which is also in accordance with the results of EEG source location.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A World Mental Health Survey conducted in 17 countries found that on average about 1 in 20 people reported having an episode of depression sometime in their life [1], and it is estimated that depression will constitute the second largest burden of disease by the year 2020 [2]. A large amount of brain imaging research has been focused on the neural correlates of depression using experiments that monitor emotions [3–5]. The emotion-based studies found that some brain regions, such as amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), tends to generate abnormal activities in depression [6].

The functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques have high spatial resolution, but suffer from relatively low temporal resolution. On the other hand, EEG (electroencephalogram) has higher temporal resolution, is inexpensive, and simple to use. EEG is therefore commonly used as an input to techniques that investigate brain activity. Meanwhile, research [7] proposed new method to help solve the inverse source imaging technologies. Another example is sLORETA which uses source EEG to compute images of neuronal activity. These images are then used to accurately identify the 3D distribution of the neuronal activity [8]. Other examples include work by Farahbod et al. that demonstrated a more pronounced lateralization effect in normal healthy controls than those of MDD (major depressive disorder) subjects when changing from a resting (eyes-closed) condition to viewing faces without emotional valence [9]. Ricardo-Garcell et al. reported that both hemispheres could be affected by MDD, but abnormal EEG sources can be found more frequently in the right side, with the maximal abnormal inverse solution at the alpha and theta bands in frontal and parietal cortices [10]. Other researches have also proved differences between mild depressed subjects and healthy controls in delta, theta, alpha and beta bands with EEG source location techniques [10–14].

To our knowledge, current research has focused on the severely depressed, with mild depression receiving considerably less attention. Taking into account the previous research on major depression disorders (MDD), we suppose that, like MDD, mild depression subjects would also have a bias towards negative face expressions, but with the typical brain activity less pronounced. Hence, the aim of this study is to test this hypothesis by observing the abnormal brain regions of mildly depressed subjects during the viewing facial expression pictures.

@&#METHODS@&#

Thirty seven subjects were recruited from a local university to participate in this study. All of them were right-handed, with normal or corrected-to-normal vision. In order to classify the emotional state of the subjects, several measures of depression and anxiety were used: 18 participants (3 females and 15 males) were chosen based on Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) [15] scores they completed before the tasks. A BDI score of ≥13 was considered to indicate a depressive state; <9 was considered to indicate a non-depressive state. The subjects were also asked to give information with respect to an OASIS(Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale) measure. OASIS [16] is a five-item self-rating scale which can be used to access anxiety disorders. Subjects are judged to have significant anxiety symptoms when their score is greater than 8. K10 (Kessler Psychological Distress Scale) [17] was also used to measure anxiety and depression, a score greater than 20 was considered to be evidence of depression or anxiety. All participants gave informed consent and were rewarded for their participation.

The stimulus materials were selected from Chinese Facial Affective Picture System (CFAPS) [18] which has 870 Chinese affective facial pictures of 7 types of emotions, including 74 of anger, 47 of disgust, 64 of fear, 95 of sadness, 150 of surprised, 222 of calm, and 248 of happy. The 15 negative pictures used were randomly selected from the system except calm, happy, and surprised. CAFPS contains face pictures of undergraduates indicating several types of emotion.

The whole experiment includes two blocks which take approximately 3min each. Each block contains 15 trials, therefore the experiment consists of a total of 30 trials. Block 1 contains 15 trials with two neutral Chinese facial expressions shown simultaneously. Block 2 contains 15 trials with one neutral Chinese facial expression on one side and one negative emotional expression (sad, angry, depressed, terrified) on the another. The pictures appear randomly in each block.

Stimuli were displayed on a black background screen. At the beginning of the experiment, participants were given 5 practice trials from a separate set of images to ensure that they understood what to do.

The experiment took place in a sound-attenuated, light-dimmed, and air-conditioned room. The EEG was acquired with a 128-channel HydroCel Geodesic Sensor Net, and Net Station software, version 4.5.4. All Electrode impedances were maintained below 70kΩ [19]. All channels were referenced to Cz during acquisition. The continuous EEG signals were recorded at sampling rates of 250Hz. We chose the following 70 electrodes: F10, AF8, AF4, F2, FCz, FP2, Fz, FC1, FPz, AFz, F1, FP1, AF3, F3, AF7, F5, FC5, FC3, C1, F9, F7, FT7, C3, CP1, FT9, C5, CP3, T9, T7, TP7, CP5, P5, P3, CPz, TP9, P7, P1, Pz, P9, PO7, PO3, O1, POz, Oz, PO4, O2, P2, CP2, PO8, P4, CP4, P10, P8, P6, CP6, TP10, TP8, C6, C4, C2, T8, FC4, FC2, T10, FT8, FC6, FT10, F8, F6, F4.

Eye movements were recorded synchronously by an Eyelink1000 eye-tracking system (SR Research, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada), which uses infrared video-based tracking technology, to record the left eye movement trajectory of each participant. Participants sat approximately 60cm from the screen. Data was sampled at 250Hz and the visual angle corrected to no more than 0.5 degrees error. The eye-tracker was paired with a 17-in. display screen at a resolution of 1024×768, with a chin rest to minimize the head movements. Data viewer software was used to extract fixation and pupil characteristics during the observations for later offline analyses.

A band-pass filter of 1–40Hz and a notch filter of 50Hz were applied to the data to reduce noise and eliminate ocular artifacts. Raw EEG data of each participant was separated into 30 segments (each segment corresponding to one trial) and analyzed offline using the MATLAB R2010a software package.

Eye movement tracking has proved to be an important tool for the study of attentional biases in depressed and non-depressed individuals. The following fixation and pupil characters from the raw data were collected by the eye tracking system and used as key variables by the SPSS 19 software to differentiate mild depressed and non-depressed individuals.
                           
                              •
                              Average fixation duration: the average duration (in milliseconds) of all selected fixations in one trial.

Max fixation duration: the longest fixation duration (in milliseconds) in one trial.

Mean pupil size: the average pupil size in arbitrary units.

Average fixation duration, max fixation duration and mean pupil size for each group were analyzed with independent t-tests to determine the significance of the differences between the two groups. Significance levels for statistical tests were set to p
                        =0.05.

sLORETA (standardized low-resolution electromagnetic tomography) [20], is a method that computes images of electric neuronal activity from EEG, these images may then be processed to obtain the 3D distribution of the neuronal activity. For different noise levels and different simulated source depths it has shown that for single source localization, regularized sLORETA gives the best solution in terms of both localization error and ghost sources [21]. sLORETA was found to have the lowest localization errors and the lowest amount of blurring when compared with the Dale method [20].

The sLORETA computations were made in a realistic head model which is partitioned in 6239voxel at 5mm spatial resolution using MNI152 template [22]. MNI coordinates were then converted to corrected Talairach coordinates [23]. The Talairach coordinates are used to create transformation matrix. 15 epochs of each participant for each condition (negative faces and neutral faces) were averaged to compute the cross spectra. The following frequency bands were analyzed: delta=1.5–4.0Hz, theta=4.0–8.0Hz, alpha1=8.0–10.0Hz, alpha2=10.0–12.0Hz, beta1=12.0–18.0Hz, beta2=18.0–21.0Hz and beta3=21.0–30.0Hz. Each cross spectra file was then transformed to its corresponding sLORETA file.

The differences between the groups were compared voxel-by-voxel using independent a log-F-ratio statistic test in each of the seven frequency bands. This was facilitated by the sLORETA built-in voxel wise randomization tests (5000 permutations), based on statistical nonparametric mapping (SnPM). The levels of significance were corrected for multiple comparisons. The voxels with significant differences (p
                        <0.05). Brodmann areas (BA) as well as coordinates in the MNI-brain were also noted.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In our experiment, participants were required to perform block 1 which used two neutral Chinese facial expressions and block 2 which used neutral Chinese facial expression on one side and one negative emotional expression (sad, angry, depressed, terrified) on another. The EEG and eye-movement recordings were synchronously recorded during each trail. The sLORETA source localization analyses were then performed to locate and quantify activities in brain regions. A comparison of results from the two groups was then made.

The range of BDI scores in the depressed group was 14–40, with a mean of 18.56 (see Table 1
                        ) and the range of scores in the controls was 0–13, with a mean of 1.33 (see Table 1). The score of OASIS ranged from 0 to 20, with a mean of 8.11 (see Table 1) in the depression group and a mean of 2.11 (see Table 1) in non-depression. Previous research has indicated a strong association between high scores on the K10 and a current CIDI diagnosis of anxiety and affective disorders. The mean for K10 in the mild depressed group is 23.67 and 14.22 in the non-depressed group.

Of the 18 subjects, the control group all reported good sleep while from the mild depressed group, 6 reported poor sleep (3 reported difficulty in falling asleep, 2 had an irregular sleep, one often woke up at night), and the remaining 3 reported good sleep.

Average fixation duration, maximum fixation duration and mean pupil size for each group are presented in Table 2
                        . It can be seen that there is significant difference in the mild depressed and non-depressed groups for the average fixation duration, t
                        =3.382, p
                        =0.001, for max fixation duration, t
                        =33.274, p
                        =0.021, for mean pupil size, t
                        =−6.314, p
                        =0.000. For more detailed analysis see Table 2.

In the comparison of facial expressions with respect to neutral faces, the mild depressed group exhibited a higher activation in all bands in the following brain regions: the right middle frontal gyrus (BA6) of the frontal lobe for delta band; the right precentral gyrus (BA6) of the frontal lobe for theta band; the right superior temporal gyrus (BA38) of the temporal lobe for alpha1 and beta1 band; the right transverse temporal gyrus (BA41) of the temporal lobe for alpha2 band; the right inferior temporal gyrus (BA20) of the limbic lobe for beta2 bands; the right inferior temporal gyrus (BA20) of the temporal lobe for beta3 bands (see Table 3
                        ).

Usually, mild depression is characterized by persistent low mood, and often accompanied by anxiety, body discomfort, sleep disorders and lack of interest in daily activities. With respect to cognition, they have a poor memory and slow thinking, often unable to concentrate. They also often show slow action and listlessness in behavior.

The OASIS and K10 scores indicate that the subjects in mild depressed group suffered anxiety and affective disorders described above.

The eye movement results indicate that the mild depressed group spent significantly more time viewing negative images, a result that is consistent with the previous research [19]. However, the pupil size results exhibit that the non-depressed group had a larger mean pupil size, which is inconsistent with current research.

Previous EEG studies, using eye open, eye closed conditions, have quantified the EEG spectra differences at the early stages of depression. It was found that there is an increase in slow (theta and alpha) activity at parietal and occipital sites [24]. Other research has also reported that functional connections involving alpha and theta frequency bands were positively correlated with severity of depressed individuals [25]. Therefore, in our analysis we focus on the theta and alpha bands.

The sLORETA results indicate that with respect to negative expressional stimulus there is a higher theta activity in the right premotor area (PM, BA6) when compared with neutral stimulus (Fig. 1
                        ). The activity of the theta band has been linked with emotional influences on perception in anxious people [26,27]. Neurobiology studies have suggested that the premotor cortex incorporates both a representation of peripersonal space and defensive-like motor repertories [28]. Ref. [29] found that viewing emotional facial expressions in others activates automatically mirrored expressions on the face of the observer, especially in the premotor. Using facial expressions, [30] have also found higher activity in the premotor cortex for perceiving anger as compared to perceiving fear. According to Beck's cognitive model [31], depressed patients have a bias towards the negative, and a maintenance of a depressed mood. Because of this, depressed individuals pay much more attention to the negative facial expressions and will tend to imitate the expression unconsciously, hence the PM will be more active than when viewing neutral faces. Furthermore, the higher theta band activity of BA6, supports the hypotheses that mildly depressed subjects have anxiety symptoms and an attentional bias toward negative information.

For the alpha1 band, there is higher activity in the temporal lobe, the right superior temporal gyrus (STG, BA38), see Fig. 2
                        . BA38 is part of the temporal cortex in the human brain, at the anterior end of the temporal lobe, between the orbital frontal cortex and the amygdale, known as the temporal pole. It receives and sends connections to both regions. Previous studies have exhibited that the temporal lobe plays a key role in depressed subjects. There are many studies raise the possibility that the left TP functions link high-level sensory representations with semantic information, the right TP is associated with high-level sensory representations of emotional responses and social memory [32,33]. Canli et al. using fMRI found depressed patients with high BDI scores will have an active BA38 region when watching fear pictures [34]. There is also good evidence that TP damage can lead to unstable mood states, including rapid cyclical changes in clinical levels of depression, anxiety and irritation [35]. The structural and functional abnormalities of the TP may represent part of a disturbed neural orientation leading to severe depression [36]. The limbic system, include hippocampus, amygdala, insula, temporal pole, and other structures, supports a variety of functions including emotion, behavior, motivation, long-term memory, and olfaction. Meanwhile, there is evidence that the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis (HPA or HTPA axis) is also involved in the neurobiology of mood disorders including MDD [37]. Existing researches exhibit that dysregulation of certain positions in limbic system and HPA axis has a close relation with MDD, such as, amygdala and hippocampus. All the above research has revealed that the TP plays an important role in depression, but the results are mainly concerned with severely depressed patients. To our knowledge, there has been much less attention focused on the mildly depressive state.

The fact that in our experiment the TP region was found to be more active when viewing negative expressions may suggest that there is a dysregulation in the temporal pole in mild depression, which could lead to an individual not being able to control their own mood states, exacerbating their condition due to frustration.

Previous studies reveal the amygdala, the prefrontal cortex, the cingulate gyrus and other abnormal brain activity are related to depression, however, we did not identify any of these brain regions in our experiment. A possible explanation is that mildly depressed subjects have less structural and functional abnormalities of the brain regions, thus obvious differences are not apparent, if this is true a more subtle approach would be needed. Another possible reason could be that anxious depressed subjects have different parietotemporal activity to that of non-anxious depressed subjects. Sample size may also be an issue, although even in a small cohort, some differences would be expected.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In summary, our results suggest, depressed individuals may exhibit a bias toward negative stimuli, especially concerning face processing. From the source location result of sLORETA, the higher activity in BA6 of theta band indicates that mild depressed subjects paid much more attention to negative face expressions, and that the temporal pole has a dysregulation.

In our future work, different levels of depression and emotion dysregulation will be related to structural and functional abnormalities of the brain regions. The doubt over sample size will also be removed by increasing the sample size of the depressed group. It is hoped that we may then generalize these findings to help the treatment of depression.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (No. 2014CB744600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant Nos. 60973138, 61003240), the International Cooperation Project of Ministry of Science and Technology (No. 2013DFA11140), the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (No. 2011CB711000).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

