@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Interactions between traditional Chinese medicine and western drugs in Taiwan: A population-based study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Most commonly interacting Chinese herbs were Ephedrae Herba and Angelicae Sinensis Radix/Angelicae Dahuricae Radix.


                        
                        
                           
                           Unique cultural factors that have resulted in widespread acceptance of both western and traditional Chinese medicine.


                        
                        
                           
                           Taiwan stands well positioned to report on the prevalence of interactions between western drugs and traditional Chinese medicine.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Traditional Chinese medicine

Herb–drug interactions

National Health Insurance Research Database

Alert system

Drug–drug interactions

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Drug–drug interactions have long been an active research area in clinical medicine. In Taiwan, however, the widespread use of traditional Chinese medicines (TCM) presents additional complexity to the topic. Therefore, it is important to see the interaction between traditional Chinese and western medicine.
               
               
                  Objective
                  (1) To create a comprehensive database of multi-herb/western drug interactions indexed according to the ways in which physicians actually practice and (2) to measure this database's impact on the detection of adverse effects between traditional Chinese medicine compounds and western medicines.
               
               
                  Methods
                  First, a multi-herb/western medicine drug interactions database was created by separating each TCM compound into its constituent herbs. Each individual herb was then checked against an existing single-herb/western drug interactions database. The data source comes from the National Health Insurance research database, which spans the years 1998–2011. This study estimated the interaction prevalence rate and further separated the rates according to patient characteristics, distribution by county, and hospital accreditation levels. Finally, this new database was integrated into a computer order entry module of the electronic medical records system of a regional teaching hospital. The effects it had were measured for two months.
               
               
                  Results
                  The most commonly interacting Chinese herbs were Ephedrae Herba and Angelicae Sinensis Radix/Angelicae Dahuricae Radix. Ephedrae Herba contains active ingredients similar to in ephedrine. 15 kinds of traditional Chinese medicine compounds contain Ephedrae Herba. Angelicae Sinensis Radix and Angelicae Dahuricae Radix contain ingredients similar to coumarin, a blood thinner. 9 kinds of traditional Chinese medicine compounds contained Angelicae Sinensis Radix/Angelicae Dahuricae Radix. In the period from 1998 to 2011, the prevalence of herb–drug interactions related to Ephedrae Herba was 0.18%. The most commonly prescribed traditional Chinese compounds were MA SHING GAN SHYR TANG (23.1%), followed by SHEAU CHING LONG TANG (15.5%) and DINQ CHUAN TANG (13.2%). The prevalence of herb–drug interactions related to Angelicae Sinensis Radix, Angelicae Dahuricae Radix was 4.59%. The most common traditional Chinese compound formula were TSANG EEL SAAN (32%), followed by HUOH SHIANG JENQ CHIH SAAN (31.4%) and SHY WUH TANG (10.7%).
                  Once the multi-herb drug interaction database was deployed in a hospital system, there were 480 prescriptions that indicated a TCM–western drug interaction. Physicians were alerted 24 times during two months. These alerts resulted in a prescription change four times (16.7%).
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  Due to the unique cultural factors that have resulted in widespread acceptance of both western and traditional Chinese medicine, Taiwan stands well positioned to report on the prevalence of interactions between western drugs and traditional Chinese medicine and devise ways to reduce their incidence. This study built a multi-herb/western drug interactions database, embedded inside a hospital clinical information system, and then examined the effects that drug interaction alerts had on clinician prescribing behaviour. The results demonstrated that western drug/traditional Chinese medicine interactions are prevalent and that western-trained physicians tend to change their prescribing behaviour more than traditional Chinese medicine physicians in their response to medication interaction alerts.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Today there is more interest than ever in the use of traditional Chinese medicines (TCM). Increasingly, patients are taking Chinese herbal supplements in combination with western drugs as part of their medical treatment regimens. With increasing use, however, comes the increased potential for adverse drug–drug interactions [1,2]. Despite this trend, however, TCM are still used only account for a small fraction of all drug prescriptions. Taiwan stands in a unique position to report on the nature and magnitude of interactions between traditional Chinese medicines (TCM) and western medicines because both types of medicines are widely and concurrently used.

Taiwan's National Health Insurance (NHI) system was implemented in 1995, and it started covering traditional Chinese medicines (TCM) in 1996. Taiwan's unique health insurance system, which gives patients the choice to access both traditional Chinese medicine alongside western medical treatment has allowed the use of TCM treatments to flourish. In 2012, the NHI expended NT$ 565.5 billion on healthcare in Taiwan. Traditional Chinese medicine accounted for 7%, or NT$ 39.6 billion [3]. Most medical care institutions are contracted with the NHI system. In addition, the number of hospitals with a traditional medicine department has increased from 77 (13.9%) in 2009 to 90 (17.6%) in 2013 [4]. The high usage of traditional Chinese medicine and western medicine means that more and more patients are being treated for the same disease using both styles. In central Taiwan especially, the percentage of patients using both TCM and western medicine in the treatment of the same disease was about 32.5% in 2009 [5]. It is likely then, that the opportunity for adverse TCM–western drug interactions exists. Such drug–drug interactions may result in severe complications which cause permanent damage or life-threatening events [6,7]. Therefore, more research into the frequency of TCM–western drug interactions is warranted.

Currently, robust software tools exist that allow health care providers to query for drug–drug interactions between western medicines [8–11]. Research has also been done in foreign countries on herb–drug interactions in the literature, including Chinese herbs [12–14]. However, Chinese herbal medicine in foreign countries is considered complementary and alternative medicine (CAM), so it is not regulated as a true medical drug. In Taiwan, traditional Chinese medicines are considered mainstream medications. Furthermore, the same Chinese herbal medicines have different usage patterns and indications in the East and in the West. For these reasons, traditional Chinese medicine and western drug interactions need to be studied separately in Taiwan.

Taiwan now has databases of Chinese herb–drug interactions for use within the country. One database, the “Query System of Herb-Drug Interactions,” was created by Chi Mei Medical Center in 2003 [15], and another, the “Web of Herb-Drug Interactions,” was built by the Department of Chinese Medicine and Pharmacy in the Ministry of Health and Welfare in 2004 [16]. However, the two databases cover only single herb prescriptions and a small number of common TCM compounds. Most traditional Chinese physicians, however, prescribe multiple-herb compounds in which in which several herbs are combined. This key clinical practice fact limits the utility of single herb databases because herb–drug interactions are likely to be underestimated or incomplete.

The purpose of this study is to establish a comprehensive database of herb–drug interactions, including multi-herb compounds, by analyzing Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database. It further aims to calculate the prevalence of herb–drug interactions and identify categories of combined TCM–western medicine interactions. After discovering this knowledge, this study also applies it to everyday clinical care by integrating the comprehensive herb–drug interactions database into a clinical decision support system at a regional teaching hospital. The study then briefly investigates the effects that this database has physician-prescribing behaviour.

@&#METHODS@&#

To create a database of herb–drug interactions, each traditional Chinese medication needs to be broken down into its component herbs. Then, each herb needs to be matched to a similar western equivalent drug. This list is provided in Table 1
                     .

For example, the active herbs from the traditional Chinese medicines Sennae Folium and Rhei Rhizoma contain ingredients that are similar to Sennoside; those from Ephedrae Herba contains similar ingredients to ephedrine; those from Angelicae Sinensis Radix, Angelicae Dahuricae Radix, Angelicae Laxiflorae Radix, Peucedani Radix, and Psoraleae Semen contain similar ingredients to warfarin.

Next, we try to find out drug–drug interactions. Since Sennoside does not have any clinically important interactions, we focus on ephedrine and warfarin, whose interaction is listed in Table 2
                     . An important point is to note that most traditional Chinese physicians prescribe mainly TCM compound formulas, rather than single herb prescription. That is, most traditional Chinese medicines are actually a combination of many herbs combined into one. In order to break down each medication into its constituent ingredients, we consult the Chinese herbal products reference, which is produced by the Department of Chinese Medicine and Pharmacy. We remove the medications that are not used as daily drugs from the multi-herb TCM. We then obtain the formula of the target TCM, as shown in Table 3
                     . Finally, we look up each individual herbs’ drug–drug interactions to establish a database of multiple herb–drug interactions.

The data source for this study is Taiwan's National Health Insurance claims database, which encompasses >99% of all Taiwanese citizens who received treatment in Taiwan's medical institutions. It includes anyone who received a prescription for either TCM or western medicines between the years 1998 and 2011. An interaction between TCM and western medicine was defined by breaking down each TCM into its constituent herbs and then checking for known interactions between each single herb and each western medication that a patient was currently taking. For example, “SHENG HUA TANG and Aspirin,” and “SHENG HUA TANG and Mefenamic acid” were considered TCM–western medicine combinations.

By incorporating the drug–drug interactions database between multi-herb TCM compounds and western medicines in this study into a clinical alerts system in a northern Taiwan teaching hospital, online for two months, we observed outpatients in the Department of TCM and Western Medicine. We calculated the frequency of alerts for herb–drug interactions and the rate that doctors’ prescriptions changed after an alert.

@&#RESULTS@&#

We analyzed two western drugs that commonly interact with TCM compounds: ephedrine analogues and coumarin analogues [17]. Using health insurance codes (drug codes) approved by NHI Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare, there were 407 drug codes for TCM compounds that contain ephedrine analogues and 19 drug codes for western medicines that interact with those TCM compounds, for a total of 7733 interaction pairs. There were 271 drug codes for TCM compounds containing coumarin analogues and 2135 drug codes for western medicines that have interactions with those TCM compounds, for a total of 578,585 interaction pairs. This study used a sample of 1,361,535 TCM prescriptions that contained Ephedrae Herba, 5755 western prescriptions that contained drugs that interact with ephedra, and 463 instances during which ephedra and an interacting western medicine was prescribed during the same year.

We further limited the dataset to 251 instances of patients using TCM compounds and western medicine at the same time. This accounted for 0.18% of total prescriptions of TCM compounds with Ephedrae Herba. The number of prescriptions for each individual year is listed in Table 4
                     . Among the data, 12 prescriptions were prescribed by the same hospital (4.79%), and 143 prescriptions were prescribed by hospitals in the same county (56.97%). The prevalence of interactions between ephedra-containing TCM compounds with western drugs is 0.06–0.39‰ (Fig. 1
                     ). Further analysis of the 251 prescriptions is given in Table 5
                     , which shows that males accounted for 47.01% (118 prescriptions) and females for 52.99% (133 prescriptions), with a mean age of 67.17 years old, ranged from 4 to 89 years old, mostly centred on 61–70 years olds (35.06%) and 70–80 years olds (34.66%). Among the TCM compounds with interaction effects, the most common one is MA SHING GAN SHYR TANG, with 58 prescriptions (23.11%); the second is SHEAU CHING LONG TANG, with 39 prescriptions (15.54%), followed by DINQ CHUAN TANG, with 33 prescriptions (13.15%), as shown in Table 6
                     . The most commonly implicated western medicine that interacts with TCM is Selegiline, with 248 prescriptions (98.8%). Moreover, analysis of the 251 prescriptions by distributions of counties is given in Fig. 2
                     , which shows that the most interactions occurred in New Taipei City, with 35 prescriptions (13.94%). The second most common locale is Taichung County, with 34 prescriptions (13.55%). The third most common locale is Kaohsiung City, with 24 prescriptions (9.56%). Analysis of the data by hospital type shows that 4 prescriptions were prescribed by large medical centres and 8 prescriptions were prescribed by regional hospitals.

Next, the study used a sample of 947,014 prescriptions of TCM compounds with Angelicae Dahuricae Radix and Angelicae Sinensis Radix, 1,763,072 prescriptions of commonly interacting western medicines, and 120,099 instances of simultaneous TCM compound and western medicine usage within the same year. By estimating the prescription date and number of days a patient was on the medicine, we screened the data to select 43,504 prescriptions where TCM compounds and western medicines were used at the same time. This accounted for 4.59% of total prescriptions of TCM compounds with Angelicae Dahuricae Radix and Angelicae Sinensis Radix. The number of prescriptions for each individual year is listed in Table 7
                     . Analysis of this dataset showed that 394 prescriptions were prescribed by the same hospital (0.91%), and 33,428 prescriptions were prescribed by hospitals in the same county (56.97%). The prevalence rate is given in Fig. 3
                     , which indicates that the prevalence rate was between 2.03 and 9.83%, presenting an obviously downward trend.

Further analysis of 43,504 prescriptions and their interactions is given in Table 8
                     . It shows that males accounted for 31.45% (13,682 prescriptions) and females for 68.55% (29,822 prescriptions), with a mean age of 32.84 years old (range 1–94 years old). Most patients were younger than 20 years old (26.19%), with the next most common age group being patients aged 31–40 years old (22.63%). Among the TCM compounds that interacted with western drugs, the most common one is TSANG EEL SAAN, with 13,936 prescriptions (32.03%); the second most common is SHIANG JENQ CHIH SAAN, with 13,655 prescriptions (31.39%); the third most common is SHY WUH TANG, with 4639 prescriptions (10.66%). These results are summarized in Table 9
                     . The western medicine that was involved with the most drug interactions is mefenamic acid, with 15,969 prescriptions (36.71%); the second is erythromycin, with 11,882 prescriptions (27.31%); the third is phenobarbital, with 6599 prescriptions (15.17%). These results are shown in Table 10
                     . In addition, analysis of the 43,504 prescriptions by county is given in Fig. 4
                     . This analysis showed that Taichung County prescribes the most, with 4461 prescriptions (10.25%); the second is New Taipei City, with 4288 prescriptions (9.86%); the third is Kaohsiung City, with 3935 prescriptions (9.05%). Of the 394 prescriptions prescribed by the same hospital, most occurred in Taipei City, with 98 prescriptions (in black). Analysis of the data by hospital category showed that 78 prescriptions (19.80%) were prescribed by academic medical centres, 258 prescriptions (65.48%) were prescribed by regional hospitals, 33 prescriptions (8.38%) were prescribed by community hospitals, and 25 prescriptions (6.35%) were prescribed by private physician clinics.

The multi-herb TCM–western drug interactions database in this study was integrated into an electronic medical records system in a northern Taiwan teaching hospital. If a healthcare provider tried to order a TCM and a western drug combination that would result in a drug–drug interaction, a medication alert was immediately triggered on the screen. During the trial period, physicians prescribed ephedrine analogues (Ephedrae Herba) 39 times, and prescribed coumarin analogues (Angelicae Sinensis Radix and Angelicae Dahuricae Radix) 441 times. This could result in patients taking two medications that contain the same active ingredient. Data about the medication alerts was accumulated for two months and is presented in Table 11
                     . Medication alerts for possible TCM–western drug interactions were issued 24 times. 18 of these alerts were issued to TCM physicians, and 6 times they were issued to western medicine physicians. The doctors’ responses after receiving the alarm are listed in Table 12
                     , which show that they amended medicine prescriptions 4 times (16.7%). Western medicine physicians were far more likely to amend prescriptions than TCM physicians. The 24 alerts were all related to interactions between TCM compounds and coumarin. Of the interacting TCM compounds, the most frequent offenders were HUOH SHIANG JENQ CHIH SAAN, YI GAN SAAN, and TAO GONG SHY WUH TAN, as shown in Table 13
                     . The most commonly interacting western medicines were aspirin and famotidine, as shown in Table 14
                     .

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

TCMs are often prescribed as multi-herb compounds and commonly taken by patients with western medications. Current drug–drug interaction databases are limited to single herb–western medication checks. In this study a new multi-herb TCM/western drug interactions database was created. Next, the prevalence and clinical features of multi-herb TCM compounds with western medicines were analyzed.

This study used the NHI database, which contained a total of 586,318 herb–drug interactions and is the first study on interactions between multi-herb TCM compounds and western medicines.

The study found that from 1998 to 2011, the prevalence rate of herb–drug interactions was 1.9%, of which 0.18% were multi-herb TCM compounds with Ephedrae Herba and 4.59% were TCM compounds with Angelicae Dahuricae Radix and Angelicae Sinensis Radix. These interactions are discussed next.
                        
                           1.
                           Among the TCM compounds that interact with ephedrine analogues, the most common is MA SHING GAN SHYR TANG (23.11%), the second is SHEAU CHING LONG TANG (15.54%), and the third most common is DINQ CHUAN TANG (13.15%). Those TCM compounds have similar treatment indications and are used to treat the common cold, influenza, and other upper respiratory tract infections. Other commonly interacting TCMs are WU YAO SHUN CHI SAAN (7.97%) and HSIAO HSU MING TANG (6.37%), which are used for guiding one's qi downward and curing rheumatic diseases shown in Table 6. They are also used in nonspecific situations to disperse pathogens in the body and improve circulation. Western-named diseases that these TCM compounds treat corresponded to cerebral thrombosis and neuralgia. The most commonly interacting western medicine is selegiline (98.8% of identified interactions), which is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor used for treating Parkinson's disease. This interaction mostly affected patients older than age 61 (78.88%), reflects the age of most Parkinson's patients.

Among the TCM compounds that interacted with coumarin analogues, the most common was TSANG EEL SAAN (32.03%), which is used to treat rheumatic disorders and Tongqia; the second was HUOH SHIANG JENQ CHI SAAN (31.39%), which is used for dispersing dampness in the body, to smooth the liver, to regulate qi, to treat colds, upset stomach and indigestion. The third most common interacting TCM compound was SHY WUH TANG (10.66%) and TAO GONG SHY WUH TANG (9.55%), which is used for improving blood circulation) and anaemia as well as for dysmenorrhea during a female's menstrual period. Women seeking for the help from TCM physicians did so mostly for symptoms such as abnormal menstrual cycles, dysmenorrhea, and functional gastrointestinal disorders. Men sought TCM physicians mostly for symptoms like neuralgia and hypertension. In terms of age, the majority of TCM patients were younger than 40 years old (65.81%). Western medicines that interacted most oftenly with TCM compounds included mefenamic acid (36.71%), followed by erythromycin (27.31%), phenobarbital (15.17%), and indomethacin (10%). Grouped by drug classification, the majority were NASIDs, with 20,318 prescriptions, which accounted for 46.7% of interactions.

This study demonstrated that overall, the prevalence of TCM–western medicine interactions trended significantly downward between the years 1998 and 2011. For example, interactions with ephedrine analogues (ephedra) fluctuated up until 2009. Afterwards, it went down from 0.37% to 0.09%. Also, interactions with analogues containing coumarin (Angelicae Sinensis Radix, Angelicae Dahuricae Radix) declined after 1999, and the prevalence rate went down from 9.83% to 2.03%. This is probably due to two reasons: (1) medicine safety has received a higher priority in clinical healthcare over time. In recent years, health authorities have vigorously promoted correct medication usage and medication safety. Medical institutions at all levels have organized relevant health education seminars on drug–drug interactions, effects of foods on medication efficacy, and herb–drug interactions [18]. In addition, pharmacists now provide professional consulting services in hospital and community pharmacies. Also, patients themselves have enhanced their medical knowledge and can often actively inform physicians about their medication lists, which reduces the number of herb–drug interactions [19,20]. (2) Use of the NHI research database as the datasource. This means that if during the study period medicines had been removed from shelves, suspended from production, or cancelled payments from NHI, or if medication safety alert had issued, or if the global usage of medication had changed, it would affect the usage of medicines and in turn affect the prevalence of interactions.

There are several limitations to this study: (1) the study sample included only outpatients clinics and not emergency room visits. It also did not include medications still on patent and over-the-counter (OTC) medicines. Including these could possibly increase the prevalence of TCM–western drug interactions. (2) In this study, the relationship between dosage of medicines and the degree of herb–drug interactions was not addressed. (3) This study did not investigate the prevalence of actual adverse effects resulting from TCM–western drug prescriptions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study began by creating a multi-herb TCM/western drug interactions database by analyzing National Health Insurance data in Taiwan. The results show the prevalence 1.9% of herb–drug interactions in between 1998 and 2011. The most commonly interacting western medicines drug classes with TCM compounds were NASIDs, antibiotics, and anti-seizure medications. This study draws attention to the need for policy-makers to pay attention to the importance of herb–drug interactions.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research is sponsored in part by Taipei Medical University and Shuang-Ho Hospital project under grant 104TMU-SHH-20.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

