@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Automated personnel-assets-consumables-drug tracking in ambulance services for more effective and efficient medical emergency interventions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Convenient and rapid inventory control of the PACD in the ambulance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Alarm generation for device maintenance and line replacement of outdated drugs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Missing PACD identification and alarm generation in case of asset removals.


                        
                        
                           
                           Automatic patient information transfer and sharing (hospital–ambulance).


                        
                        
                           
                           Prevention of unprovisioned ambulance dispatch due to depleted or missing PACD.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Ambulance

Bluetooth low energy

Medical emergency interventions

Health services

Near field communication (NFC)

RFID

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Patient delivery time is no longer considered as the only critical factor, in ambulatory services. Presently, five clinical performance indicators are used to decide patient satisfaction. Unfortunately, the emergency ambulance services in rapidly growing metropolitan areas do not meet current satisfaction expectations; because of human errors in the management of the objects onboard the ambulances. But, human involvement in the information management of emergency interventions can be reduced by electronic tracking of personnel, assets, consumables and drugs (PACD) carried in the ambulances. Electronic tracking needs the support of automation software, which should be integrated to the overall hospital information system. Our work presents a complete solution based on a centralized database supported by radio frequency identification (RFID) and bluetooth low energy (BLE) identification and tracking technologies. Each object in an ambulance is identified and tracked by the best suited technology. The automated identification and tracking reduces manual paper documentation and frees the personnel to better focus on medical activities. The presence and amounts of the PACD are automatically monitored, warning about their depletion, non-presence or maintenance dates. The computerized two way hospital–ambulance communication link provides information sharing and instantaneous feedback for better and faster diagnosis decisions. A fully implemented system is presented, with detailed hardware and software descriptions. The benefits and the clinical outcomes of the proposed system are discussed, which lead to improved personnel efficiency and more effective interventions.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The convergence of large populations in cities has led to enormous metropolitan areas and high traffic densities. Both developments have hampered the provision of rapid ambulance services. Dissatisfaction of citizens is frequently reported in the news, about late or inadequate ambulance interventions. Accurate figures on unsuccessful ambulance runs are difficult to obtain however; because city authorities often attribute the cause of failure to dense traffic conditions or long travel distances.

The ambulance services are provided by dedicated vehicles, medical healthcare-personnel, assets (computers, medical devices and communication equipment), consumables and drugs (Personnel-Assets-Consumables-Drugs: PACD). The ambulances are based and supported logistically either by hospitals or specifically designated ambulance centers. The logistic support includes the supply of all of the PACD on the ambulance, previous personal-medical patient information and the intervention instructions for special cases. Therefore, the ambulance service should be looked upon as a professional, dedicated emergency service supported and managed by capable, large organizations. The city ambulance services directive [1] is a depiction; which lists the filling out of a daily ambulance maintenance form as one of the duties of the doctor on call, at the city ambulance service center [2]. The form contains a list of all assets which should be manually checked and signed, at multiple times a day. However, repeated manual form completion many times during a day is prone to human errors and does not guarantee practical compliance. For example, despite error-free and complete form evidence, some drugs and assets were missing from an ambulance [3]. The practice of manual forms and hence the same type of errors are common, in many countries. Missing assets do not necessarily mean the negligence of the personnel, because theft may be the reason. In July 2011 and August 2014 – in two separate incidents – assets worth up to 30,000 U.S. dollars were stolen from ambulances parked in front of the hospitals [4,5]. Missing PACD items that are not reflected in the maintenance forms violate the general “rule of PACD presence”; i.e. PACDs’ guaranteed presence on the ambulance at the call site. However, if the disappearance of a PACD is detected immediately, a notification can be sent for its replacement. Additionally, if it were possible to observe the circumstances of the item's removal, similar events may be prevented from happening. Fortunately, today's capable RFID tracking technologies are ready to enable healthcare organizations to provide the needed monitoring and notification.

Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a technology which is widely used in healthcare [6,7]. Major RFID hospital application areas are asset tracking, safe drug administration and real time object location [8]. RFID is based on a simple principle, in which an electronic sticker (tag) is used to give a unique identification number (ID) to its beholder. The tag contains a microcontroller whose integrated memory holds the unique ID. An antenna is needed to communicate with the outer world, for the identification process to take place [9]. After obtaining the ID, the reader relays it to a server; which searches its database to match the ID to an already recorded item. As in every electronic device, a trade-off exists between the cost and the operating distance of a tag. Due to the trade-off, RFID tags are divided into two categories, as Active and Passive. The more expensive, active tags require a battery source to energize the microcontroller, to be able to support long lifetime and operating distances. The low-cost passive tag is energized electromagnetically by the reader, which in fact is an alternative to the paper barcode. The passive tags are sub-divided into categories, but the most popular are the ultra-high frequency (UHF) and the high frequency (HF) tags. The HF tags are also called near field communication (NFC) cards because of the low operating distance. The categories and features of RFID tags can be found in many books, but a summary is available in our preceding work [9].

Various frequencies and communication protocols are used in active tags for additional features, beyond providing an ID. BLE is a new version of the regular bluetooth communication that promotes the technology into a suitable category, for RFID [10]. A popular, commercial BLE-based item used for identification is the iBeacon (a trademark of Apple Inc.) [11]. Although designed for mobile phone applications, iBeacons are gradually becoming more common in healthcare, as well [12]. An iBeacon is a low energy consuming device that periodically broadcasts a unique identification number (ID). Any device with BLE capability that comes within the iBeacon's transmission range can identify the iBeacon and launch a pre-defined application. Thus, devices can detect proximity to specific locations and perform location aware activities.

The differing properties combined with the cost considerations make using one single identification technology for diverse applications impractical. For example, accommodating an iBeacon on a small syringe is not practical due to size mismatch. In addition, the price of an iBeacon is much higher than the syringe's. On the other hand, a UHF RFID sticker is cheaper than a syringe and suitable as a sticker on each item. UHF tags also provide bunch reading of all syringes present in an ambulance, within a second. Fig. 1
                      of presentation [13] summarizes the comparison of various communication technologies. The Wi-Fi and Wi-Max technologies are good for computer-to-computer communication, with high data transfer rates and long operating distances. But, Wi technologies are relatively 100 times more expensive than the passive RFID technologies. However, identification and tracking do not require high transfer rates. Transfer rates less than 1MB/s are enough to acquire the ID of a tag, in less than a second. If there are many items to track another consideration; the cost becomes a big factor. Naturally, the usual choice of tracking cheap and small sized items is using cheap UHF tags. For tracking expensive and bulky items, higher cost technologies like BLE are more suitable. Another constraint is forcing the tracked person or item to come very close to its reader. In other words, intentionally reading each tag one by one is necessary. Hence, the popular NFC tags with an operating distance of a few centimeters (Fig. 1) can specifically compel personnel or expensive assets to be present physically, at the site of the reader. The NFC technology also provides higher security than the UHF tags, for acquiring the ID number through the insecure air medium [9]. Therefore, it can be concluded that the variety of the ambulance PACD requires a combination of RFID technologies, for efficient tracking.

In this paper, the next section presents the identification and analysis of the problem, as well as the related work. Our proposed solution is called Effective and Efficient Ambulance PACD Tracking System (EEAPTS); which is a software application for tracking PACDs, supported by RFID and BLE technologies. The details of the proposed solution are given in Sections 3 and 4. Section 4 also presents an integration example. Section 5 presents the discussion; Section 6 depicts the limitations and finally, Section 7 presents the conclusion and future work.

Straightforward, the problem is the need to stop the lives or health lost in ambulatory services, due to human errors; especially of those humans who normally would have recovered had the correct treatment been available, at the correct time. The provision of the correct treatment at the correct time, at the call site can be simply defined as effective emergency intervention. There are several factors affecting the quality of effective intervention. One of the factors is the accessibility to the most current medical history of the patient at the emergency site. Utilizing mobile technologies provide immediate access to patient medical history from the hospitals, on demand. The transfer of patient vital signs to hospitals in return and sharing the data with other health institutions increase the patient's survival chances. The real time monitoring of patient signs is referred to as mobile health (m-health) [14]. M-health makes an early specialist physician intervention possible [15]. Several cases have demonstrated the success of m-health, like the transmission of echography video during emergency services [16]. Mobile technologies can further improve the efficiency of the emergency services by sharing the patient information among hospitals and institutes. When revealed, it will be obvious that our proposal supports m-health, with complementary RFID.

The other issue affecting effective intervention is the inability or the delay in giving the correct treatment, because of PACD unavailability. The reason of PACD unavailability is mainly due to human errors. But, human errors in the ambulance and hospital services can be eliminated, by using ubiquitous systems. Such systems also eliminate the degraded confidence of patients and ambulance crews in the guaranteed presence of critical PACD. Increased confidence helps in improving the satisfaction; but obviously there is a need to set the threshold for satisfactory ambulance services. Hence, the general requirements of transporting a remote patient to a hospital have to be clearly identified, first. In order of importance, the requirements are:
                        
                           a)
                           Minimization of the time that passes between the initiation of an emergency call and the entrance of the patient into the hospital emergency room,

The immediate transfer of the patient's measured biological and personal (if possible) data to the hospital, for the preparation of the hospital treatment,

The transfer of patient health history (previous operations, complications, allergies, etc.) to the ambulance personnel, before or during the remote intervention,

The guaranteed provision of timely maintained, calibrated and tag updated PACD in the ambulance, in correct quality and quantities,

The dispatch of the list of PACDs used during the last intervention, to enable the logistic preparations start before the ambulance reaches the hospital,

The detection of any non-presence or deficiencies in PACD, before the ambulance leaves the emergency call site.

Failing to satisfy one of the above requirements results in an ineffective intervention, during the present or in the next emergency run. In other words, it is not only important to deliver the patient to the hospital fast; but it is also important to intervene efficiently in the present emergency call and make preventive preparations for the following calls, even before the ambulance returns its base.

The need to meet the requirements of effective emergency services obligates the use of reliable technologies in tracking of healthcare PACD. Such strategies help to eliminate the old fashioned, error prone, manual, form driven procedures. Currently, past intervention processes and patient records are archived in patient health record (PHR) forms [17]. The non-digital forms are often lost or deformed beyond recognition. Obviously, preserving and retrieving information from unreadable paper forms is a source for errors. In addition, categorizing and retrieving information from an extensive archive of paper files is very time-consuming. The emergency department of Southampton university hospital in U.K. investigated patient transfer forms and emergency department reports, for accuracy of patient information [18]. Among the records investigated, as many as 26 had inconsistent information or missing data. Going one step further, Owen et al. studied the transfer of information between the ambulance and emergency department personnel [19]. The study identified the two main problems; the deficiencies in verbal information transfer and the short transfer time for information handover. In an attempt to remedy the problem, Redfern et al. aimed to improve the formats of the doctor notes and the patient record-forms, filled in by the ambulance crew [20]. Saga university hospital in Japan opted to use information technology and modern communication techniques to improve the information transfer, in the emergency departments [21]. To reach the goal, a tablet based information sharing solution has been developed for the Emergency Medical Services. The system maintains a record of available hospitals for emergency cases, and shares the information with the ambulance personnel. However, the 3G mobile phone communication connection used to transfer a large amount of data is exposed to weak or sometimes unavailable connections, leaving the ambulance personnel with no support. A comprehensive medical emergency system (CMES) is proposed in work [22] consisting of five subsystems: a main central server, online healthcare records, a mobile web application, an ambulance system and global positioning system (GPS) tracking [23]. However, the CMES offers only periodical personnel inspections, but no automated tracking of the ambulance equipment. The equipment data are recorded manually on a form. This process is also vulnerable to human error and time consuming. Other mobile asset tracking solutions in healthcare centers are provided in works [23–25]. Although RFID based systems are used to manage the assets in hospitals in these works, the ambulances are excluded.

There are also various commercial solutions for the tracking of ambulance assets. IntelliTrack uses the old-fashioned barcode technology [26]. Unfortunately, the paper barcode has serious disadvantages, such as “wear and tear” and “one-by-one” manual reading. In another solution, SPT IntelliView offers only active RFID based tracking [27]. However, the system does not cover all PACD for two reasons. First of all, the cost of the active tags is much greater than the cost of most drugs and consumables. Secondly, small sized or flexible PACD cannot be tagged by larger, rigid active tags. Yet another commercial product is Collective Data's software solution, which offers no hardware devices for tracking [28].

In the U.K., the East Midlands Ambulance Service has tagged around 4000 devices, turning the error prone and burdensome manual checking into an efficient (error free and fast) automated process [29]. The automation has also improved the efficiency of the maintenance of the devices. Since the start of the project, wrongly timed maintenance and replacement of devices into wrong ambulances have been mostly eliminated. Even though the above solutions and examples are available, many problems are still reported. For example, the loss of a suction pump from an ambulance and the transfer of a heart monitor to another ambulance were detected through the RFID tracking of the assets of the Frisbie Memorial Hospital (U.S.A.) [30]. In U.K. hospitals, it is not uncommon to find one thousand mobile medical devices that have a combined value of 3 million sterlings. The total price of the mobile equipment in university hospitals is over 10 million sterlings [31]. As an example of investment in RFID, WellSpan Health's hospital in York upgraded its mobile device tracking capability from one thousand to three thousand [32]. The period of return of investment has been reported as 2 or 3 years, depending on size of the tracking projects [9]. The ambulance PACD is simply an extension of hospital PACD. Therefore, considering the importance given to delivering patients in critical condition to hospitals, investment in ambulance PACD tracking is fully justified. More information on RFID tracking projects can be found in work [8].

The implementation of PACD tracking in ambulances is more challenging than in hospitals because of the differences between a hospital and an ambulance. For example:
                           
                              •
                              A hospital's location is fixed, but the ambulance is mobile: the tracking of mobile PACD in a mobile vehicle is more complex,

Ambulances can be airborne, maritime or ground vehicles, each of which has special circumstances,

Mobile ambulances contain fewer items but from all cost categories (high, medium and low), requiring a combined and closely integrated solution.

To meet the above challenges, the ambulances usually have a mounted GPS and a radio link to the hospital. But, more sophisticated facilities that are not found on most ambulance are:
                           
                              •
                              An online asset tracking application working in coordination with the hospital information system (HIS),

An automatic data collection set-up that feeds the HIS, which in return provides feed-back of patient and intervention information to the ambulance,

An integrated tracking of both the assets and the personnel, enabling the hospital to trace the cause of abnormal events; e.g. the removal of a valuable asset from the ambulance with no accompanying personnel (an apparent theft).

@&#MOTIVATION@&#

Our proposal is a result of continuous need for a fast and flawless ambulance emergency service; i.e. effective intervention in densely populated areas. It should be aforementioned that our proposal is intended to complement, rather than to replace the present audio and communication links to the hospital; because the incorporation of fast and reliable technologies into healthcare has become a necessity for providing facilities unavailable to today's ambulances. Particularly, the goal is to replace the outdated, manual, error prone and slow PACD tracking methods with modern, precise, fast modern technological tools. With the support of our proposed EEAPTS solution, the health of emergency patients cannot deteriorate, but only improve.

In order for EEAPTS to work, every PACD in the ambulance must be tagged to prevent: (i) the errors highlighted in Section 2; (ii) non-recognition of a PACD item. Therefore, each PACD in the ambulance is assumed to be tagged according to its cost, size and dimensions by:
                           
                              1.
                              Only a UHF RFID tag,

A combo HF and UHF tag,

Both an iBeacon and a UHF RFID tag.

The RFID tags are available in many sizes and forms (paper or plastic mounted; flexible or rigid). Therefore, it is possible to find a suitable UHF tag for every PACD. However, the special method of iBeacon use in EEAPTS has to be emphasized. Normally, iBeacons are placed at pre-defined, static locations. This enables any BLE capable device coming close to an iBeacon to discover its proximity to a specific location and launch a pre-defined application. However in EEAPTS, the iBeacons are used in place of propriety designed mobile, active identification tags; i.e. the roles of an iBeacon and its detectors are reversed. The use of iBeacons removes dependency on specific commercial, active tags and their readers; because they can be detected by already available tablets, mobile phones and BLE sensors. Apart from HF, UHF and iBeacon tags, the following equipment is also required to transfer the ID of the tags and iBeacons to a central database:
                           
                              1.
                              Medical devices with capability of sending their readings (heartbeat, blood pressure, etc.) to a data collection device,

A fixed HF and UHF RFID reader capable of reading the tags inside the ambulance,

Simple, low cost BLE detectors mounted on the inside and outside of the ambulance,

A portable UHF RFID reader mounted the emergency crew's tool case, capable of reading UHF tags in the vicinity,

A data collection device (netbook or equivalent) that accumulates the gathered information via wired or wireless media,

A general packet radio service (GPRS) connection between the data collection device and the hospital database server.

Medical interventions supported by EEAPTS will have the following precision advantages:
                           
                              •
                              Convenient and rapid inventory control of the PACD in the ambulance,

Alarm generation for device maintenance and replacement of outdated drugs,

Alarm generation for replenishment of used consumables,

Rapid identification of the missing PACD and alarm generation at the removal of an important asset from the ambulance,

Determination of the involved personnel during PACD movement,

Rapid, automatic transfer of patient information (the medical history, allergies, etc.) from the hospital database to the ambulance medical devices to remove the risk of personnel using unsuitable drugs or medical practices for the specific patient,

Recording the transfer of PACD from one ambulance to another,

Providing alarms for depleted or missing PACD to prevent the ambulance from being reassigned to a new intervention without resupply,

Alarm generation at the hospital to initiate preventive preparations (replenishment, replacement, sterilization), even before the ambulance returns to the hospital,

Sharing of the patient's medical condition with other related hospitals and institutions, for seamless patient transfers and accountancy bookkeeping.

EEAPTS contains hardware and software components to achieve its intended goals. The proposed hardware is shown in Fig. 2
                        , in a lab environment. EEAPTS hardware has a UHF RFID reader (6) with two antennae (5 and 7) for determining the PACD inside and outside the ambulance, respectively. If a PACD item disappears from the list of both readers, it is put on the “lost” list. If the lost status continues for a pre-defined amount of time, or even after the personnel appear inside the ambulance, an alarm is generated. Four different types and sizes of UHF tags have been tested, shown collectively as (12). Some tags comprise both UHF and HF types integrated in one plastic card (combo). Hence, a combo tagged PACD inside a closed room or within a radius of 9m in open area is easily detected. The personal computer (1) represents the database server. An ADSL modem (4) functions as the wired and wireless network of the ambulance, which simulates the connection between the ambulance and the hospital. The system includes an NFC enabled tablet (8). The second computer (upright) is used as the data collection device, which accumulates the temporary data when the link to the HIS goes offline. The CRT display (3) is used to monitor the activity at the database server and the data collector, during testing. The power supply (2) provides energy for the iBeacon detector (13), which is custom designed for our implementation. The iBeacons enumerated as (10) represent the PACD inside the ambulance. The iBeacons shown as (11) are the PACD taken outside. The mobile reader (14) is used for tracking tags outside the lab and report to the data collector, via the wireless modem (4). The mobile phone (9) is used as the hospital phone of the personnel, which is loaded with the same custom software as the hospital tablet (8).

The tagging of PACD in an ambulance is represented in Fig. 3
                        . The PACD are all tagged according to their cost, size and dimensions:
                           
                              1.
                              High cost mobile PACD are tagged with an iBeacon to be tracked outside the ambulance, and a UHF tag to be tracked inside the ambulance,

Medium cost PACD and personnel are tagged with a combo (UHF and HF) tag, allowing tracing inside and outside the ambulance,

Low cost PACD (consumables and simple drugs) are only tagged with a UHF tag.

Observe the iBeacon detector (1) mounted on the side of the ambulance, which detects the removal of any iBeacon mounted asset (2). There is a numbered detector on each side of the ambulance, and the closest to the PACD reports the highest returned signal strength indication (RSSI) value. As the PACD moves away the RSSI value drops; giving an indication of the distance between the ambulance and the PACD. The inexpensive consumables and drugs are marked with UHF tags (5). In some cases, the PACD are tagged with the key-holder or plastic-lock type UHF tags (7). The hardware includes a portable RFID reader (3) mounted on the emergency case and a hospital registered ambulance mobile device (4). Hence, any PACD disappearing from the “inside” or the “outside” lists is immediately detected. If it is a high value PACD, an alarm warns the personnel to retrieve the missing PACD. The static GPS location of the ambulance shows the point of service. With the additional RSSI information from the BLE detectors, the last recorded location of a missing PACD is obtained. Notice that if the ID of a personnel and the ID of a PACD disappear at the same time from the present list, it is most likely that the PACD was removed by that personnel.

The operation of EEAPTS starts as follows. The ambulance personnel start their shift after registration on the ambulance's NFC and BLE integrated mobile device (4), which itself is UHF tagged [9]. The tagging helps the system to identify the personnel, match them with the PACD inside the ambulance and detect their departure. The data of the PACD reside at the database server and contains information such as the next maintenance date of the suction-pump, the expiration date of the drugs, the date and the performer of the sterilization of the tools, the number of size five injector needles, etc. Hence, the logistics data are online and real time at both ends, making it possible to generate instantaneous alarms for any abnormalities or undefined events. The alarms eliminate personnel errors and draw attention to missing or depleted PACD. The general control of the readers and tags and the matching of the stock collected through EEAPTS can be carried out periodically, at intervals defined by the management. A copy of PACD data is present on the data collection device, in the ambulance.

The mode of operation of EEAPTS during an intervention is as follows. The first step is tagging the patient with a combo RFID wristband (6), the ID of which is recorded by the portable RFID reader and the ambulance mobile device. The data of the patient, the personnel carrying out the medical intervention, as well as the PACD used are all shared with the hospital, in real time. The patient's identity is preserved throughout the treatment at the hospital, eliminating any confusion. The only requirement is to obtain the patient's social security number and match it with the RFID number.

The organization of EEAPTS inside the ambulance is shown in Fig. 4
                        . The UHF reader (1) is near the data collector (3). The first antenna (2) of the reader is just above the reader, and the second is positioned opposite most of the tags are located, on top of the personnel seats (not seen in the Fig. 4). Valuable PACD are tagged with iBeacons shown in yellow circles (4). Some items are tagged with plastic key-holder type UHF tags (5), while others are tagged with paper type tags (6). Drugs and consumable packs are tagged with plastic-lock type UHF tags (7). Since a personal computer is too big for an ambulance, a notebook motherboard is used to collect data from the wired UHF reader (1), wireless mobile UHF reader and iBeacon detectors of Fig. 3. All data are transferred to the hospital via the wireless GPRS modem (8).

The advantages of the RFID identification of patients receiving treatment at the hospital are given in detail in work [23]. The EEAPTS’ importance comes out especially when the audio link to the hospital is disrupted, or when the personnel is in intense medical activity. The automatic transmission of the device readings to the hospital, via the data collection device, provides hospital personnel with an objective view of the patient's medical condition. Meanwhile, the movement of the mobile devices out of the ambulance is an indication of the type of medical equipment used in the intervention. At first, all of the PACD taken out of the ambulance are classified as used for the intervention. The used consumable and drug wrappers are put in a metallic foil bag to block their RFID signals. After the return of the unused PACD, the used PACD can be determined because they disappear from the updated “inside” the ambulance list. Any unpowered, or non-active device, or returned PACD is defined as unused for the patient. The tablet is brought into the ambulance with the patient, and the portable RFID is closed when the lid of the emergency case is closed. The EEAPTS continues to collect data until the patient is transferred to the hospital, resulting in the following benefits:
                           
                              1.
                              The sharing of the patient's present and past medical data leads to a better diagnosis, which allows a more effective intervention and better treatment decisions,

More effective hospital treatment can be prepared due to automatic medical data transfer,

Better hospital maintenance and sterilization planning of the used devices and tools is achieved, due to the immediate automatic warnings generated,

Better hospital replenishment planning of the used drugs is achieved, due to immediate warnings generated,

Better detection and replacement planning of missing or malfunctioning critical PACD, due to automatic warnings generated.

The software developed in present work is the basis of our proposed EEAPTS. The software consists of a server and a mobile web application, which integrates the hardware shown in Figs. 3 and 4 into a ubiquitous system. The system has been designed to work both on and offline. All of the information from multiple ambulances’ data collection devices is gathered in the EEAPTS central database. The database is the core of EEAPTS, which resides in a server that is integrated with the HIS. The database is synchronized throughout the system by data transformation services (DTS). The mobile web application reaches the data stored in the database through Web services and creates messaging in the form of XML data. To be able to work offline, the tablet computer shown in Fig. 2 is provided with a copy of the local data specific to the ambulance, using SQLite Database. Whenever the tablet comes online with the HIS, the data are synchronized with the EEAPTS database. The developed software application is capable of running on all types of mobile device platforms, because state of the art framework Bootstrap version 3.3.4 has been used in developing the application. Bootstrap is a HTML, CSS, and JS framework for developing responsive, mobile projects on the web.

The first part of the EEAPTS software is the web-admin portal and the second is the mobile web application. Use cases and list of steps defining personnel-EEAPTS interactions are shown in Fig. 5
                        .

In the EEAPTS prototype implementation, every PACD is tagged by a passive and/or active identification tag. Initially, the tagged PACD inside the ambulance are registered for presence by authorized personnel, using the UHF reader and the BLE detectors, in the ambulance. Once the presence of an item is approved, it is placed on the “inside” the ambulance list. Any undetected item in future operations is put on the “outside” list. After a while it is promoted to the missing list. Fig. 6
                         shows the EEAPTS activity diagram for tracking the PACD.

After registration, it is the personnel's responsibility to check the reader and data collection device warnings; and not to depart with a missing item, before returning the hospital or setting out to service a new call. After vehicle engine power-on, the readers report any missing items within seconds. Therefore, the ambulance personnel are made aware of missing items within seconds and have the chance to locate a PACD or demand a fully equipped vehicle. The vehicle, the missing item, the new vehicle request and the reply of the hospital personnel are automatically recorded in chronological order. Moreover, if the maintenance date of any equipment is near, the ambulance personnel are again warned by the system. The same approach is used for drug expiration dates. At the intervention location, when equipment is forgotten outside, an alert is generated by the system, again warning the ambulance personnel to retrieve the equipment.

In EEAPTS, the hospital has three main responsibilities. The first one is assigning the active and passive tags to the PACD. The second is making preparations for the incoming patient. The third is supplying patient specific data (if available) and expert medical intervention instructions (if necessary) to the ambulance personnel, while the patient is delivered to the hospital. With the help of the RFID bracelet placed on the patient's wrist, a case report is generated and automatically updated, by detailing the used medication and equipment. The hospital confirmed reports are shown on multiple platforms (tablet, personal computer, monitor displays) in order to provide information to all related personnel, before the patient reaches the hospital. Real time sharing of the medical data is critical to EEAPTS effectiveness. As shown in Fig. 5, the medical data that gives information about the condition of the patient is shared with other hospitals and related institutions. If the patient is transferred to another hospital, the patient's medical condition is made available seamlessly to the new medical personnel. In addition, the accounting information of the services provided by each hospital is easily followed and differentiated, by the authorities of all sides.

The main user window in Fig. 7
                         summarizes the online Web Manager System of EEAPTS. The window is simple to use and gives a general view of the overall system. The PACD of each ambulance can be easily followed. In the given example, the hospital has five ambulances and a total of 32 equipments. The green colored boxes show the number of PACD inside the ambulance and the red colored shows the number outside the ambulance. PACD are designated under their individual types, but adding up to an overall PACD status for the ambulances, in a single window.

Clicking the ambulance button shown in Fig. 7, causes the sub-menu window in Fig. 8
                         to appear. The window is one of the most important menus of EEAPTS, which shows information about ambulance types, license plates, driver names and a map of the ambulance location. A click on the “Find on Map” button takes the user to an ambulance centered window on the display.

The main window of the mobile web application shown in Fig. 9
                         also contains the ambulance, personnel, assets, medicine and consumables data; the same data obtained with the click of the ambulance button of Fig. 7. There is a real time total for each item, present in the system. When one of the navigation menu items on the left or one of the PACD boxes on the right is clicked, the activity page of the selected item is displayed. As long as the mobile device is online, the event data are transferred immediately to the EEAPTS database. If the device goes offline, the PACD tracking submenus remain active and allow the personnel to continue tracking the PACD, via the local readers and iBeacon detectors.

The information displayed on the mobile web application in Fig. 9 is retrieved online from the EEAPTS database. When there is no connection with the EEAPTS database (offline), the mobile web application uses the available data in the local database. The information for the database is generated using location information from the GPS, RFID tags and iBeacons.

The EEAPTS Mobile also has a sub-menu window shown in Fig. 10
                         which provides detailed information on the ambulances in the system, just like in the EEAPTS Web Management System. The map shows ambulances by their current location and provides information on the personnel of the ambulance, when chosen. Other available information is visible in the Figure.

The methodology of generating the alarms proceeds as follows. The readers acquire and transfer the tags unique ID to the database; hence remotely identifying PACD. The identified PACD are transmitted to a custom “location windows service” application (LWS) for processing. The LWS sends the location data to other mobile web applications over TCP/IP. Following is a sample XML message created by the LWS, when a PACD changes location:
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       <LocationChg>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <MsgID>155</MsgID>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <BadgeID>2345</BadgeID>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <LocName>AmbulanceOut</LocName>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <TimeEntered>11/23/2014 4:23:34 PM</TimeEntered>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <PrevLocName>AmbulanceIn</PrevLocName>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <Equipment>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <ESerial>1234567890</ESerial>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <BTypeID>3</BTypeID>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <EName>Portable Suction Unit</EName>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <EBrand>EqBrandA</EBrand>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <EModel>98765B</EModel>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          </Equipment>
                                    
                                    
                                       </LocationChg>
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

In the above example, the mobile web application receives the XML message as “Portable Suction Unit”, “moved out”, “at 11/23/2014 4:23:34 PM”. Fig. 10 is the core piece of the application which depicts the missing and used equipment during an intervention. When the user selects the assets menu, Fig. 11
                         is displayed. The tracking data of PACDs are the inputs of the core system, which uses it to create the accurate assets screen of Fig. 11, in real-time.

The use of different XML messages for tracking PACDs creates a novel ubiquitous system and provides personnel with many advantages. If the GPS data for a hospital training ambulance shows a movement from a distant location toward the hospital and all personnel are back in the ambulance; then for any item remaining on the missing list, a notification is sent to the personnel to resolve the issue. The mobile web application receives the following example XML message created by the LWS, warning about the missing Portable Suction Unit.
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       <LocationAlert>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <PageReq>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <Message>Portable Suction Unit is missing</Message>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          </PageReq>
                                    
                                    
                                       </LocationAlert>
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

A preliminary test of EEAPTS has been carried out on a training ambulance. One of the advantages of preliminary test was the simulation of the equipment maintenance dates. According to the data already in the database, the personnel were warned about the up-coming maintenance dates. Likewise, the expiration dates of the drugs were also tracked to alert the personnel. The alert message generated by the LWS is as follows:
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       <MaintenanceAlert>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <ChangeReq>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <Equipment>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          <ESerial>1234567890</ESerial>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          <BTypeID>3</BTypeID>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          <EName>PulseOxPeds09</EName>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          <EBrand>EqBrandA</EBrand>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          <EModel>98765B</EModel>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          <ExpirationDate>11/23/2014</ExpirationDate>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          </Equipment>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          </ChangeReq>
                                    
                                    
                                       </MaintenanceAlert>
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

Furthermore, the ambulance personnel themselves are tracked by using combo NFC-UHF cards. The NFC reader available in the vehicle records the personnel on duty and their presence. The following XML message is generated by the LWS:
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       <LocationChg>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <MsgID>155</MsgID>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <BadgeID>2345</BadgeID>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <LocName>AmbulanceOut</LocName>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <TimeEntered>11/23/2014 5:43:54 PM</TimeEntered>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <PrevLocName>AmbulanceIn</PrevLocName>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          <Personnel>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <PersonnelID>12345</PersonnelID>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <BTypeID>1</BTypeID>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <LName>Saylor</LName>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <FName>Sandra</FName>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          <MName>S</MName>
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          </Personnel>
                                    
                                    
                                       </LocationChg>
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

The above example shows that personnel named Sandra Saylor, with BadgeID=2345 left the ambulance at 5:43:54 PM. The LWS is a .NET application and records the location change messages in the local database, for the mobile web applications. Fig. 12
                         depicts the interface diagram between the LWS and the local database. There can be multiple connection requests from the LWS. Each connection request contains a connection and a command object. These objects are given inside the IDatabaseAccess. To accommodate the multiple connection requests, the core class DatabaseAccess consists of several connection objects. The connection objects are defined in the child class called DBCon, which has the IDatabaseAccess interface. The LWS calls the core class DatabaseAccess to save the location messages of the database. To execute the call, the ExecuteNonQuery method is called first by the LWS to get a connection object from the connection pool. Then, the DBCon checks the returned object to find out whether it is already connected or not. If not, DBCon asks the connection object to connect to the database. The LWS uses the command object associated with this connection to write the location message into the database. After the command object finishes writing into the database, the connection object is returned to the pool of available connection objects, without getting destroyed.

During EEAPTS ambulance tests, all generated XML messages were first saved in the local database. If the mobile web application was online with the server, the XML messages were uploaded to the central database, instantaneously. If the connection to the server was offline, the local database was utilized to track the PACD. After the connection was reestablished, the XML messages were uploaded to the central database to equate the saved data.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The cost of the EEAPTS software is calculated by using the COCOMO Model. This model was proposed by Boehm in 1981 [33]. According to the model, software cost estimation should be done through three stages: Basic COCOMO, Intermediate COCOMO, and Complete COCOMO. Basic COCOMO gives an approximate estimate of the project parameters for small teams, with good working experience. The present work calculations are based on Basic COCOMO, where the estimation of software development effort is given in Eq. (1), as person-months (PM) [33]. The Organic Project Type coefficients a
                        b, b
                        b, c
                        b and d
                        b are given in Table 1
                        .
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    Effort
                                     
                                    Applied
                                    (
                                    E
                                    )
                                    =
                                    
                                       a
                                       b
                                    
                                    (
                                    KLoC
                                    )
                                    
                                       b
                                       b
                                    
                                    PM
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

KLoC is the delivered lines (expressed in thousands) of code for the project. The EEAPTS software consists of approximately 3000 lines of code which makes KLoC=3 in Eq. (1). Hence, E is obtained: E
                        =2.4*(3)1.05
                        =7 PM. The development time is estimated as in Eq. (2), according to work [33].
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    Development Time
                                    (
                                    D
                                    )
                                    =
                                    
                                       c
                                       b
                                    
                                    (
                                    Effort Applied
                                    )
                                    
                                       d
                                       b
                                    
                                     
                                    [
                                    months
                                    ]
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

Inserting the value of Effort found in Eq. (1) into Eq. (2), the estimated development time is calculated as: D
                        =2.5*(7)0.38
                        =5.2 Months.

Three types of ambulances are widely used for emergency services. These are Patient Transport, Emergency Aid and Intensive Care ambulances [34]. The number of PACD used in different types of ambulances is given in Table 2
                        . The numbers are obtained using the real inventories in the Ambulance American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) policy statement, for ambulance equipments. The most sophisticated ambulance is the Intensive Care Ambulance, where the presence of a doctor is mandatory. Using the tagging method assumed in our proposal (a UHF tag per drug or consumable, an iBeacon and a UHF tag per asset and a combo tag per personnel), the number of UHF-NFC tags and the iBeacons used in an ambulance can be calculated. For example, in a Patient Transport Ambulance the number of UHF tags is 85, the number of iBeacons is equal to the number of assets and the NFC tags equal to the number of personnel.

Using the unit prices given in Table 3
                        , the total tagging cost for each vehicle type in Table 2 can be calculated. For example, for Patient Transport vehicles the total is [(85×0.20)+(43×(30+0.2)+(3×(0.2+0.25)=1316.95]. The total tagging cost of the other two ambulance types have been similarly calculated and listed in Table 2. The total budget needed for an ambulance includes the cost of for the UHF RFID readers, minibook computer, NFC enabled tablet, wireless modem, mobile phone, and iBeacon detectors. Using the Table 3’s unit prices, the total cost for the above equipment is equal to [1320+680+370+129+25+300+(2×28)=$2880]. Adding the equipment cost to each vehicle types total tagging cost; the cost of EEAPTS hardware becomes $4196.95, $4548.40 and $5154.25 for a Patient Transport, Emergency Aid and Intensive Care type ambulance, respectively. The biggest investment is in an Intensive Care ambulance.

In Table 4
                        , the unit prices of some PACD are provided. The loss of a single defibrillator or a mechanic ventilator is more costly than the highest EEAPTS hardware investment of $5154.25. This observation is not a worst case scenario but a reality. Apart from the abstraction or negligence of ambulance personnel, PACD theft is a serious problem in ambulances. For instance, at two separate events in July 2011 and August 2014, a defibrillator and some other materials were stolen from ambulances in the U.S.A. [5]. Therefore, it is obvious that the EEAPTS investment is well founded and soundly feasible.

However, the EEAPTS hardware investment can be simplified or adapted according to varying needs or budgets. EEAPTS is flexible in deciding a suitable cost-performances ratio, for different operation sizes. For example, for consumables and drugs with prices less than the cost of a tag, tagging can be neglected.

The timing performance of the proposed EEAPTS can only be measured in real life use. Nevertheless, one of the important characteristics of EEAPTS is the use of state of the art, yet widespread, off-the-shelf equipment. Both ambulance and hospital personnel can have displays of vital patient signs (heartbeat, blood pressure, etc.) at the same time and discuss about the medical condition of the patient, instantaneously. In addition, the RFID identifies the real-time location of personnel and any missing PACD. The information is available to any authorized mobile device, instantly. Therefore, undeniably the proposed solution speeds up and facilitates emergency interventions by ambulances. EEAPTS also reduces the work load of the personnel. The benefits unique to EEAPTS are:
                           
                              1.
                              The co-existence of three complementing radio frequency technologies,

The mobile object tracking capability,

Due to the automatic medical data transfer from the ambulance, hospital feedback capability to improve the patient's condition during the intervention,

Hospital capability to track the circumstances and cause of PACD disappearance from the ambulance,

The automatic sharing of patient's medical data in digital form with other institutions,

The potential to improve the following ambulance mission, due to generated preventive alarms.

As observed, EEAPTS have superior features over present traditional ambulance services, which do not have automatic tracking and alarm generating systems. Although EEAPTS does not increase the medical skills of the ambulance personnel, it makes ambulatory services more effective and efficient by:
                           
                              •
                              Reducing the manual and administrative work of both the ambulance and hospital personnel,

Providing the ambulance personnel with more time and confidence to focus on the medical intervention,

Providing the ambulance personnel with more medical support from the hospital,

Guaranteeing the presence of all needed PACD, in the correct amounts and in good condition,

The capability to eliminate human errors in filling forms, data collection and due date tracking.

The ideal clinical outcome of any treatment is patient's return to previous quality of life, after receiving the treatment [35]. But in most cases, the goal of an emergency ambulatory service is the delivery of the patient in a health condition that facilitates the hospital treatment. Therefore, the delivery time of the patient from the incident point to the hospital has been regarded as the most important success factor of ambulatory services. However, a comprehensive research by the United Kingdom's National Health Service (NHS) in 2011 has shown that fast delivery is important to only cardiac arrest patients (1% of 999 patients) [36]. As a result, instead of focusing primarily on emergency response times, the research pointed out the need for other performance indicators. As a result five clinical performance indicators were presented [37]. The NHS indicators are below:
                           
                              •
                              Stroke (including transient ischemic attack),

Acute myocardial infarction (AMI),

Cardiac arrest,

Asthma,

Hypoglycaemia.

To prove the positive effect of EEAPTS on the clinical outcomes of ambulance services, each NHS indicator is evaluated. Sometimes a nasogastric tube is needed for lung ventilation of a stroke patient. Its non-presence in an ambulance puts the life of the patient into danger. Therefore, a UHF tag on each tube guarantees its availability in the ambulance; which in turn helps in the patient lung ventilation, directly affecting the clinical outcome of the intervention. Therefore, the use of EEAPTS improves the stroke clinical performance indicator.

Morphine and/or Entonox are used in AMI treatment. Morphine is the most popular drug of ambulances and its amount is frequently reported as “low”. But, inadequate amounts of morphine affect AMI treatment negatively. Providing a tag on each morphine pack guarantees the presence of adequate amounts in the ambulance and also helps tracking its amount. Hence, tracking morphine through EEAPTS definitely has a positive impact on the clinical outcome of AMI treatment in ambulances, by providing the needed drug administration to the patient.

The use of a crash cart or a defibrillator in cardiac arrest intervention is critical. As an example, in case of a defibrillator theft before a cardiac arrest call like the reported events in [4,5]; the non-availability of the defibrillator has a devastating effect on the clinical outcome. Using an iBeacon attached on the defibrillator as advised in EEAPTS, the presence of a defibrillator is guaranteed. Hence, the patients survival chance increases, i.e. the clinical outcome is positively affected.

Oxygen administration is vital for asthma management. Thus, malfunctioning of an oxygen supply equipment may prove critical for the breathing of an asthma patient. Therefore, tracking and alarming the maintenance due dates of portable and fixed apparatuses through EEAPTS undeniably affect the clinical outcome of asthma and other interventions.

Administration of glucagon is critical in treatment of hypoglycaemia. If enough dosage of glucagon is missing in an ambulance, the clinical outcome of consecutive hypoglycaemia interventions is negatively affected. Thus, the delivery time remains as the only variable that can improve the clinical performance of the overall treatment. Therefore, checking the presence and dosages of glucagon automatically definitely improves the clinical performance.

By its natural tracking and warning characteristics, EEAPTS affects clinical outcomes of interventions, positively. Therefore, the overall clinical performance of ambulance services is increased by the use of EEAPTS. Looking at the benefits and clinical outcomes obtained, an ambulatory service using EEAPTS can have more ambulance personnel efficiency and provide more effective interventions, than traditional ambulance services without any tracking.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

However, EEAPTS does not currently support Health Level 7 (HL7) to achieve the integration of health-care information exchange between the ambulance emergency services and the hospital. In future work, the focus will be on integrating EEAPTS with Hospital Information Systems using HL7. Another limitation is the lack of real life scenario tests, in real ambulance services. Currently, the planning of a long period of simulation, testing and statistical data collection is underway.

Uninterrupted communication and precision tracking of PACD is the key to effective medical emergency interventions. Critical procedures are carried out and decisions are made daily by ambulance personnel, resulting in life or death of emergency patients. It is of outmost importance that the healthcare personnel are guaranteed to have access to all PACD and the latest patient information, vital for medical emergency interventions. The presented EEAPTS software and hardware systems can be integrated into ambulance services to provide the much needed precise asset tracking, uninterrupted two-way information sharing and mobility, using three RFID technologies. The presented solution proposes electronic tracking of PACDs inside an ambulance and the instantaneous sharing of information about the events taking place at an intervention. The proposed EEAPTS system, also tracks the maintenance and expiration dates related to the PACD inside an ambulance to provide good quality interventions, by generating warnings over missing or outdated PACD. With these features, the proposed solution eliminates personnel errors that can cause adverse effects to a remote patient during the medical intervention. The EEAPTS has distinct advantages over previous works, as it is a complete system with hardware and the software components needed for a total ambulatory service. A prototype of the proposed system has been successfully implemented in a hospitals training ambulance. The system is in the process of being tested at a volunteering institution, on two ambulances. At the end of the tests, it will be possible to employ EEAPTS in real life.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

