@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Low EOT GeO2/Al2O3/HfO2 on Ge substrate using ultrathin Al deposition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Ge gate MOS devices were investigated due to its applicability to sub 16nm node pMOST technology.


                        
                        
                           
                           GeO2/Al2O3/HfO2 gate stacks were grown by a combined MBE and ALD technique.


                        
                        
                           
                           Devices were characterised by various physical and electrical methods.


                        
                        
                           
                           Devices were found to have low EOT and leakage currents and have small hysteresis.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

MOS device

Ge MOS

HfO2

ALD

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  High-κ dielectric gate stacks comprising HfO2 were fabricated on Ge with alumina as the barrier level. This was achieved by thermal annealing in an ultra high vacuum to remove the native oxide followed by deposition of aluminium by molecular beam epitaxy. After in situ oxidation at ambient temperature, HfO2 was deposited by atomic layer deposition. The devices underwent physical and electrical characterisation and show low EOT down to 1.3nm, low leakage current of less than 10−7
                     Acm−2 at ±1V, and CV hysteresis of ∼10mV.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Germanium (Ge) is a candidate channel material for sub-16nm CMOS technology node pMOST devices due to its higher hole (×4) mobility compared with silicon. High-κ dielectrics, such as hafnia (HfO2), are needed to achieve the equivalent oxide thicknesses (EOT) required at this scale, whilst maintaining sufficiently low leakage current density. Direct deposition of HfO2 onto Ge leads to high interface state density (D
                     it) [1] and a thin native oxide, GeO2 interfacial layer (IL) has been shown to be effective for reducing D
                     it. However, Ge suffers from desorption of volatile GeO to the surface, which causes device instability, high D
                     it and mobility degradation [2]. A variety of methods have been used for capping the IL to prevent desorption of GeO. Recently alumina (Al2O3) has been proposed as an interlayer between Ge and HfO2 to act as a diffusion barrier [3,4] and stabilize a very thin GeO2 layer on the Ge channel to achieve a low D
                     it. One approach to form the Al2O3 interlayer is to deposit a thin layer of Al metal by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and subsequently oxidize it to form an Al2O3/GeO2/Ge structure [5]. We report here the use of such a passivation scheme, combined with HfO2 as a high-κ layer, to achieve an EOT as low as 1.3nm with an acceptable leakage current of less than 10−7
                     Acm−2 at ±1V.

Ge (100) wafers (n- and p-type) were cleaned in ultra high vacuum (<10−6
                     mbar) at 500°C and 600°C for 10min to evaporate any native oxide and so achieve an oxide free surface. Subsequently, wafers were exposed to an Al flux for a range of times to deposit ultrathin Al layers. The samples were then oxidized at ambient temperatures in the MBE load lock to produce Al2O3 layers. The samples were transferred within 1min to an Oxford Instruments OpAL reactor and thin films of HfO2 were deposited on the Al2O3 using atomic layer deposition (ALD). The HfO2 depositions used a [(CpMe)2HfOMeMe] precursor coupled with an O2 plasma as the oxidizing species. Between 30 and 130 ALD cycles were used to grow HfO2 thicknesses from 1.6 to 7nm at 250°C. For electrical measurements, circular gold contacts of area 1.96×10−3
                     cm2 were deposited onto the films to form MOS gate electrodes and Al was deposited on the back of the Ge wafers to provide an ohmic contact. After preliminary measurements, the samples were annealed in forming gas (FGA) at 350°C for 30min. The oxide leakage current was measured using a Keithley 230B voltage source and Keithley 617B electrometer. The HP 4192A low frequency (LF) impedance analyzer at small signal frequencies between 100Hz to 1MHz was used to perform high frequency capacitance–voltage (HF CV) measurements.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#


                     Fig. 1
                      shows an HRTEM image of a sample with 10s exposure to the MBE Al source with 130 ALD cycles to deposit HfO2, obtained with a JEOL 2100F TEM operating in STEM mode with an operating voltage of 200kV.

The image indicates a 2nm thick layer of GeO2/Al2O3 with a 7nm layer of HfO2 on top. X-ray Photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out to investigate the chemical bonding present in the films. Fig. 2
                      shows XPS Al(2p) spectra confirming that Al2O3 is formed when compared to a reference Al foil. The small peak at 73eV is attributed to differential charging across the thin alumina layer. The XPS Ge(3d) data of Fig. 3
                     , shows that a layer of GeO2 is present at the Ge surface.

The leakage current density shown in Fig. 4
                      was less than 1×10−7
                     Acm−2 at ±1V for the sample thermally cleaned at 500°C with 3.5nm of HfO2. Typical CV plots measured in the range 100 Hz - 500 kHz are shown in Fig. 5
                     . The plots indicate very low frequency dispersion in the accumulation region and well-behaved variation of inversion capacitance with frequency at negative voltages. The CV plots show very small hysteresis of ca. 10mV, as shown in Fig. 6
                     .

To estimate the IL thickness, samples with various thickness of HfO2 were fabricated. Fig. 7
                      shows the relationship between the capacitance equivalent thickness (CET) and the physical thickness of high-κ layers calculated from the number of ALD cycles on a sample cleaned at 500°C for two different Al deposition times. The CET of GeO2/Al2O3 layer can be found from the linear interpolation of these data, from which the thickness of the alumina layer was estimated by extrapolating the CET at zero HfO2 thickness for 5s and 10s Al deposition with the difference being attributed to increasing alumina thickness. The alumina thickness was found to be 0.6nm per 5s and the thickness of GeO2 was calculated to be ∼1.6nm by using k values of 9 and 5 for alumina and GeO2 respectively. For the sample cleaned at 600°C the thickness of GeO2 was reduced to 1nm (EOT of 0.65nm).

The CV plots of a sample with 10s Al MBE exposure and 30 ALD cycles of HfO2 before and after FGA are shown in Fig. 8
                     , which shows a steeper slope and larger accumulation after FGA. The steeper slope is assumed to be due to a reduction of interface states by the FGA. In the presence of interface states, the CV plot is broadened and cannot saturate to the oxide thickness in the accumulation region in the swept voltage range. This can explain the difference in oxide capacitance before and after FGA, corresponding to reduction of EOT of the gate stack from 1.7nm to 1.3nm by FGA. The hysteresis was slightly improved on some samples with FGA but degraded slightly on others. This observation is under investigation.

The CV plots shown in Fig. 9
                      are for samples with thermal clean at 500°C and 600°C with 130 cycles of HfO2 at small frequency of 1kHz. The sample cleaned at 600°C shows about 30% higher oxide capacitance which gives the EOT value of 2.3nm, compared to the value of 3nm for the sample cleaned at 500°C. The reduction of EOT for the sample cleaned at higher temperature is an indication of lower thickness of GeO2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

ALD hafnia high-κ dielectric gate stack was fabricated on Ge with alumina as the barrier level using combined MBE and ALD technique and have been characterised by physical and electrical techniques. The devices show low EOT down to 1.3nm, low leakage current of less than 10−7
                     Acm−2 at ±1V, and CV hysteresis of ca. 10mV. The thicknesses of GeO2 interfacial layer and alumina barrier layer were estimated by comparing samples with different high-κ thickness. The forming gas anneal indicates an improvement in the shape of CV plots due to reduction of interface states. Thermal cleaning at higher temperature reduces the thickness of GeO2 resulting in an improved EOT.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was funded by EPSRC, project number EP/1012907/1.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

