@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Cancer-disease associations: A visualization and animation through medical big data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A novel approach for visualization of temporal patterns focused on the association of cancers with other diseases.


                        
                        
                           
                           A dynamic animation of cancer-disease association across different age groups and gender.


                        
                        
                           
                           Identifying comorbidity relationships and providing more information for medical researchers.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Visual analytics

Disease visualization

Big data visualization

Cancer disease visualization

Cancer comorbidities visualization

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Objective
                  Cancer is the primary disease responsible for death and disability worldwide. Currently, prevention and early detection represents the best hope for cure. Knowing the expected diseases that occur with a particular cancer in advance could lead to physicians being able to better tailor their treatment for cancer. The aim of this study was to build an animated visualization tool called as Cancer Associations Map Animation (CAMA), to chart the association of cancers with other disease over time.
               
               
                  Methods
                  The study population was collected from the Taiwan National Health Insurance Database during the period January 2000 to December 2002, 782 million outpatient visits were used to compute the associations of nine major cancers with other diseases. A motion chart was used to quantify and visualize the associations between diseases and cancers.
               
               
                  Results
                  The CAMA motion chart that was built successfully facilitated the observation of cancer-disease associations across ages and genders. The CAMA system can be accessed online at http://203.71.86.98/web/runq16.html.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  The CAMA animation system is an animated medical data visualization tool which provides a dynamic, time-lapse, animated view of cancer-disease associations across different age groups and gender. Derived from a large, nationwide healthcare dataset, this exploratory data analysis tool can detect cancer comorbidities earlier than is possible by manual inspection. Taking into account the trajectory of cancer-specific comorbidity development may facilitate clinicians and healthcare researchers to more efficiently explore early stage hypotheses, develop new cancer treatment approaches, and identify potential effect modifiers or new risk factors associated with specific cancers.
               
            


                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Motion chart parameters
                                       Mapping variables in this study
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Time
                                       Presents age of patients (i.e. 100 age groups)
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          X-axis
                                       Presents the scale of association's strength (i.e. Q-values)
                                    
                                    
                                       Y-axis
                                       Presents the scale of count number of relative disease
                                    
                                    
                                       Size of circle
                                       Presents the number of co-occurrence of both diseases A and B
                                    
                                    
                                       Color
                                       Presents the category of disease (see Table S1 in Appendix)
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

As advancements in medicine and healthcare contribute to longer life expectancies and substantial growth of the aged population [1–4], it is becoming increasingly important to predict cancer and its concomitant diseases early in the disease process. This is because early prediction and detection is considered the key to initiate preventive and curative procedures [5,6]. Over the past two decades, research has amassed much information and knowledge on gene expression profiles [7–9], protein interactions [10–13] and genome-wide associations (GWAS) [14,15] which has contributed to better understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms in hereditary diseases, cancers and neurological disorders. Nevertheless, a comprehensive understanding of various mechanisms underlying most diseases is still in its infant stages.

A shift from traditional methods of phenome-wide associations (PWAS) studies is occurring. Current visualization methodologies rely on case reports and sampled cohort studies for investigating one-to-one disease relationships [16]. The increasing availability of large amounts of data in many national healthcare systems has prompted informaticians to begin analyzing multiple disease associations simultaneously [17–19]. Furthermore, rapid adoption of electronic health records has enabled the accumulation of significant amounts of patient-level clinical data by many healthcare providers [20,21].

One of the prime targets for large-scale data visualization techniques is cancer due it being responsible for such a large burden of disease worldwide. Each year, tens of millions of people are diagnosed with cancer around the world, and more than half of the patients eventually die from it. Cancer prevention is as essential component of all cancer control plans because about 40% of all cancer deaths can be prevented [22]. For example, Larsson et al. observed that 20% incidence risk of breast cancer is attributed to type 2 diabetes, a preventable disease [23]. The underling mechanism may be related to alterations in circulating concentrations of insulin, insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), and endogenous sex hormones [24]. Insulin inhibits the production of sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) [25], which results in an increase in free steroid hormones, (free estrogens in particular) because testosterone successfully competes with estrogen for SHBG [26]. Insulin is also a growth-promoting hormone with mitogenic effects in both normal and malignant breast tissue [27]. Insulin suppresses IGF binding protein-1 and thus increases bioavailability of IGF-1 [28]. Furthermore, studies have also reported that hyperinsulinemia with insulin resistance may increase the risk of breast cancer [29,30]. Thus, early awareness of signs and symptoms of comorbidities that are involved in the tumor development process is important because of the importance of prevention and early intervention [31].

The Cancer Associations Map Animation (CAMA) project was conceived of and built by the College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taiwan. It is an applied data visualization tool designed with an intuitive interface that is intended for use by real-world clinicians and health researchers who do not have computer programming skills or a strong statistics background. Using CAMA, anyone can verify or unearth new associations between cancers and other diseases based on a large medical dataset. The large volumes of medical data required for the CAMA project was aided in particular by Taiwan's highly accessible universal healthcare system [32] and high rates of annual doctor visits per individual (15 visits per year).

This section provides details of the CAMA system, beginning from the process of data gathering to the development of the visualization tool. The study consisted of two primary steps:
                        
                           I.
                           Establishment of the Disease–Disease Association (DDA) knowledge database.

Visualization approach.

In this study, we used Taiwan's National Health Insurance (NHI) claims database, a database that covered 99% of Taiwan's population by 2013 [33]. The claims data included outpatient visits, dental visits, hospitalizations, medications prescribed, medications refilled, laboratory and imaging examinations, and procedure codes for all of Taiwan's 23 million people each year. The National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRDB) has become an important “Big Data” research data source that has provided an ideal opportunity to conduct clinical research [33,34]. Moreover, due to Taiwan's National Health Insurance Bureau cross-checking all diagnostic codes and medication codes before reimbursement, the codes are known for their exceptional fidelity.

Data from Taiwan's NHI database from January 1, 2000 to December 31, 2002 was eligible for inclusion in this study. During this timeframe approximately 787.86 million outpatient visit claims were recorded in the database. Each record in the database consisted of a patient's visit date, patient's deidentified national ID, age, gender, and one to three ICD9-CM diagnosis codes. We excluded all records due to a miscoded diagnosis, errors regarding the date of birth, or missing or unknown gender. In total, 5.88 million (0.75%) records were excluded, while the remaining 782 million visit claims were valid records. There were 9.73 million unique males and 10.29 million unique females in the database.

We assumed that two disease were associated if they occurred at least once in the same person over 36 consecutive months (3 years). In this study, three year windows (i.e. January 2000 to December 2002) were used to observe and compute the associations among cancers and other diseases. All patient records were stratified by gender and age. Therefore, the dataset contained 200 subsets (i.e. 2 genders with 100 age groups). Each subset was used separately to quantify the disease–disease associations’ strength.

Each patient was followed for 36 months and all of the unique three digit ICD9-CM codes were obtained for each patient (e.g., ICD9-CM code 250 and its children was used to define diabetics). All possible pairwise combinations of these ICD9-CM codes were then calculated. Disease–disease associations were defined as the number of times that two diseases co-occurred within a one year window. Q values were calculated for each pair in order to measure the association strength [35]. In case that no associations were found between a DD pair, the Q would be equal to 1. Positive DD associations would give Q values greater than 1, and negative DD associations would give Q values less than 1. However, DD associations with less than 5 co-occurrences or less than one by hundred thousandth of age population [36], by default were considered as “rare associations” and were not included in this study.

After computing all DD associations for the 200 subsets, we stored these associations in a DDA database that contained 3.9 million and 4.4 million unique associations along with their Q values. The Q values were gender-specific, with a separate value for males and a separate value for females. (Figure S1 in Appendix).

As with any sampled statistic, there is uncertainty about the true population Q values. We handled this by reporting confidence intervals for each Q value. In the present version of method implementation, we intentionally avoid using confidence intervals, p-values or other statistical tools normally involved in hypothesis testing. We do so in order to reflect the empirical information contained in the data without any subjective interpretation that could otherwise be introduced through, for example, the choice of a significance level.

Let C
                           AB be an outcome of a random variable X, and consider disease B as a risk factor for disease A. Table 1
                            shows the margins C
                           A and C
                           B and assumes that subjects are affected independently of each other, X follows a non-central hypergeometric distribution X
                           ∼Hyper(N, C
                           A, C
                           B) [37]. The X
                           1 and X
                           2 were defined as the threshold of C
                           A and threshold of C
                           B respectively; therefore, C
                           AB
                           >Max (0, C
                           A*X
                           1, C
                           B*X
                           2). Moreover, the cut-off value α was also defined as a threshold of Q value to comply with the clinical relationship significance between both diseases A and B. The threshold X
                           1, X
                           2 and cut-off α by default were 0.001, 0.001 and 1, respectively.

After creating a large disease–disease association database, the next step was to make the knowledge it contains easy to visualize. Our goal was to display large amounts of data efficiently given limited screen space. We first considered rendering each event (i.e. association) as a point. However, even mid-sized traces often contain far too many events to display on-screen without causing clutter and losing the ability to show patterns and meaningful information. Mostly used in a variety of finance and economics [38–40], the motion chart – a dynamic bubble chart was employed in this study. This allowed efficient and interactive exploration and visualization of longitudinal multivariate data [41].

Our system used the familiar 2D motion bubble chart which enabled the display of large multivariate data such as thousands of disease data points and allowed for interactive visualization of the data using additional dimensions (i.e. time, the size of circles and colors) to show different characteristics of the data. The central object of a motion chart is a circle. Circles have three important characteristics – size, position and appearance. Using variable mapping, motion charts allow users to control the appearance of the circles at different time points. This mechanism enhances the dynamic appearance of the data in the motion chart and facilitates the visual inspection of disease associations, patterns and trends in multivariate datasets [41]. Box 1
                            shows the specific mapping variables in our study.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In this study, we concentrated on 9 common malignant neoplasms (i.e. Stomach cancer [ICD9-CM], 151; Colorectal cancer, 153; Rectum rectosigmoid junction cancer, 154; Liver cancer, 155; Lung cancer, 162; Skin cancer, 173; Breast cancer (female), 174; Cervical cancer, 180; and Prostate cancer, 185). Table 2
                      shows the number of associations with 9 malignant neoplasms in this study. The disease associations with their classified categories were observed in the CAMA system. By default all disease groups were queried and presented in the motion chart. Different disease groups were defined in different colors (see Table S1 in Appendix). A particular disease (i.e. single disease) that was associated with malignant neoplasms was also presented in CAMA. Fig. 1
                      shows an overview of our CAMA system interface.

A visualization and animation of various diseases associated with female breast cancer were performed in three different age groups (i.e. 50, 60, and 70 year-old), showed in Fig. 2
                     . Moreover, the size of the circles shows the number of co-occurrences of a particular disease with breast cancer. We observed that the circles could appear in four different areas of the chart (i.e. right-top, left-top, right-bottom, and left-bottom). For example, a circle in the top-left of the chart means that the disease has a higher prevalence but has lower association with breast cancer. A circle at the bottom-right of the chart shows that the disease is more likely associated with breast cancer however, it has a lower prevalence in Taiwan.

The motion chart could also display a trend of a particular disease by double clicking on the circle. Visualizing disease–disease associations according to individual age groups was done and is presented in Fig. 3
                      (i.e. Diabetes mellitus [ICD9-CM], 250 and Infection of kidney, 590). The number of Q values, particular diseases, and co-occurrences according to age were also shown in bar chart, respectively.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Cancer is a systemic disease, so other comorbid diseases that a cancer patient has will affect the cancer's clinical course and the effectiveness of treatments. However, cancer comorbidities dramatically change with age and sex, so an animated visualization of individual cancers and their associations with other diseases was developed based on this assumption. Animation enhances the details in a chart and facilitates the observation of disease associations, patterns and trends in the multivariate datasets [41].

Initially, many were skeptical that what is “the” referring to associations were real, including the statistician Karl Pearson, who wrote: “I must frankly admit that at first I viewed Dr. Maynard's conclusion as in some-way based on disregarded spurious correlation, and due to non-allowance for population, age or general unhealthiness factors. But I have been gradually forced by the pressure of these statistical results to consider it something very real” [42]. We hypothesized that the CAMA system could visually display the link between chronic diseases (e.g. diabetes, hypertensive disease, or hyperlipidemia, etc.) and cancers. Some studies have reported an increased in the risk of lung cancer in diabetic patients [43,44]. The risk of breast cancer is reported to be approximately 20% higher and colorectal cancer 30% higher in diabetic subjects compared to those without diabetes [43,45,46]. Those results are consistent with the Q values which we observed in our system. While this is a good start, several unanswered questions have also been raised. For example, it remains unclear whether the association between diabetes and cancer is direct (e.g., hyperglycemia leads to cancer), whether diabetes is a marker of underlying biologic factors that alter cancer risk (e.g., insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia), or whether diabetes is a confounder for cancer. That is, diabetes is related to a common risk factor such as obesity, which is also a risk factor for cancer. Other common risk factors for cancer include lack of physical activity, diet, race/ethnicity, alcohol, smoking, etc.

Nevertheless, this study has potential advantages. First, this work is the first time that a visualization system using motion charts has been applied to health care data specifically to explore the relationships between cancers and other diseases. The second advantage is that the CAMA animation system focused on the association of 9 common cancers with their comorbidities that could reveal several related diseases in early cancer risk detection. The motion chart provides an array of opportunities and challenges with regard to disease classification and may aid in the development of new treatment approaches. Third, physicians and researchers can easily observe trends over time for a particular disease with a single mouse click. Moreover, researchers could filter out weak associations with cancers by setting the threshold of number patients or Q values respectively. Fourth, the CAMA visualization system is well-suited for displaying cancer-disease associations in big datasets such as Taiwan's National Health Insurance Database. Thus, the CAMA motion chart can be a useful tool for doctors, epidemiologists, and public health researchers.

However, the study also has some limitations. Our study is based on the assumption that two diseases are associated if they were recorded for the same patient within the same 1-year observation window, so we did not observe anything outside the window. Both acute and chronic diseases were treated identically, thus, regardless of how many times a disease was observed during the observation period, it was counted as a single occurrence. The motion chart presented in this study does not reveal causation of diseases, either, although it could be used to identify notable associations among diseases. This could generate hypotheses that would otherwise be difficult to imagine.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The animated visualization of cancer-disease associations using a large medical dataset was accomplished by building a motion chart called Cancer Associations Map Animation (CAMA). CAMA was used to analyze 782 million outpatient visits obtained from NHIRDB over a three-year period and provided dynamic animation of cancer-disease association across different age groups and gender. Such information can be used to identify comorbidity relationships for clinicians and provide additional reference data for medical researchers.

U.I., C-K.H, W-S.J., and Y-C.L. invented and developed the concept. Y-C.L., M-H.H. obtained the data. Y-C.C., P-A.N., C-Y.H., and H-C.Y organized and validated the data. Y-C.C., P-A.N., W-S.J., S-S.A. reviewed the methods. C-K.H., C-W.H. implemented the method and developed the website. W-S.J., Y-C.W. gave technical support. U.I., C-K.H., D.L.C., and R.L. wrote the manuscript.

This research is sponsored in part by Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) under grant MOST 103-2221-E-038-014, MOST 103-2221-E-038-016, MOST 103-2622-E-038-004-CC2, Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW), Taiwan, under grant MOHW103-TD-B-111-01, MOHW103-CC-EMR-05, Health and Welfare Surcharge of Tobacco Products grant MOHW104-TDU-B-212-124-001, Taipei Medical University under grant 99TMU-WFH-10, 101TMU-SHH-21, TMU102-AE1-B31, Taipei Medical University and Taipei Medical University Hospital (101-TMU-TMUH-03) and Ministry of Education, Taiwan, under grant TMUTOP103006-6.

None.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We would like to thank Mr. Yong-Fu Yen from College of Medical Science & Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taiwan, has contributed in building the web-site for CAMA system.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.01.009.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

