@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Enabling semantic interoperability in multi-centric clinical trials on breast cancer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We present a standard-based semantic interoperability solution.


                        
                        
                           
                           This solution uses a mechanism that exploits semantic normalization over HL7 model.


                        
                        
                           
                           It has been used for testing in trial recruitment or trial feasibility.


                        
                        
                           
                           Execution times obtained in testing empower its utilization for end user tools.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Semantic interoperability

Data integration

Clinical trials

Clinical research informatics

HL7

SNOMED CT

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and objectives
                  Post-genomic clinical trials require the participation of multiple institutions, and collecting data from several hospitals, laboratories and research facilities. This paper presents a standard-based solution to provide a uniform access endpoint to patient data involved in current clinical research.
               
               
                  Methods
                  The proposed approach exploits well-established standards such as HL7 v3 or SPARQL and medical vocabularies such as SNOMED CT, LOINC and HGNC. A novel mechanism to exploit semantic normalization among HL7-based data models and biomedical ontologies has been created by using Semantic Web technologies.
               
               
                  Results
                  Different types of queries have been used for testing the semantic interoperability solution described in this paper. The execution times obtained in the tests enable the development of end user tools within a framework that requires efficient retrieval of integrated data.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The proposed approach has been successfully tested by applications within the INTEGRATE and EURECA EU projects. These applications have been deployed and tested for: (i) patient screening, (ii) trial recruitment, and (iii) retrospective analysis; exploiting semantically interoperable access to clinical patient data from heterogeneous data sources.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Current oncology research aims to translate the explosion of genomic research results into clinical practice. Molecular tests are being introduced in modern clinical trials, increasing the potential number of variables and trials [1]. The participation of multiple institutions and semantic interoperability has become therefore essential for the feasibility and sustainability of post-genomic clinical trials.

Although different types of semantic interoperability have been defined in the literature [2], two main topics from previous initiatives in the area has been considered in this work: (i) different data models – such as the HL7 Reference Information Model [3], Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) [4], Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) [5] or CaGRID [6] – and (ii) different vocabulary representations – such as SNOMED CT [7], LOINC [8], HGNC [9], ICD [10], or NCIt [11] – of legacy systems from institutions involved in the same trial. These challenges were identified by analyzing data sources available in the EU projects INTEGRATE: “Driving excellence in integrative cancer research” [12] and EURECA: “Enabling information re-Use by linking clinical Research and CAre” [13]. In practice, such heterogeneities are solved mainly manually and involve a significant amount of the clinical trial information management costs.

This paper proposes a novel semantic interoperability approach based on interoperability standards and vocabularies [14]. A binding process has been created in order to automatically relate terminologies with data models [15]. While a solution leveraging on the latest semantic technologies and normalization procedures following HL7 and SNOMED CT recommendations has been implemented [16]. The proposed solution is based on a modular service-oriented architecture to provide a homogeneous patient data endpoint. Regarding the architectural approach, we have discarded a solution that completely relies on query translation, to avoid performance issues and to facilitate complex data transformation required in the biomedical domain [2]. Previous initiatives also provide a common data model [4–6] that can be deployed in different instances, but sharing query mechanisms and applications.

The main contributions of this work are: (i) an automatic mechanism to bind biomedical vocabularies and data models, solving vocabulary overlapping issues among others; and, (ii) a normalization mechanism implemented within performance boundaries suitable for multi-centric clinical trial scenarios. The proposed semantic interoperability layer has been tested by application prototypes that homogeneously access clinical data within INTEGRATE and EURECA projects. Concretely, for three main scenarios: (i) patient screening, to find the optimal trial that best fits the needs of a given patient, (ii) trial recruitment, where the aim is to find suitable patients for a given clinical trial. Both patient screening and trial recruitment scenarios share technical use cases that need to match clinical data of patients with eligibility criteria. And finally, (iii) the retrospective analysis of multiple clinical trials requires the definition of patient cohorts for further study, addressing important data sharing challenges [17]. In addition, such scenarios require the exploitation of knowledge stored in biomedical vocabularies, mainly by relationships among concepts. Therefore, based on existing standards, we have introduced Semantic Web technologies to extract such knowledge, exploited afterwards in clinical data retrieval.

@&#METHODS@&#

The proposed solution aims to homogenize shared information from Clinical Trial Management Systems (CTMS), Laboratory Information Management Systems (LIMS) and Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems among others. A Common Information Model (CIM) is therefore required to provide a semantic interoperability layer across systems. As depicted in Fig. 1
                     , two main components were created within the CIM: (i) the Common Data Model (CDM) and (ii) Core Dataset.

The CDM is the structure and concepts required to homogenize ad-hoc data models of information systems from different institutions – or even in departments of the same organization. Built from subsets of clinical terminologies that fully represent different data sources and scenarios [25], the Core Dataset includes such concepts relationships among them. Finally, the Terminology binding is necessary to define relations between the CDM and the Core Dataset.

As it is depicted in Fig. 1, CDM is populated from heterogeneous databases using Extract, Transform and Load (ETL) processes. These transformations processes are explained elsewhere [14].

The main requirement for the CDM is that any data source from clinical institutions must be able to be efficiently represented – in performance and usability terms. The HL7 version 3 Reference Information Model (RIM) has been selected as the foundation of the CDM. The HL7 RIM offers a wide coverage for representing clinical data and has proven useful for clinical information exchange [3]. Moreover, built-in tools from legacy systems, or open source HL7 mapping tools – such as Mirth Connect [18] – for generating HL7 v3 messages can be used.

Although the RIM is the core element of the HL7 v3 standard, it is not a definition of a database structure but an object model. Due to the coverage of the RIM – that also includes specification for messaging, financial data, imaging data, etc., only some RIM classes have been implemented to represent patient clinical data of breast cancer clinical trials:
                           
                              •
                              Act, with the sub-classes Observation, Procedure, Substance Administration, and Exposure.

Role


                                 Entity, with the sub-classes Living Subject, Person, and Device
                              

Two main relationships classes from the RIM were also required:
                           
                              •
                              
                                 Act Relationship
                              


                                 Participation
                              

Although the HL7 RIM is extensively used for interoperability, data types’ definitions are not trivially translated into a relational model. For example, HL7 defines the Encapsulated Data (ED) data-type, which may contain from a text string to binary data (e.g. images or videos). To solve this issue, some attributes have been simplified in the relational model compared with those defined by HL7 v3 standard. Consequently, classes from HL7 RIM have been represented as tables in the CDM and each sub-class is related with its parent class. The CDM and the corresponding documentation are available at [12].

The Core Dataset of the proposed approach is based on a single vocabulary, SNOMED CT, extended with domain specific terminologies such as LOINC for laboratory tests and HGNC for gene names. SNOMED CT is a widely used vocabulary containing over 310,000 active concepts and over a million relationships. SNOMED CT also provides mechanisms of normalization in combination with HL7 RIM-based models.

Mappings from original terms in other terminologies such as ICD or NCI thesaurus to SNOMED CT (or LOINC or HGNC) concepts are not always straight-forward [19]. In addition, translations from original concepts may lack information that the original concept contained. For this reason, every attribute in the relational model storing a medical coded concept also stores the original code, the original vocabulary and the normalized version. The provenance of each Act in the system is therefore maintained; allowing the update of inter-ontology mappings if necessary. In case these mappings were updated in terminologies used by translation/mapping services such as BioPortal [20].

Once the Core Dataset and the CDM were implemented, the corresponding links are required to connect Core Dataset concepts to the CDM, i.e. Terminology Binding [21]. The Terminology Binding defines which concepts, from different vocabularies, can be stored in a given field in the model, in order to build a common representation of the information. For example, Asthma is stored in Observation.code in the RIM model, where Observation is the class and code is the attribute.

Furthermore, one concept in SNOMED CT could be represented in different ways, e.g. Fracture of femur concept can be normalized to an equivalent Normal Form that contains only ‘atomic’ concepts – Fracture and Femur. In the proposed solution, the most informative normalized form of SNOMED CT concepts are always selected. The procedure developed to create the Terminology Binding can be summarized in three steps:
                           
                              •
                              
                                 Vocabulary integration. Terminologies of the Core Dataset (i.e. SNOMED CT, LOINC and HGNC) are stored using the Ontology Web Language (OWL).


                                 Binding Annotation. In such ontology, each concept is annotated with the binding of those concepts to the corresponding CDM class an attribute (based on HL7 recommendations [16]).


                                 Disambiguation. The objective is to solve overlap among bindings, i.e. when the same concept can be annotated with two different attributes in the HL7 RIM, e.g. a concept that can be an Observation or a Procedure, i.e. Sodium measurement (25197003) is in the procedure branch of SNOMED CT but it also belongs to evaluation procedure, that is mapped to Observation in HL7.

The most complex disambiguation cases are those requiring common rules to select the correct class and attribute when a concept is linked to different fields of the CDM. Such disambiguation relies on relationships obtained from the SNOMED CT normal form to select the right mapping to HL7 model.

Once the semantic components of the solution were implemented, a standardized service is required to seamlessly retrieve data across applications. The execution of semantic queries to the proposed CIM is facilitated by a Query Execution service based on morph-RDB tool [22]. This service provides a SPARQL endpoint on the HL7 RIM model through a manual RDF mapping of the HL7 v3 RIM. This mapping is contains a subset of classes and attributes of the RIM enough for representing the domain of study.

Query Execution service allows executing SPARQL queries on the CDM based on the HL7 v3 RIM. Consequently, these SPARQL queries have to be built based on the RIM relationships (Participation, and Act relationship), the main classes (Entity, Role, and Act) and their specializations. The following code shows a query that retrieves from the CDM all patients with any kind of tumor size observation bigger than or equal to 20mm.
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          SELECT DISTINCT ?obs_id ?code ?entityId ?birthTime ?effectiveTime
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          WHERE {
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          ?instObs
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          hl7rim:observation_code
                                       
                                       
                                          ?code;
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          hl7rim:observation_id
                                       
                                       
                                          ?obs_id;
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          hl7rim:observation_effectiveTime
                                       
                                       
                                          ?effectiveTime;
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          hl7rim:observation_value
                                          
                                          
                                          ?value;
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          hl7rim:observation_units
                                       
                                       
                                          ?units;
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          hl7rim:observation_participation
                                       
                                       
                                          ?obs_part.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          ?obs_part
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          hl7rim:participation_entityId
                                       
                                       
                                          ?entityId.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          ?livSubj
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          hl7rim:livingSubject_id
                                       
                                       
                                          ?entityId;
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          
                                          hl7rim:livingSubject_birthTime
                                       
                                       
                                          ?birthTime.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          FILTER (?code IN (isAnySubclassOf (263605001)))
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          FILTER (?units = “mm”)
                                          
                                          FILTER (xsd:double (?value) >= 20)
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          }
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

As it is defined in the HL7 RIM, Observations are linked to Living Subjects – subclass of Act – through the Participation relationship. The semantic capabilities of SNOMED CT are exploited in the Query Execution service to enhance the morph-RDB endpoint with query expansion features. The semantic query expansion mechanism is based on two main characteristics: (i) SNOMED CT organization, that follows a hierarchical structure using “is_a” relationships (e.g. Allergic asthma “is_a” Asthma), that could be used for expanding a query; and (ii) the concept composition/normalization provided by SNOMED CT, allowing the creation of new concepts by the post-coordination mechanism. Concrete examples can be found in Section 4.

The patient screening and trial recruitment scenarios from the EURECA and INTEGRATE projects need to match eligibility criteria defined in clinical trials with patient data. The retrospective analysis scenario should support queries to build patient cohort. The objective of the proposed solution is to share tools across institutions with an instance of the common data model (CDM) and vocabularies as depicted in Fig. 2
                     .

Eligibility criteria patterns from TOP [23] and NeoALTTO [24] were identified [25], requiring 5 different types of data and queries:
                        
                           •
                           
                              Diagnosis, referring to any fact that a clinician has diagnosed such a “Malignant tumor of breast”.


                              Measurements, including data with numerical values, such as “Tumor size” or laboratory tests.


                              Procedure, referring to that data that describe procedures performed on a patient – e.g. a biopsy procedure.


                              Substance Administration, covering any supply of drugs or substance to a patient, including dose and units. For example, an administration of “Epirubicin”.


                              Patient demographics, enclosing any consultation about patient information, like age, gender, etc.

Each of these queries has special characteristics that have been covered within the functionalities provided by the proposed approach:


                     Query expansion based on Core Dataset terminologies. Certain queries do not require knowledge from the Core Dataset, such as simple demographic queries “Age of patient is ≤70 years” or “Patients who signed the informed consent”. On the other hand, the majority of the queries need to be expanded according to the Core Dataset relationships to obtain the expected results. For example, a common substance administration query that can be found in eligibility criteria of trials, is “obtain information about patients with a previous treatment (substance administration) of a family of drugs” e.g. “Anthracycline | 108787006”. A query using the RIM model is then built to retrieve substance administrations including the SNOMED CT code for Anthracycline. Since “Anthracycline” is a family of products, in real clinical data we will never find that a patient received a dose of such concept. These kind of queries need to use the query expansion mechanism of the semantic layer to find patients that have been treated with any substance of the “Anthracycline” family. And then, the query will retrieve codes of concrete products – i.e. “Epirubicin | 417916005”.


                     Normalization of compound concepts of terminologies. A diagnosis query to retrieve patients with a “Breast Cancer | 254837009” diagnosis also require knowledge extracted from the Core Dataset. Breast cancer could be stored using different representations even within the same vocabulary. By using the SNOMED CT normalization, we can homogenize the representation and use only ‘atomic’ concepts. While “Breast Cancer” is a single concept in SNOMED CT, it can be decomposed to its short normal form “Malignant neoplasm of primary, secondary, or uncertain origin (morphologic abnormality) | 367651003” with a finding site in “Breast structure | 76752008”. Moreover, if we want to find any type of carcinoma in any part of “Breast Structure”, the query expansion mechanism should expand the query with 981 concepts (853 from neoplasm and 128 from the breast structure). This normalization maintains the semantics of the original concepts while the potential number of possible queries is increased. For example, storing the normalized version of “Breast cancer”, queries retrieving patients with a disease in the breast can be executed. While using the original concept this kind of queries, would not return any results.


                     Filtering by scalar values. A measurement query should retrieve a test value, i.e., a laboratory test called ANC, “Absolute Neutrophil Count | 30630007” – in cells per microliter. The resulting query will retrieve an HL7 RIM observation, with an observation code equal to the SNOMED CT code “30630007” and will return the value and units. Similarly, other clinical information could be retrieved as a measurement, returning only those patients that match a mathematical restriction. A query about patients with a primary tumor measurement with a value greater than 30mm can therefore be executed. Thus, the SPARQL query will retrieve Acts of measurement about the concept “Primary tumor size | 399734001” and a filter constraining the value to greater than 30mm.


                     Relationships among different Acts are also stored. Additional information stored in the proposed solution such as diagnosis that is “produced by” interpreting an image; or, the trial that a particular diagnosis or procedure or act “belongs to”.

Such functionality, together with a homogeneous access to the CDM, allows that applications exploiting the data to match eligibility criteria or create a cohort of patients can be constructed. With a common query endpoint, even when data was originally stored in different information systems such as CTMS, EHR and LIMS.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Data from two different clinical trials on breast cancer were identified, analyzed and collected within the INTEGRATE and EURECA projects, TOP [23] and NeoALTTO [24], to evaluate the proposed solution. The dataset integrating those clinical trials contains 80 patients and 415 acts for those patients. A set of 32 queries has been created (Annex A), extracted from eligibility criteria of clinical trials on breast cancer. These queries are used in patient screening and trial recruitment tools created within EURECA project in order to obtain patients that fit some criteria, based on clinical data.


                     Table 1
                      summarizes the classification of the list of queries using 5 different types of data, described in the Use Cases Section, and by those functionalities that each query exploits. All SPARQL queries were normalized according to the SNOMED Normal Form and the Terminology Binding. In some cases, although the query expansion functionality is applied, such functionality is not exploited, i.e. a query for obtaining patients with ‘nosocomial infectious disease’ diagnosis (D03); the ‘nosocomial infectious disease’ concept used for the query is already normalized so there will be no further modifications in the query to be executed. In Table 1, this is marked with O instead of X.

Since advance GUIs were developed for the screening and recruitment scenarios, the performance of the semantic interoperability layer was also a critical requirement. The final usability of such applications depends in a high degree on the interoperability layer performance. As it is shown in Table 2
                     , execution times for the 32 SPARQL queries in most cases are less than half second. This execution time includes all steps explained in Section 2, i.e. applying normalization, SPARQL to SQL translation, query expansion, query execution and result translation to XML.

Queries D07, M07, P01 and PD01, from Table 2, are slightly time-consuming compared to the rest. The reason is these queries should iterate through every possible field in the data for a given diagnose, measurement and substance administration. Such queries need to include existing information from several tables in the data model.


                     Table 3
                      shows the average execution time for queries by its data type. As it can be observed, the total average execution time is almost 250 milliseconds per query.

In order to test the scalability of the proposed solution, the same 32 queries have been executed on a larger dataset that contains information about 4600 patients containing almost 70,000 acts from GeparQuattro [26] and GAIN [27] clinical trials. Table 4
                      shows that average time execution continues under one second. Exceptions are D06, and SA03, which present a significant worse execution time for the whole process, but it is due to the high amount of results that should be retrieved (70,000 and 12,500 respectively), while the time for query execution remains within acceptable boundaries.

The semantic interoperability layer containing the CDM and queries are available at https://bitbucket.org/sparaiso/enabling-semantic-interoperability-in-multi-centric-clinical/src. This repository contains an OWL file of the CDM structure and data for executing SPARQL queries. Due to legal restrictions the OWL file contains synthetic data built using statistical results from real datasets. While the 32 queries used for matching patient data with eligibility criteria of real clinical trials, are also available to be tested, including the original SPARQL code.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Traditional challenges in the area, such as semantic heterogeneities, data annotation and common data models among others, have been faced in this work for oncological clinical trials. Such special focus has allowed the development of a common HL7 RIM-based schema with SNOMED CT as a general terminology. The standard-based solution exploits (i) a normalization mechanism lacking in other approaches in the area and (ii) the automation of the linkage between the data model and the Core Dataset, the main contributions described in this paper.

The specific scenario and requirements were motivated by clinicians and industry of INTEGRATE and EURECA research projects, aiming to provide advanced methods that facilitate the exploitation of data in post-genomic oncology research. After three years of and important joint effort, we have already undertaken essential issues to improve the management of post-genomic multi-centric clinical trials data. An interoperability layer and related methods have been developed to efficiently gather integrated patient data.

The proposed semantic layer approach, as it is highlighted in the Results Section, suggest that it could be used in daily end-user tools, such as (i) patient screening, (ii) trial recruitment, and (iii) retrospective analysis. The performance in data retrieval is adequate, even without commercial optimizations, and includes the benefits of the latest semantic technologies.

Although the results suggest the suitability of the approach, the CDM will be enhanced in the future with provenance information from data sources to: (i) be able to exploit the degree of confidence and origin of the data – by annotating data from external sources using different levels of data reliability or confidence; i.e. data coming from the automatic extraction processes from clinical sources, such as NLP in clinical reports, are usually less reliable than data extracted from structured sources like EHR systems. (ii) Implement the security and legal framework – by filtering data depending on the user and/or institution that were accessing the system. Finally, although out of the scope of this paper, the underlying processes to load original data sources into the CDM, i.e. ETL processes, should be quantified and improved to be deployed in real settings. The deployment costs of the proposed solution will depend on each site data sources and the corresponding ETL process. But once such interoperability framework is in place, the costs associated to information management in multi-centric clinical trials will be significantly reduced. Current manual tasks to gather information from different sources will be semi-automated, and the corresponding resources could be used to improve the clinical trial outcome.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The presented work has been partially funded by the European Commission through the INTEGRATE (FP7-ICT-2009-6-270253) and the EURECA (FP7-ICT-2011-288048) project, and also it has been funded by the Ministry of Health of the Spanish Government under the grant no. PI13/02020.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2015.01.003.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     Diagnosis
                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    D01
                                    List all patients with malignant neoplasm of breast.
                                 
                                 
                                    D02
                                    List all patients with infiltrating duct carcinoma in the breast.
                                 
                                 
                                    D03
                                    Check if a patient has a nosocomial infectious disease, adding the associated values.
                                 
                                 
                                    D04
                                    Obtain data from patients related to an observation associated to the entity Blood urea nitrogen.
                                 
                                 
                                    D05
                                    Obtain data from a particular patient checking if it has an antimicrobial susceptibility test, related to the substance lactate.
                                 
                                 
                                    D06
                                    List all patients whose related diagnoses have a creation time later 2009-02-28.
                                 
                                 
                                    D07
                                    Obtain patient data related to a particular diagnosis (id given), adding every possible information related to the act.
                                 
                                 
                                    D08
                                    Obtain patient data related to a particular diagnosis.
                                 
                                 
                                    D09
                                    Obtain data from a particular patient related with a glucose measurement test, related to the substance glucose.
                                 
                                 
                                    D010
                                    List all patients with infiltrating duct carcinoma with some laterality.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     Measurement
                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    M01
                                    List all patients related to a carbon dioxide content measurement, adding the values associated to the measurement.
                                 
                                 
                                    M02
                                    List all patients related to a carbon dioxide content measurement, which measured value is equal to 32mmHg.
                                 
                                 
                                    M03
                                    List all patients related with a tumor size measurement.
                                 
                                 
                                    M04
                                    List all patients with a tumor size bigger than or equal to 20mm.
                                 
                                 
                                    M05
                                    List all patients related to a neutrophil count in units ×103/μl, adding the associated values.
                                 
                                 
                                    M06
                                    Obtain data from a particular patient related with a gamma glutamyl transferase measurement.
                                 
                                 
                                    M07
                                    List all patients whose related acts (measurements) have associated values.
                                 
                                 
                                    M08
                                    Obtain data from a particular patient related with a c-reactive protein measurement.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     Procedure
                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    P01
                                    Obtain data of biopsies preformed using a trocar device.
                                 
                                 
                                    P02
                                    Obtain data associated to a cytotechnologist procedure on a patient.
                                 
                                 
                                    P03
                                    List all patients related to an aspartate aminotransferase procedure.
                                 
                                 
                                    P04
                                    List all patients related with a procedure involving a trocar biopsy.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     Substance administration
                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    SA01
                                    List all patients that have received a treatment with alanine aminotransferase substance.
                                 
                                 
                                    SA02
                                    List all patients that were administered the substance idarubicin, belonging to a particular clinical trial.
                                 
                                 
                                    SA03
                                    List the patients that were administered mitoxantrone, retrieving the information associated with the target site, the method used, and the approach site, if it exists.
                                 
                                 
                                    SA04
                                    List all patients that were administered any substance, adding the information associated to the administration of substance.
                                 
                                 
                                    SA05
                                    List all patients that were administered aclarubicin, adding all the information related to de administration of substance (dose, quantity, etc.).
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     Patient demographics
                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    PD01
                                    List all patients including demographic data.
                                 
                                 
                                    PD02
                                    List patients older than 45.
                                 
                                 
                                    PD03
                                    List patient characteristics related with a particular act.
                                 
                                 
                                    PD04
                                    List all female patients.
                                 
                                 
                                    PD05
                                    Obtain data of an act of a particular patient.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

