@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Neurosurgery planning in rodents using a magnetic resonance imaging assisted framework to target experimentally defined networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Framework based on magnetic resonance imaging and digitized 3D brain atlases for brain navigation.


                        
                        
                           
                           It allows the use of individualized information from multiple MRI modalities to assist experimental neurosurgery planning and in vivo tissue processing.


                        
                        
                           
                           Three examples of experimental designs in neuroscience are presented.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results illustrate its feasibility for identifying and selecting connected neuronal population in vivo and directing electrode implantations to targeted nodes in the intricate system of brain networks.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

MRI

Neurosurgery planning

Computerized rat brain atlas

Electric microstimulation

Functional connectivity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and objective
                  Meaningful targeting of brain structures is required in a number of experimental designs in neuroscience. Current technological developments as high density electrode arrays for parallel electrophysiological recordings and optogenetic tools that allow fine control of activity in specific cell populations provide powerful tools to investigate brain physio-pathology. However, to extract the maximum yield from these fine developments, increased precision, reproducibility and cost-efficiency in experimental procedures is also required.
               
               
                  Methods
                  We introduce here a framework based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and digitized brain atlases to produce customizable 3D-environments for brain navigation. It allows the use of individualized anatomical and/or functional information from multiple MRI modalities to assist experimental neurosurgery planning and in vivo tissue processing.
               
               
                  Results
                  As a proof of concept we show three examples of experimental designs facilitated by the presented framework, with extraordinary applicability in neuroscience.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The obtained results illustrate its feasibility for identifying and selecting functionally and/or anatomically connected neuronal population in vivo and directing electrode implantations to targeted nodes in the intricate system of brain networks.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Neurosurgical methods for precise targeting of brain nuclei are necessary to many experimental designs in current neuroscience. For instance, multiple electrophysiological recordings (from tens to hundreds of locations) are now possible with silicon probe technology. Simultaneous recording from multiple brain targets is fundamental to unveil the rules of information coding in such a system which implements a highly distributed and parallel processing. These technologies can be applied both in vivo and in vitro in live tissue. For in vitro recordings, the preparation of brain slices containing interconnected neuronal populations is critically limited by the lack of specific information on fibers trajectory. Thus, cutting brain tissue commonly results in the dissection of most, if not all, long-range axonal connections. Another example of current interest in neuroscience is the electric microstimulation of deep brain structures. This technique is being investigated in preclinical settings to uncover their functional principles and exploit their full clinical possibilities [1–13]. Stereotaxic neurosurgery is particularly relevant to deep brain stimulation since the precise location of the stimulated cell population will determine the functional outcome [14,15].

There are two leading procedures for targeting specific brain structures. The first one is an atlas-guided technique based on the combination of an anatomical atlas with a stereotaxic frame. The main drawbacks of this method are the lack of three-dimensional information for the electrode insertion, the inaccuracy due to biological variability in size and shape among subjects, and the lack of specific atlases for all animal species and particular ages (for instance, from development to aging). Although inter-individual variation is reduced in experimental animals [16], especially in those lissencephalic as rats and mice [17], the lack of three-dimensional information and age and species-specific atlases hampers the precision in many experimental designs.

The second methodology is based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) guidance. This approach brings as major advantage the possibility to apply personalized surgical procedures and coordinates in three dimensions [18]. The inherent disadvantage of this approach is the utilization of two different devices, the imaging system and the stereotaxic frame, using consequently, two different reference systems. This problem has been solved in the past by recognizing in the images several tissue landmarks and using their relative position to determine the brain orientation in the stereotaxic frame [19]. Alternatively, recent work has exploited the idea of placing external landmarks, such as bars or cannula filled with paramagnetic material [16,20]. These landmarks are easily detectable in the MR image and are used to obtain the transformation parameters between the two reference systems. Regardless of the strategy, both reference systems need to be registered [21]. The process of obtaining the transformation parameters for the registration can be done manually or automatically by means of cost-function algorithms, and several registration strategies can be found in recently published papers [22–26].

In the case of rat brain region-wise studies, most solutions assume as a de facto model the anatomical atlas developed by G. Paxinos and C. Watson in 1982 [27]. For instance, Schwarz et al. [28], Cai et al. [29] or Hjornevik et al. [30] developed their respective rat brain atlases taking as reference the Paxinos and Watson model. In [30] it was possible to combine the developed rat brain atlas with both Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and MRI, but involving manual coregistration. Schwarz and collaborators [28] presented a framework for functional MRI (fMRI) whereby it was possible to register automatically anatomical and functional images to a digital version of the Paxinos and Watson rat brain atlas. Besides the version of Schwarz et al., other digitalizations of Paxinos and Watson atlas attempt to improve the label coregistration accuracy using Principal Components Analysis [29,31].

Another interesting approach is presented by the Allen Developing Mouse Brain Atlas [32]. Its tool elegantly provides a characterization of gene expression in the brain beginning with mid-gestation to aging, in conjunction with an online database and annotated reference atlases.

Other methods involve spatial normalizations to a common stereotaxic space [33]. The current trend is given by whole brain registrations, as they allow inter-subject studies and extends the research to a higher level by giving the possibility to compare among populations. Such direction is followed in Schweinhardt et al. [34], who used the SPM software package (SPM99, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, United Kingdom) to implement an approach to register functional MR images to a rat brain template based upon anatomical landmarks present in T2-weighted images. Anatomical correspondences in the two image spaces were identified and used in a label-based affine spatial transformation. However, this forces to identify as many anatomical landmarks as possible to achieve a better approximation. This method relies on the biological observation that the skull shape and size of rat brain are essentially the same as long as their weights are within certain range [19].

In this work we are presenting a virtual space to assist sophisticated experimental designs and surgery planning in rodents using functional and anatomical information extracted from MRI, in addition to general cartographic information provided by an integrated brain atlas. Importantly, experimental designs can be planned based on both, average group-level imaging results or individualized results for specific subjects. Imaging data used to guide electrode implantations, orientation of brain slicing for in vitro experiments or complex surgeries in general, include functional MRI (fMRI), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and manganese enhanced MRI (MEMRI), just to mention some examples. The possibilities opened by the developed framework for the study of rat brain circuits in vivo are illustrated, as a proof of concept, in three examples of functional and anatomical connectivity experiments based on electric stimulation-driven fMRI and MEMRI neuronal tract-tracing.

All computational procedures have been written using MATLAB R2009b (The Mathworks, Inc., Natwick, MA, USA). The FSL (FMRIB Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom) and SPM (SPM8, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, United Kingdom) packages have been used for preprocessing and statistical analysis. All experiments were approved by the local authorities (IN-CSIC) and were performed in accordance with Spanish (law 32/2007) and European regulations (EU directive 86/609, EU decree 2001-486).

Urethane anesthetized (1.3g/kg) Sprague-Dawley rats (250–300g) were implanted with platinum-iridium electrodes following standard surgical procedures as described before [35]. The microelectrode implantation was targeted to the nucleus accumbens (i.e., desired coordinates: anteroposterior or AP=1.6, mediolateral or ML=0.8, and dorsoventral or DV=6.8mm), and stereotaxic coordinates were facilitated by the virtual electrode placement tool provided by the framework. The stimulating electrode was fixed to the skull with plastic screws and dental cement and after that, the animal was placed in the scanner. Stimulation during BOLD-contrast fMRI acquisition consisted on periods of 4s of stimulation followed by 26s of rest, repeated ten times [35]. The stimulation pulses had a duration of 0.1ms, an intensity of 0.2mA and a frequency of 10Hz. Electric currents applied to brain tissue produce direct depolarization of neuronal elements (including somas and axons) and therefore fMRI maps under electric stimulation unveil the functional outcome of a particular stimulation protocol in a specific location.

Isoflurane anesthetized (4% induction, 2% maintenance during surgery) Sprague-Dawley rats or ICR mice were stereotaxically injected with an isotonic solution of MnCl2 0.1M into the primary somatosensory cortex (0.1μL) or intra-vitreally (0.5μL), respectively [36]. Stereotaxic coordinates for the cortex were obtained from the virtual placement tool. After manganese injection animals were recovered from the anesthesia and i.p. administered with analgesics (buprenorphine 5μg/Kd). MEMRI scans were routinely obtained before (baseline) and 24h after manganese injection. Manganese ions reduce the longitudinal relaxation times (T1) of hydrogen protons. Consequently T1-weighted MR images show enhanced signal intensity at those locations where Mn2+ ions accumulate. Since Mn2+ is transported anterogradely by neurons, statistically significant increases in signal intensity will demonstrate the presence of efferent connections.

Anesthetized animals (urethane for fMRI or isoflurane for MEMRI studies) were monitored for body temperature, heart rate, CO2 and SpO2 throughout the scanning session. All experiments were carried out in a horizontal 7T MR scanner with a 30cm diameter bore (Biospec 70/30v, Bruker Medical, Ettlingen, Germany). A 1H rat brain receive-only phase array coil with integrated combiner and preamplifier, no tune/no match, in combination with the actively detuned transmit-only resonator (Bruker BioSpin MRI GmbH, Germany) was employed. Data were acquired with a Hewlett-Packard console running Paravision software (Bruker Medical GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany) operating on a Linux platform. Functional MRI was done in 15 coronal slices using a GE-EPI sequence with the following parameters: field of view (FOV)=25mm×25mm, slice thickness=1mm, matrix size=96×96, number of segments=1, flip angle (FA)=60°, echo time (TE)=15ms and repetition time (TR)=2000ms. T2-weighted anatomical images were collected using a rapid acquisition relaxation enhanced sequence (RARE), applying the following parameters: FOV=25mm×25mm, 15 slices, slice thickness=1mm, matrix size=192×192, effective TE=56ms, TR=2s and a RARE factor of 8. For MEMRI experiments a modified driven equilibrium Fourier transform (MDEFT) sequence with MDEFT-preparation was used to obtain T1-weighted anatomical images [37]. The scan parameters were: TR=22.2ms, TE=4ms, FA=20°, ID=1000ms and four segments. The geometric parameters of the 3D scans were: matrix size=192×112×128, FOV=48mm×28mm×32mm, and voxel size=0.25mm×0.25mm×0.25mm. Parameters: FOV=15mm×15mm, matrix 75×75, 28 slices, slice thickness 0.25mm.

We registered the experimental images to the standard space provided by Schwarz and collaborators [28]. It has two anatomical T2-weighted images used as templates (each with high and low resolution in the anterior–posterior direction, used here for MEMRI and fMRI respectively), and another image, with all the brain regions of interest (ROI) parcellated according to Paxinos and Watson atlas. The position of bregma is defined in image space from the stereotaxic coordinates [27], and is used as the origin of our virtual space.

Experimental data of both fMRI and MEMRI acquisitions were preprocessed using SPM8 and FSL [38] software packages. Images were scaled by a factor of 10 to compensate the difference between human and rat brain size, and skull stripped (FSL BET, Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance imaging of the Brain, London, UK) [39] in order to achieve better registration results. To improve brain extraction, data was rescaled by a factor of 0.5 before using BET (and by a factor of 2 afterwards) in the anterior–posterior dimension making the brain more spherical. Electric stimulation fMR images were also realigned with SPM8. Finally, the dataset was smoothed with a Gaussian kernel and registered to the atlas with FSL/FLIRT [40] using 9 parameters.

Regarding to the esfMRI analysis, the SPM8-GLM machinery was used for the calculation of statistical parametric maps. The design matrix includes the temporal paradigm and the realigned movement parameters as regressors [41]. We estimated the statistical significance via Monte Carlo simulation as implemented in AlphaSim (AFNI AlphaSim, Biophysics Research Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA) and applied it for statistical correction.

The MEMRI statistical analysis procedure consists of a repeated measure t-test between pre- and post Mn2+ injection images [36].

An approach based on Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was implemented to obtain a brain slice containing a neuronal tract of interest. The desired trajectory is defined by the user based on the result, in the present example, of in vivo tract-tracing with manganese injections and MEMRI. Desired trajectories based on DTI results are also envisioned. For MEMRI, voxels containing manganese were segmented by means of a semi-automatic region-growing algorithm. The user has to click on those voxels that contain manganese (they appear brighter on MRI) and define an intensity range in order to determine the belonging of other voxels in the neighborhood to the region. Afterwards, this 3D segmented volume is binarized and skeletonized. The most important locations (network nodes) according to the user can be selected before applying PCA. The two first principal components define a mathematical plane, which minimizes the mean squared error with respect to the desired trajectory. The optimal virtual slice with a desired thickness containing the trajectory can be determined from this plane. The user can maximize the number of nodes to be conserved modifying this slice thickness. The position of the calculated plane is determined by only two angles, elevation and azimuth, relative to the horizontal plane. The PCA is carried out by means of MATLAB statistical toolbox, which implements singular value decomposition.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Our framework implements the tools and functions necessary to navigate through experimental MRI data and statistical maps. The virtual positioning of recording and stimulating devices is also possible, as well as defining precise coordinates for brain slicing. It was programmed in MATLAB and it integrates the SPM and FSL software packages for image processing. A digitized version of Paxinos brain atlas permits several measurements based on anatomical regions. Since FSL allows the automatic registration to the atlas, is not necessary a manual geometric manipulation of the images by the user.

The main goal of the tool is to provide a user-friendly environment based on several powerful neuroimaging software packages, and also a virtual space where different types of neurosurgery planning can be performed.

The visualization interface (Fig. 1
                        ) provides the tools and functions necessary to navigate through a 3D experimental MRI data, explore and quantify statistical parametric maps, and positioning virtual recording or stimulating devices.

The main panel is divided into four subpanels, and each one controls the settings of the anatomical image, the slice selection, the atlas regions to show, and the statistical analysis. On one hand, the atlas panel permits to select the regions of interest (ROI) that will take part in statistical measurements. Statistical maps can be overlayed over one of two available anatomical references (i.e., the experimental image or the anatomical template) or the atlas itself. Several statistical measurements can be calculated for each region after setting a significance threshold for the connectivity map. The kind of measurement that can be calculated to characterize different ROIs are: percentage of active voxels with respect to the whole brain/ROI; average and standard deviation of active voxels; and average BOLD signal. All of these measurements can be calculated either with respect to the whole brain, either with respect to each ROI. Here, active voxel is defined both as a voxel containing manganese for MEMRI (whose significance is above a threshold) and BOLD correlated voxels for esfMRI (also whose significance is above a threshold).

These atlas-based measurements, combined with the provided tools for 3D navigation in a stereotactically referenciated space, will help neurosurgical planning and multiple implantations in longitudinal brain connectivity studies.

Next, three different approaches will be presented, where the tool has been used for distinct purposes.

This first experiment illustrates the utility of the framework for the planning of electrode implantation. This will facilitate the surgery and help the user to better locate the desired position for the probe. Furthermore, the three-dimensional representation of the anatomical space through ROI, gives the possibility of different region-based analyses, as for example, by means of connectivity fingerprints or matrices.

Functional MRI techniques such as electric stimulation functional MRI (esfMRI) [35] is a prominent tool for the investigation of neuronal connections in vivo. However, as stated before, the precise location of the microstimulation electrode is critical as it will determine the stimulated neuronal population and therefore the functional response. We have applied the developed framework for esfMRI experiments in two different stages. First, we have selected individualized coordinates for the implantation of a stimulating-electrode targeted to the ventral striatum by registering the anatomical image of the experimental subject to the digital atlas included in the framework (Fig. 2
                        ). Then, after electrode implantation and recovery from surgery (one week after implantation), the animal was subjected to an fMRI session with electric stimulation delivered through the implanted electrode. Brain activations were recorded and the functional data was feed-back into the framework and used to produce the connectivity matrices representing the functional connections between those brain areas being stimulated. These connectivity matrices (or fingerprints) reveal in vivo the anatomical substrate of specific sets of connections together with their functional weights and therefore, precisely identify the neuronal populations across the brain being activated by a specific and well characterized electrode implantation. This information can be used, for instance, to (a) confirm the correct implantation of the probe, (b) investigate the longitudinal evolution of the functional weights in a particular experimental paradigm or disease model, or (c) to investigate the behavioral output of precisely defined deep brain stimulation (DBS).

Connectivity matrices are constructed in two steps: (1) given a parametric statistical map for a certain level of statistical significance and correction, the average BOLD-fMRI time-series is calculated for all regions, automatically identified by the atlas labels where functional activity is present, and (2) the correlation of the time-series of all matched pairs of regions from the previous step are calculated as a measure of functional connectivity [42]. Fig. 3
                        .a represents the supra-voxels of the esfMRI statistical parametric map (SPM{F}-AlphaSim; p
                        <0.05) unveiling the brain regions responding to electrical stimulation. From the generated connectivity fingerprint we can observe that the functional connectivity in this particular case of DBS is highest (0.95) between the core and the shell of the nucleus accumbens (AcbC and AcbSh, respectively) or that a low mutual information (0.17) is shared between these structures and the ventral tegmental area (VTA) during stimulation [43,44].

An attractive application of the connectivity fingerprints is the possibility to target electrophysiological recordings to a set of brain regions functionally connected. Such an experimental approach would allow, for instance, the investigation of the physiological principles of deep brain stimulation, a promising clinical intervention for many neurological and psychiatric disorders. By using the presented framework it is possible to coregister the functional maps, associated to a particular DBS paradigm, to the anatomical and reference space of the same animal and by means of the virtual electrode locating tool, planning and guiding the surgical implantation of real recording electrodes. As an example, we have modeled virtual multichannel silicon-probes (NeuroNexus, Ann Arbor, United States) [45]. Firstly, the user can define the geometry of the probe to be used by introducing the number and spacing of contacts in the electrode. Afterwards, the user defines the target position of the most distal recording in the electrode and the desired trajectory of the complete probe. Finally, the software calculates the stereotaxic coordinates for probe insertion respect to bregma and the angles relative to any reference plane (see Fig. 2a). Together with the coordinates for implantation, the software provides a list of the brain regions crossed by the implanted electrode. It can also be used to plan a surgery in which specific brain regions need to be preserved from any damage derived from probe implantation.

The goal of this experiment is to study the functional connectivity between several ROIs by means of contrast enhanced MRI (MEMRI). The presented tool is used to guide the manganese contrast injection to the desired location. Moreover, the individualized connectivity maps could be used to plan the surgery for the recording of electrophysiological data.


                        In vivo neuroanatomical tract-tracing has been introduced using paramagnetic contrast agents and MRI [36,46–49]. The technique allows visualization of large-scale three-dimensional networks in living animals. Furthermore, this non-destructive technique can be repeatedly applied in the same animal to visualize different neuronal pathways and to generate individualized connectivity maps. Applying the developed framework to the MEMRI data provides the statistical maps representing the terminal fields of the labeled axons, this is, the anatomical efferent connections of the targeted group of neurons (Fig. 4
                        ). The use of the computerized atlas reveals that after injection of manganese in the primary somatosensory cortex (S1) efferent and monosynaptic connections can be automatically detected (and manually corroborated) in well-known projection fields as the caudate putamen (CPu), secondary somatosensory cortex (S2), primary motor cortex (M1) and several thalamic nuclei (VPM, VPL, VL) (Fig. 3b). In addition, a quantitative measure of connectivity strength can be extracted as the volume of the efferent fields or the density of the projection (signal intensity in an efferent field). These results are in good agreement with previously reported results of S1 connectivity using MEMRI [36] and validate the use of the presented automatic analysis tool for anatomical connectivity studies. Thus, without any previous knowledge on rat anatomy and semi-automatically, it is possible to identify the projections from the primary somatosensory cortex to the basal ganglia, striatum and several cortical areas. Moreover, the stereotaxic coordinates (not shown) corresponding to every MEMRI-identified projections are provided by the software and can be used to direct recording or stimulating electrode implantations as shown in Fig. 2.

The MEMRI technique is used here to study functional connectivity the same way as in the previous experiment, but with a different application. From the individualized connectivity map obtained, the tool computes a virtual slice containing a determined neuronal trajectory of interest. This information can be used to plan brain tissue slicing for a further in vitro study.

Electrophysiological experiments in vitro present important advantages for mechanistic investigations of functional connectivity. They allow an easy access to different brain nuclei, facilitate intracellular recordings especially in deep structures and permit a fast exchange of substances in the extracellular space, ideally for pharmacological experiments in which active principles have to be added and replaced fast and repeatedly. A major drawback of the technique is that most of the neuronal inputs and outputs, especially those in long-range connections, are sectioned by tissue slicing. Therefore, incorporating information on neuronal connectivity and fiber trajectories would greatly enhance the applicability of in vitro techniques for investigations on functional organization of networks. By combining the presented virtual neurosurgery planner with MEMRI tract-tracing data we provide a tool to perform such experiments. Manganese injection into the mice eye produced the expected anterograde tracing of the visual pathway (Fig. 5
                        ) as previously shown [50]. Twenty four hours after administration of the contrast agent the optic nerve containing the axons of the retinal ganglion cells is clearly visualized crossing in the optic chiasm and reaching the first station in the lateral geniculate nucleus and superior colliculus and the second synapse in the visual cortex (Fig. 5). Using the framework it is possible to first segment the visual pathway revealed by manganese, then select the nodes in the networks that need to be recorded and finally, calculate the slice orientation that contains the targeted nodes and the fibers connecting them with a desired thickness, in this case of 500μm (Fig. 6
                        ). With the above information, slice preparations containing functionally connected neuronal populations can be produced using conventional vibratomes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In the present work a framework has been developed to perform neurosurgery planning in experimental animals with multiple applications in neuroscience. It allows both individualized and group-level information on functional and anatomical connectivity to guide experimental design and execution. We have first used the framework to extract individualized coordinates to implant a stimulating electrode in the core of the nucleus accumbens or inject the paramagnetic neuronal-tract tracer manganese in the fore-limb region of the rat somatosensory cortex. Then, we have automatically extracted the functional and anatomical connectivity patterns from the respective electric-stimulation fMRI and MEMRI experiments. Furthermore, we have introduced the concept of connectivity fingerprints and shown the possibility to derive the precise stereotaxic coordinates for the nodes constituting these networks. Similar experiments are envisioned based on diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), resting-state fMRI or volume based morphometry, to guide multi-electrode implantations in vivo, as an example. Finally, the possibility to use in vivo tract-tracing to image fiber trajectories between interconnected regions is used by the developed framework to extract the optimal sample orientation for slicing brain tissue while preserving neuronal connections of interest. Therefore the developed framework, combined with state of the art methodologies for non-invasive and longitudinal imaging of neuronal circuits, opens new avenues for understanding brain structure and function in health and disease.

The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank Adam J. Schwarz (Translational Imaging, Exploratory and Program Medicine, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, USA) for his fruitful collaboration providing us the initial digital multislice 2D rat brain atlas. We also thank Begoña Fernández for her excellent technical assistance. The authors are grateful to Guillermina López-Bendito, Graciela Navarro and Henrik Gezelius for their help with intra-vitreal manganese injections and Jesús Pacheco for MRI assistance. This work was supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Plan Nacional de I+D+I (CSD2007-00023, BFU2009-09938 and PIM2010ERN-00679 part of the Era-Net NEURON TRANSALC project), and by the Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (MINECO) and by FEDER funds under Grant TEC2012-33778.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

