@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Building a National Electronic Medical Record Exchange System – Experiences in Taiwan

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Electronic medical record (EMR) can support a secure, real-time, point-of-care, patient centric information resource for clinical care.


                        
                        
                           
                           Taiwan's government has been promoting the EMR adoption since 2000.


                        
                        
                           
                           We describe the EMR adoption strategies, current progress in EMR development, and our practical experience and lessons learned in implementing the EMR exchange system in Taiwan.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Electronic medical record

Health information exchange

National Health Insurance

Health smart card

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  There are currently 501 hospitals and about 20,000 clinics in Taiwan. The National Health Insurance (NHI) system, which is operated by the NHI Administration, uses a single-payer system and covers 99.9% of the nation's total population of 23,000,000. Taiwan's NHI provides people with a high degree of freedom in choosing their medical care options. However, there is the potential concern that the available medical resources will be overused. The number of doctor consultations per person per year is about 15. Duplication of laboratory tests and prescriptions are not rare either. Building an electronic medical record exchange system is a good method of solving these problems and of improving continuity in health care.
                  In November 2009, Taiwan's Executive Yuan passed the ‘Plan for accelerating the implementation of electronic medical record systems in medical institutions’ (2010–2012; a 3-year plan). According to this plan, a patient can, at any hospital in Taiwan, by using his/her health insurance IC card and physician's medical professional IC card, upon signing a written agreement, retrieve all important medical records for the past 6 months from other participating hospitals. The focus of this plan is to establish the National Electronic Medical Record Exchange Centre (EEC). A hospital's information system will be connected to the EEC through an electronic medical record (EMR) gateway. The hospital will convert the medical records for the past 6 months in its EMR system into standardized files and save them on the EMR gateway. The most important functions of the EEC are to generate an index of all the XML files on the EMR gateways of all hospitals, and to provide search and retrieval services for hospitals and clinics. The EEC provides four standard inter-institution EMR retrieval services covering medical imaging reports, laboratory test reports, discharge summaries, and outpatient records. In this system, we adopted the Health Level 7 (HL7) Clinical Document Architecture (CDA) standards to generate clinical documents and Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) Cross-enterprise Document Sharing (XDS) profile for the communication infrastructure.
                  By December of 2014, the number of hospitals that provide an inter-institution EMR exchange service had reached 321. Hospitals that had not joined the service were all smaller ones with less than 100 beds.
                  Inter-institution EMR exchange can make it much easier for people to access their own medical records, reduce the waste of medical resources, and improve the quality of medical care. The implementation of an inter-institution EMR exchange system faces many challenges. This article provides Taiwan's experiences as a reference.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The WHO defines eHealth as “the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) for health” [1]. Examples include treating patients, conducting research, educating the health workforce, tracking diseases and monitoring public health. Because eHealth can increase the accessibility of medical care and reduce costs, it can have a far-reaching impact, particularly for developing countries and disadvantaged ethnic groups [2]. The WHA held on May 23, 2005 in Geneva passed a eHealth Resolution (WHA 2005) urging member countries to create eHealth development plans and an implementation focus [3].

Electronic medical records constitute a critical component of eHealth. As governments commit to national EMR systems, there is increasing international interest in developing effective implementation strategies. Coiera identifies three approaches to national EMR implementations, which he categorizes as ‘top-down’, ‘bottom-up’ and ‘middle-out’ [4,5]. A top-down approach is directed by government, with the central procurement of standardized healthcare IT systems to replace existing diverse systems and the aim of centrally stored and shared EMRs. He gave England's National Programme for Information Technology (NPfIT) as an exemplar of this approach [6]. In contrast, the bottom-up model relies on local healthcare organizations taking responsibility for making their existing and any newly acquired healthcare IT systems compliant with interoperability standards. Multiple EMRs are held locally, but the intention is that data will become accessible from other settings as diverse local systems become integrated over time. Coiera presented the USA as an example of this approach. The middle-out approach has elements of both the top-down and bottom-up strategies. It combines local consultation, systems choice and investment with central government support and nationally agreed interoperability standards and goals. Local healthcare providers retain responsibility for choosing their EHR systems and for complying with national standards in order to exchange information with other healthcare providers. Coiera identified the Australian strategy of focusing on standards rather than government implementations of IT as an example of the middle-out approach [7].

Jha examined rates of electronic health record (EHR) use in ambulatory care and hospital settings, along with activities in health information exchange (HIE) in seven countries: the United States (U.S.), Canada, United Kingdom (UK), Germany, Netherlands, Australia, and New Zealand (NZ). They found that many countries have achieved high levels of ambulatory EHR adoption but lagged with respect to inpatient EHR and HIE [8].

In recent years, Taiwan's government has aggressively developed various forms of eHealth, including tele-health [9], HIE, and other services. HIE is one of the core components of eHealth. It can help a medical team make better and more appropriate clinical decisions by utilizing the ICT technology to transmit, in real time, patient's health care information to any medical team that requires it. Past research indicated that an EMR system can help to increase the quality of medical care, enhance patient safety, lower medical costs, and so on [10,11].

This article will share Taiwan's implementation experiences through its development strategies and current achievements in promoting a nationwide EMR exchange system.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

There are currently 501 hospitals and about 20,000 clinics in Taiwan. Medical expenses account for about 6–7% of the country's GDP, which is lower than the levels of OECD and regional countries. The National Health Insurance system, which is operated by the National Health Insurance Administration, uses a single-payer system and covers 99.9% of the nation's total population of 23,000,000 [12]. Taiwan's National Health Insurance provides people with a high degree of freedom in choosing their medical care options, low medical service costs, and excellent quality. It has received a higher than 80% satisfaction rate from the people, and is well praised by other countries [13,14]. However, the fast aging population, increased demands on medical services and medicinal supplies, as well as rising medical costs, have presented huge challenges to the long-term operation of the National Health Insurance system. Because the system has no gate keeper, the number of doctor consultations per person per year is about 15. Duplication of laboratory tests and prescriptions are not rare either [15]. Building an electronic medical record exchange system is a good method to solve these problems and to improve the continuity in providing medical care.

The promotion of eHealth in Taiwan and the launch of National Health Insurance are closely related. The electronic insurance claiming system was the first step for many medical institutions in going electronic. Because of the National Health Insurance Administration's active promotion efforts, electronic claims quickly reached 100% in 2000, the sixth year after the launch of the National Health Insurance program. Moreover, because of the catalytic effect of the electronic claiming, many medical institutions started to digitize other functions as well. The promotion of the Health Insurance IC card (Health Smart Card) is another important milestone of eHealth in Taiwan [16]. At the start of the National Health Insurance, paper-based health insurance cards were issued to each insured person. On the back of the paper-based health insurance card, there were six spaces with codes. During each doctor consultation, the medical institution would stamp one of these spaces. However, even though this method could prevent fraudulent claiming, it also wasted paper and printing costs. In 2004, the Health Insurance IC card was issued to replace the paper-based insurance card. Not only can the Health Insurance IC Card prevent fraudulent filing, but it can also log medical information. In addition, all the hospitals and clinics are connected with the National Health Insurance Administration through Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) (Fig. 1
                     ). This infrastructure later became an important component in implementing the nationwide EMR exchange system.

Taiwan's government started promoting an EMR system in 2000. At the beginning it conducted trials with a single individual hospital or in a small area. Though the results indicated that inter-institution EMR technology was feasible, because the trials were focused on an individual hospital or a small area, they did not provide global infrastructure planning and good EMR exchange and communication mechanisms. Considering the high initial costs of building an EMR system and the absence of immediate benefits, there were few incentives for medical institutions to implement an EMR system and EMR exchange. Thus, the nationwide implementation faced a great challenge.

Medical institutions in Taiwan can be classified as primary care clinics and hospitals. The hospitals can be further divided into district hospitals, regional hospitals, and medical centers according to their level of medical techniques, and capacity to provide medical services (from the lowest to the highest). The Taiwan Joint Commission on Hospital Accreditation conducts a re-assessment of a hospital's classification once every 3 years. Since the launch of the National Health Insurance plan, the insurance claims have been almost completely digitized. Relevant information is automatically uploaded to the data center at the National Health Insurance Administration within 24h after each doctor consultation and a summary report of all medical expenses is filed with the agency once every month.

In addition to the health insurance IC cards for the general population, the Ministry of Health and Welfare also issued medical personnel IC cards and established an electronic certification center providing an electronic signature service. The Ministry of Health and Welfare also established the ‘Regulations Governing the Creation and Management of EMR Systems at Medical Institutions’ as the legal guidelines for the implementation of EMR systems by medical institutions.

In November 2009, The Executive Yuan passed the ‘Plan for accelerating the implementation of electronic medical record systems in medical institutions’ (2010–2012; a 3-year plan). When the plan is fully implemented, a patient will be able to, at any one hospital, by using his or her health insurance IC card and physician's medical certificate IC card, upon signing a written agreement, retrieve complete important medical records for the past 6 months from other participating hospitals. The Ministry of Health and Welfare also set up an EMR Development Committee in 2010 to draft policies for promoting EMR systems, establish relevant exchange and communication standard specifications, approve annual plans and assess the results. The EMR Development Committee consists of 20 members, including six government officials (30%), 10 representatives from industry (including hospitals) (50%), and four members from academic research institutions (20%). The deputy minister of the Ministry of Health and Welfare serves as the chairperson of the committee.

Concerning the protection of the privacy of health information, Taiwan does not have a set of regulations such as those of the HIPAA in the U.S [17,18]. However, there are clear regulations included in the Medical Affair Act, and various specialized medical personnel laws such as the Physicians Act. Taiwan has strict specialized laws for personal data protection, which also contain regulations related to medical records and other health information.

Digitalization of hospitals is the foundation for implementing inter-institution EMR exchange. Led by the National Health Insurance, hospital digitization has been widely adopted in Taiwan. Most hospitals can reach levels 3 and 4 of the HIMSS EMR Adoption Model [19]. According to Taiwan's regulations, medical records created by a computer system should include digital signatures in order to satisfy the definition of an EMR [20,21] (Fig. 2
                     ). EMR systems implemented by Taiwan's hospitals use a template-based filing system. The admission note, discharge summary, operation note, etc., each count as one template [22]. A hospital in Taiwan could use hundreds of different medical record templates. Each and every template used by a hospital needs to be reported to and filed with the local health bureau. Once the filing is completed, the hospital is qualified to connect with the national EEC and no longer needs to print out paper-based medical records. The EMR systems in the hospitals should comply with requirements related to the regulations governing the creation and management of EMRs. The standard concerning the format and content of an EMR template used within the hospital is not mandatory. Most hospitals have established their own medical records management committees. The content and format of the paper-based medical records and EMRs should be approved by such a committee at each hospital.

Each hospital's information system does not connect directly with the EEC. Instead, an EMR gateway connects a hospital's information system to the EEC. Hospitals convert the past 6 months’ medical records in their EMR systems into standard files and save them on their EMR gateways. The most important functions of the EEC are to generate an index of all the XML files on the EMR gateways of all hospitals, and to provide search and retrieval services for all hospitals and clinics. There are two versions of the EMR gateway. The one used by hospitals is the standard version and is capable of storing a hospital's own EMR XML files to be retrieved by other hospitals and clinics; it is also capable of retrieving others hospitals’ EMRs. Clinics use the simpler version, called Light Gateway, which is only capable of retrieving EMRs from other hospitals [23].

Currently, only four standard EMR exchange formats have been established, including medical imaging reports, laboratory test reports, discharge summaries, and outpatient records. The inter-institution exchange service is limited to these four types of medical records.

The EMR exchange mechanism allows a patient, using a health insurance IC card, to ask a doctor at hospital A to retrieve his or her medical records from hospital B. The patient scan sign a written agreement to authorize the doctor at hospital A to retrieve his/her medical records from hospital B (Fig. 3
                     ). After retrieving the records using the indexing system, if the doctor wants to save the records at hospital A, he must ask for further consent from the patient.

In this system, we used the HL7 CDA, Release 2 standards to generate clinical documents and the IHE XDS profile for the communication infrastructure [24,25]. The EMR gateway received clinical documents from the hospital information system, registered the metadata to the document registry (EEC), and stores them for 6 months. EEC stores metadata about each document stored in a repository (EEC gateway), including its source or location. There may be multiple repositories of documents indexed, but only one registry per clinical domain. Patient identification service was carried out by the NHI administration (Fig. 4
                     ).

Inter-institution EMR exchange can make it much easier for people to access their own medical records, reduce the waste of medical resources, and improve the quality of medical care. An EMR system that complies with the regulations of the law is the most important infrastructure [26]. By December of 2014, the number of hospitals that provide an inter-institution EMR exchange service had reached 321. The hospitals that had not joined the service were all smaller ones with less than 100 beds.

Inter-institution EMR exchange is the Holy Grail for the promotion of eHealth. It took 10 years to make the inter-institution EMR exchange possible in Taiwan. During this period of time, essential components were completed one by one – from the popularization of hospital information systems to the development of EMR's basic modules, the setup of a Healthcare Certification Authority (HCA), and the establishment of regulations governing the creation and management of EMR systems at medical institutions. The inter-institution EMR exchange in Taiwan uses the health insurance IC card as the certification for data retrieval. It also utilizes the VPN technology used previously for filing health insurance claims, thus reducing repeated investment costs.

Digitization of hospitals is an important foundation for promoting EMR exchange. The implementation of inter-institution EMR exchange is only possible when good EMR systems are available at all hospitals. EMR systems offer good incentives to hospitals by eliminating the need to print paper records, thus saving the costs of purchasing paper and printing. They can also help to reduce other administrative costs. In Asia, there are many large hospitals with more than 1000 beds which also serve more than 10,000 outpatients each day. Using paper medical records, the task of accurately retrieving 10,000 medical records, distributing them to each doctor, collecting them afterwards, and putting them back in the storage room, takes a huge amount of manpower. The implementation of EMR systems can save a lot of labor. According to the experience in Taiwan, hospitals have a strong incentive to introduce an EMR system because it is a highly cost effective investment.

It is more difficult to encourage hospitals to participate in an EMR exchange than to implement an EMR system, because sharing medical records with other hospitals or clinics does not produce a financial incentive [27,28]. Since Taiwan uses a single-payer system, 90% of the revenue of most hospitals comes from health insurance payments. Hospital accreditation classifies hospitals into three classes, and the amount of health insurance payments varies between the classes. Through the accreditation and health insurance payments, the government is able to demand that hospitals take steps to improve the quality of medical care and patient safety. In order to encourage hospitals to share medical records through the EMR exchange system, at the early stage, the government used the subsidy approach by providing direct subsidies to participating hospitals. However, in order to ensure the ongoing operation of inter-institution EMR exchange, the government must have regulatory powers over the hospitals backed by laws and institutions. The implementation of inter-institution EMR exchange can only be successfully accomplished by properly exercising the ‘carrot and stick approach’.

The ‘EMR Exchange Gateway (EEC GW)’ software can be downloaded free from the EEC's website (http://eec.mohw.gov.tw) and installed on computers owned by medical institutions. Most regular personal desktop computers (PCs) are sufficient to meet the hardware requirements. After installing the EEC GW software, the hospital can go to the EEC's website to apply for the interfacing process. The system only operates on an NHI VPN.

After the implementation of the inter-institution EMR exchange is complete, the Ministry of Health and Welfare will start to promote Personal Health Records (PHRs) and various other value-added applications such as developing a self-managed health management app based on the PHR [29]. A PHR will be integrated with an EMR and data from tele-health services in order to satisfy the 4P characteristics (preventive, predictive, participatory, and personalized) of the next generation of medical care service [30,31].

The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this article.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

