@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Cerebral arterial inflow assessment with 18F-FDG PET: Methodology and feasibility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We proposed the measurement of cerebral arterial inflow using 3-s bolus 18F-FDG brain PET acquisition.


                        
                        
                           
                           The arrival of the bolus in the field of view was calculated directly in list mode acquisition.


                        
                        
                           
                           Tubular structure enhancement filter was used to enhance vessels and a clustering step eliminated noise outside them.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     18F-fluorodeoxyglucose

Cerebral arterial blood flow

Hemodynamics

Positron emission tomography

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Positron emission tomography (PET) with 18fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) is increasingly used in neurology. The measurement of cerebral arterial inflow (QA) using 18F-FDG complements the information provided by standard brain PET imaging. Here, injections were performed after the beginning of dynamic acquisitions and the time to arrival (t0) of activity in the gantry's field of view was computed. We performed a phantom study using a branched tube (internal diameter: 4mm) and a 18F-FDG solution injected at 240mL/min. Data processing consisted of (i) reconstruction of the first 3s after t0, (ii) vascular signal enhancement and (iii) clustering. This method was then applied in four subjects. We measured the volumes of the tubes or vascular trees and calculated the corresponding flows. In the phantom, the flow was calculated to be 244.2mL/min. In each subject, our QA value was compared with that obtained by quantitative cine-phase contrast magnetic resonance imaging; the mean QA value of 581.4±217.5mL/min calculated with 18F-FDG PET was consistent with the mean value of 593.3±205.8mL/min calculated with quantitative cine-phase contrast magnetic resonance imaging. Our 18F-FDG PET method constitutes a novel, fully automatic means of measuring QA.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Positron emission tomography (PET) with 18fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) is widely used in brain imaging. The modality's quantitative accuracy has been improved by a number of technical innovations (e.g. hybrid PET/computed tomography (CT) gantries, high count rate crystals and fast electronics) and iterative reconstruction algorithms (e.g. ordered subset expectation maximization, OSEM) [1]. Moreover, 18F-FDG PET/CT brain imaging has been extensively standardized [2] and has proven value in many fields of neurology (e.g. dementia [3], movement disorders [4], epilepsy [5], brain tumors [6], acute stroke and carotid artery atherosclerosis [7]). In dementia (and particularly in Alzheimer's disease, AD), it has been shown that neurodegeneration is associated with hypometabolism in specific regions of the brain [8]. However, it is now acknowledged that cognitive impairment has a vascular component [9,10]. Nevertheless, Claassen et al. pointed out the discrepancies between the physiopathological hypothesis deduced from preclinical studies and clinical observations [11]. Indeed, impaired cerebral blood flow regulation is observed in murine models of AD [12] but not in AD patients [13,14]. In stroke, hypometabolism affects the infarcted core, which in turn is surrounded by an area of increased 18F-FDG uptake [15]. Moreover, knowledge of cerebral vascular anatomy and/or blood flow can provide useful clinical information in these diseases. In stroke, the use of common imaging techniques (such as perfusion CT and magnetic resonance imaging, MRI) has revealed that there is a decrease in cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the infarct core [16,17].

Metabolic changes in the brain PET images may be related to changes in both local perfusion [18] and cerebral arterial inflow (QA) [19]. In the present study, we propose a novel approach for measuring QA by tracking the first passage of 18F-FDG with a whole-body camera. The idea here is not to suggest a new PET examination but rather to obtain both hemodynamic and metabolic information during the same brain PET examination (with a view to exploring the coupling between cerebral metabolism and hemodynamics in the context of dementia).

The phantom designed to assess the accuracy of flow measurements consisted of a tube (inner diameter: 4mm) divided into 2 branches, each of which looped round a plastic cylinder before joining the other together (Fig. 1
                        ). The 18F-FDG solution activity concentration at the time of the acquisition was determined from activity measurement in the carotid arteries of five randomly selected patients who had undergone a dynamic 18F-FDG PET examination. Next, 150mL of this solution were placed in a Medrad Mark V injector (Medrad Inc., Warrendale, PA). The injection rate was set to 4.0mL/s.

To demonstrate the method's feasibility in a clinical context, we performed dynamic PET brain examinations of four subjects (mean age: 79±6y). Subjects fasted for at least 6h and a normal blood glucose level was confirmed before injecting a 18F-FDG bolus (315±55MBq; 4.93±0.6MBq/kg) a few seconds after the start of the acquisition. Velcro straps and a head brace were used to minimize head motion during the acquisition.

The study was approved by the local independent ethics committee (comité de protection des personnes Nord-Ouest II) and all subjects provided written, informed consent to participation.

All acquisitions in the present study were performed on a whole-body Biograph™ 6 gantry (Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). First, CT acquisitions (with a tube current of 240mAs, 130kV, in the absence of contrast agent) yielded 512×512images.

The Biograph™ is equipped with lutetium oxyorthosilicate crystals, each of which measures 4mm×4mm×20mm and is integrated into a 13×13 detector block. The PET has axial and transaxial fields of view (FOVs) of 162mm and 585mm, respectively. The PET detection was performed in three-dimensional (3D) mode. The maximum ring difference was 27 and the span was 11 [20]. Prompt events (i.e. random, scattered and true events) and random events (measured in a delayed window) from dynamic acquisitions were stored in real time in a PETLINK™ 32-bit list-mode (LM) file format (Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). The latter is constituted by a 1-ms-resolution data stream.

The arrival of 18F-FDG in the FOV (t0) was determined by studying the LM counting statistics. We computed the number of true+scattered events (by subtracting random events from prompt events). We then computed the derivative of the resulting curve. Given that random events are mainly due to activity outside the FOV, we considered that t0 corresponds to the time point at which the derivative was positive and the number of [true+scattered] events was greater than 0. The t0 value was computed directly from the LM data, in order to maintain the 1-ms-resolution.

Only events corresponding to the first 3s after t0 were binned into 3D sinograms. These sinograms were Fourier-rebinned [21], scatter-corrected [22] and reconstructed with attenuation-weighted OSEM [23] with the following parameters: 336×336 matrix with a zoom of 2 (voxel size: 1.02mm×1.02mm×2mm), 1 iteration and 8 ordered subsets. An isotropic 3D Gaussian post-filter (full width at half maximum: 5mm) was applied to each volume. Self-attenuation correction was performed with an attenuation map derived from the CT data [24].

The QA was measured by extracting the vascular volume filled with 18F-FDG during the first 3s after t0.

In a first step, each slice of a given volume was normalized against its most intense voxel; this not only compensates for non-constant axial sensitivity (due to the 3D acquisition) but also enhances the vascular signal and makes it constant across the entire PET volume. Secondly, vascular structures within this normalized volume were segmented by applying Frangi's method [25] and using ImageJ open-source software (version 1.47v) [26] and its Franji's plugin. Briefly, Frangi's method is a vessel enhancement technique that relies on local structure. It searches for geometrical structures that can be regarded as tubular by examining the local second-order ellipsoid. Minimum and maximum scales (defining the range of expected diameters) were set to 1 and 5mm, respectively.

Lastly, a clustering step (using the 3D Particle Analyzer plugin from ImageJ) extracted biggest connective structures and then removed residual noise after tubular enhancement. The QA was then computed by dividing the total volume extracted (corresponding to the number of extracted voxels multiplied by the voxel volume, i.e. 2.08mm3) by the acquisition time (i.e. 3s).

In order to validate our results of our 18F-FDG PET/CT blood flow measurement, we measured arterial CBF with phase-contrast MRI (cine-PC MRI) on the four subjects. The PET and MRI scans were performed less than 24h apart, in order to avoid the potentially confounding effects of intra-individual variations in blood flow.

Magnetic resonance images were acquired with a 3T Signa HDx magnetic resonance scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI). Intracerebral arterial blood flow was measured on axial images (acquired perpendicular to the direction of blood flow). Flow was measured quantitatively by 2D velocity-encoded cine-PC MRI (TR/TE=15/7ms; FOV=140mm×140mm; matrix size=256×128, flip angle=25°, one excitation, slice thickness=5mm, velocity-encoding value=100cm/s). Peripheral gating was used to cover the entire cardiac cycle, with retrospective synchronization of 32 quantitative, flow-encoded, images per cycle.

The cine-PC MRI data were analyzed using image processing software (http://www.tidam.fr). An optimized blood flow segmentation algorithm was used to semi-automatically extract the region of interest and compute the blood flow in the left and right internal carotids and the basilar trunk [27]. The arterial CBF was considered to be the sum of these three measurements.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The mean activity concentration measured in patients’ carotids was 238.6kBq/mL (range: 87.8–379.9kBq/mL); these data were used to choose the activity concentration of the 18F-FDG solution used in the phantom study (226.8kBq/mL at the time of the acquisition).

Phantom images are shown in Fig. 2
                        . Fig. 2a depicts the raw PET image, whereas Fig. 2b presents the results of vascular enhancement using Franji's method. Fig. 2c shows the image after clustering had been used to eliminate residual noise around the tubular structure.

Tubular volume extraction gave a total volume of 12.2mL, corresponding to a flow of 4.07mL/s.


                        Fig. 3
                         presents the segmented arteries from one subject. As with the phantom images, Fig. 3a presents the raw PET image; Fig. 3b shows the vascular enhancement using Frangi's method and Fig. 3c is the final result of the clustering step. Fig. 3d corresponds to the fusion of Fig. 3c and the corresponding CT image, confirming the anatomical location of the carotids and the vertebral arteries. The internal carotids appear within the temporal bone on either side of the sphenoid sinus, whereas the vertebral arteries appear in front of the cerebellopontine angle upstream of their junction inside the basilar trunk.

The mean QA was calculated to be 581.4±217.5mL/min and 593.3±205.8mL/min using the 18F-FDG PET/CT and cine-PC MRI methods, respectively. The results for each individual subject are given in Table 1
                        .

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Cerebral blood flow is known to account for about 15% of cardiac blood flow. For many years, the conventional PET-based measurement of CBF relied on radioactive elements with short periods (especially 15O) and high activities (typically more than 800MBq) [28,29], produced in a cyclotron connected to the PET examination room and thus was restricted to certain centers. Furthermore, estimation of the CBF is based on compartmental models [30] and thus is subject to potential pitfalls.

In view of the growing worldwide burden linked to neurological disease, it seems logical to try to perform neurological PET examinations with the most commonly available radiopharmaceutical: 18F-FDG. Although metabolic studies have been widely performed for several years, hemodynamic measurements during the same session can provide additional information about the brain's condition. For example, knowledge of QA could reinforce or weaken vascular hypotheses in the context of neurodegenerative disease. Although the pathophysiological mechanism of AD has not yet been clearly established, the presence of marked carotid artery atherosclerosis in AD patients has prompted a much-debated vascular hypothesis [31]. Moreover, Silvestrini et al. recently stated that cerebral hemodynamic evaluation could be applied to identify patients at high risk of rapid cognitive decline [32]. Our method might be able to confirm or refute this hypothesis by demonstrating the presence or absence of differences in QA in a healthy population vs. a cohort of cognitively impaired individuals. Hemodynamic assessments might also be useful applied in the field of stroke, in order to probe the relationship between QA and the infarcted area's uptake patterns in a single examination.

In the present study, we developed a novel approach for measuring cerebral hemodynamics with 18F-FDG PET on a whole-body PET camera. This became possible thanks to technical advances (notably in term of crystals and fast electronics) which have enabled the production of sensitive gantries with good spatial resolution [33]. Moreover, this method is not limited to 18F-FDG but can also be applied to 18F-labeled radiotracers that are more specific for neurodegenerative diseases (e.g. 18F-florbetapir, 18F-flutemetamol).

We first performed phantom experiments. The diameter (4mm) of the phantom tube corresponded to the average diameter of the main cerebral arteries (between 3 and 5mm) [34]; this enabled us to set up the different parameters involved in each step of our process. The activity concentration was based on values from previous patient studies. The flow was set to 4mL/s; this corresponded to a value of 240mL/min, which is similar to that observed in one internal carotid artery in healthy subjects [35].

In order to synchronize the bolus’ arrival in the FOV with our data processing step, we started LM acquisition before the 18F-FDG injection and then computed the bolus’ time arrival in the FOV (t0). The effective data acquisition time of 3s was a trade-off between having enough counting statistics for reconstruction (i.e. more than 1000 true+scattered events in our system) and ensuring that the leading edge of the bolus remained in the FOV. Moreover, considering the short effective data acquisition time and the length of the main cerebral arteries [34,36], we can reasonably assume that the 18F-FDG remained in the arterial part of the vascular tree. Thus, the activity seen around the arteries on the native PET image is probably due to lutetium's intrinsic radioactivity and reconstruction inaccuracies (e.g. due to the low number of iterations). Given the small counting statistics, eight iterations enabled us to avoid the introduction of high frequencies (corresponding to edges but mainly to noise) into reconstructed images. In fact, quantization is not crucial in this context, since our approach equates to structural imaging of the vascular tree. Furthermore, to minimize partial volume effect and then volume extraction inaccuracies, the matrix size was set to 336×336voxels with zoom of 2 (i.e. 1.02mm×1.02mm×2mm).

The Frangi's plugin used to process PET images in the present study was based on work by Sato et al., who studied brain segmentation of vessel diameters for CT and MRI modalities [37]. We applied this algorithm to PET images, in which the noise structure differs from that found in CT or morphological MRI datasets. A clustering step was required to remove noise that mimicked tubular structures (Fig. 2a). Our method is fully automated (with automatic determination of the volume of interest that corresponds to the vascular compartment) and therefore is not operator-dependent.

The QA measured with 18F-FDG PET was similar to that measured with cine-PC MRI, which is now acknowledged as a valid modality for blood flow assessment [38]. Literature data show that CBF decreases with age [39]. Even though the present work was a feasibility study, we found the same trend for the four subjects studied (Fig. 4
                     ).

Our method would be helpful for compartmental model analysis, which involves the determination of sanguine and tissue fractions.

Our feasibility study investigated only four subjects. Future research will have to extend this work to larger populations (of both patients and healthy controls) and thus to the full range of possible QA profiles.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In summary, we have developed a novel, fully automatic, PET-based method for QA measurement using 18F-labeled radiotracers. The method provides vascular information in addition to conventional metabolic data and was first validated in a phantom study. The 18F-FDG PET results in a small number of individuals were consistent with the QA values derived by cine-PC MRI.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors wish to thank Dr. David Fraser (Biotech Communication, Damery, France) for his helpful advice on the English language in this paper. We also wish to thank Dr. Roger Bouzerar and Dr. Olivier Baledent for help with the validation of our results.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

