@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
               In silico attempt for adduct agent(s) against malaria: Combination of chloroquine with alkaloids of Adhatoda vasica
            

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Malaria is endemic in the majority of tropical countries and to control strains of Plasmodium falciparum resistant to chloroquine and quinine, newer agents are needed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Today, artemisinin based drugs are in use, but artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum has been reported in several Asian countries.


                        
                        
                           
                           The molecular docking method of combining chloroquine with 5 alkaloids, individually of the medicinal plant, Adhatoda vasica is presented for the control drug resistant P. falciparum.


                        
                        
                           
                           This in silico work helped to locate the ‘adduct agent-1with chloroquine and adhatodine’, for further use as a new drug, against drug resistant Plasmodium.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Anti-malarial adduct agent(s)

Chloroquine




                     Adhatoda vasica




                  

Alkaloids




                     In silico study

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  With the aim of controlling drug resistant Plasmodium falciparum, a computational attempt of designing novel adduct antimalarial drugs through the molecular docking method of combining chloroquine with five alkaloids, individually is presented. These alkaloids were obtained from the medicinal plant, Adhatoda vasica. From the obtained individual docking values of important derivatives of quinine and chloroquine, as well as, individual alkaloids and adduct agents of chloroquine with Adhatoda alkaloids as ligands, it was discernible that the ‘adduct agent-1 with chloroquine and adhatodine’ combination had the minimum energy of interaction, as the docking score value of −11.144kcal/mol against the target protein, triosephosphate isomerase (TIM), the key enzyme of glycolytic pathway. Drug resistance of P. falciparum is due to a mutation in the polypeptide of TIM. Moratorium of mutant TIM would disrupt the metabolism during the control of the drug resistant P. falciparum. This in silico work helped to locate the ‘adduct agent-1 with chloroquine and adhatodine’, which could be taken up by pharmacology for further development of this compound as a new drug against drug resistant Plasmodium.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Among malaria prevalent Indian states, Odisha was estimated having 22% prevalence of malaria approximately a decade ago of which, about 41% were due to Plasmodium falciparum, along with Plasmodium vivax as the second most important parasitic species [1]. Prevalent values of P. falciparum are reported varying from 40 to 60 to 80 to 100 cases in 1000 people in different states of the Indian terra firma, including Assam and adjoining states, among countries of South East Asia [2]. Thus, malaria is endemic in the majority of Indian states, being linked mainly to living conditions of marginalized people, who live below the poverty line in societies of rustics and aborigines as well as, slum ghettoes [3], where there from it spreads all over. Apart from South East Asia, countries at/near the equator, Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America too have high prevalence of malaria [4], since the tropical climate remains conducive to survival of mosquitoes. For instance in 2012, malaria caused an estimated 627000 deaths (with an uncertainty range of 473000–789000) all over, including African children [4]. Moreover, non-immune travellers from malaria-free areas are remarkably vulnerable to the disease on being bitten by the mosquito Anopheles.

The option for malaria treatment is limited to alkaloids (chloroquine and other derivatives of quinine, 8-aminoquinolines, preferably primaquine) from 2 to 3 species of Cinchona, as well as, recently introduced artemisinin and derivatives from Artemisia annua. In the revised WHO directives since 2001, several regimens of artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT), with derivatives of artemisinin and/or quinine are in use. In an ACT formulation, one of artemisinin-based compounds, dihydroartemisinin, artesunate and artemether is combined with one of the following drugs, lumefantrine, mefloquine, amodiaquine, sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine, piperaquine and chlorproguanil/dapsone; but, artemether is the principal compound most often. ACTs are quite promising in treating malaria due to both species of Plasmodium, and have an additional public health benefit of reducing the overall malaria transmission. In India particularly nowadays, the revised ACT policy consists the use of ‘artemether+lumefantrineis’, as drugs in seven North Eastern states. In other states, the ACT formulation ‘artesunate+sulphadoxinepyremethamine’ is used for P. falciparum cases. And an ACT with chloroquine is totally effective for P. vivax cases. In India, the current drug policy of ACT in case of drug resistant malaria consists of sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine at 25 and 1.25mg/kg body weight, respectively on the first day, along with artesunate (a semi-synthetic derivative of artemisinin) at 4mg/kg body weight daily for 3 days [5].

However in 2008, soon after the start of wide use of artemisinin in 2007, artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum was first reported from the Cambodia–Thailand border and, it is now prevalent in Cambodia, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam. In India too, like other South East Asian countries, artemisinin resistant P. falciparum cases are detected in 10% malaria cases. Eventually, the consternation of the future failure of the current ACT stems from the rapid spread of artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum. Moreover, in the pre-referral treatment for severe malaria, the role of quinine and chloroquine has now become questionable due to the resistance in P. falciparum and P. vivax; nonetheless in India, quinine and derivatives continue to play a critical role in the control. In the perspective of comparative effectiveness research, attempts for locating suitable compounds to overcome the drug resistance in malaria could be undertaken, with the modern tools of bioinformatics with the spectacular advances in molecular biology of protein structure and phytochemistry, to state contemplatively. Currently developed in silico attempts presented here, using two phytochemicals as a ligand in a molecular combination against a parasitic protein as the target, might open a novel/alternate option with the combined phytochemicals as adduct drug(s) for the control of malaria.

Specifically in those regions where Cinchona alkaloids are used, chloroquine resistance in P. falciparum increased to a greater proportion [6], for example at 49% of the total burden in 2007 in India was recorded [7]. Cinchona alkaloids as drugs cause moratorium of the synthesis of a key enzyme, triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) in the glycolytic pathway of the parasite in its intra-erythrocytic stage; TIM catalyzes the reversible isomerization of dihydroxy-acetone 3-phosphate to d-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The evolutionary mutation of the TIM in P. falciparum is one of the major causes of drug resistance [6,8,9]. The amino acid glutamate is replaced by glutamine in the mutated form, at the position-97 of the polypeptide chain in the normal TIM [10]. The structure and biochemistry of TIM are well documented [8,9,11] and TIM can be used as the suitable target protein for drug-designing against P. falciparum. Since, resistance of P. falciparum is due to a mutation in the polypeptide of TIM, the moratorium of mutant TIM would disrupt the metabolism during the control of the drug resistant P. falciparum.

Side effects of the presently used antimalarial drugs are summarized (Table 1
                     ). Ghoulish strains of P. falciparum, causing frequent cerebral malaria are resistant to drugs, chloroquine and quinine derivatives in several endemic areas [6,7,18], resulting in treatment failures. Furthermore, the cavalcade of critical side-effects, such as the induction of hypoglycemia and neurological disorders of the existing antimalarial drugs, demands search for novel, effective and well-tolerated drugs.

A comparative effectivity-account of drugs, chloroquine, quinine and quinine-derivatives on the normal and mutated TIM species for the inhibition of cellular energy production is described in this paper, using the molecular docking tool of bioinformatics. The formation of adduct agents of chloroquine and individual alkaloids from the Indian antimalarial plant, Adhatoda vasica Nees (family, Acanthaceae) was examined, against normal and mutant TIM, in protein–ligand interactions, wherein adduct agents of chloroquine and individual alkaloids serve as ligands against TIM, the larger target protein. A. vasica also has unique alkaloids, adhatodine, anisotin, vasicine, vasicinone and vasicolinone for which probably, this plant has been in use for the control of malaria [19–21]. Consequently, involving the enzyme TIM in the further drug development cascade would be the prudent approach. The present work on in silico computation would help locating a suitable adduct agent without the hit-and-miss method, generally followed in drug targeting attempts in vivo by apothecary. Secondly, adducts (conjugates) used are regarded as adjuvants, i.e., substances that modulate the effect of the active substance, however by themselves are not active. In this study, Adhatoda-alkaloids lent themselves as adduct molecules in modulating the effect of quinine and its derivatives individually as coveted adduct-combinations for mutated TIM of drug resistant P. falciparum, computationally.

Crystallographic protein structures of both normal TIM and the mutant variant of P. falciparum were selected and retrieved from protein databank (PDB) (http://www.rcsb.org); the PDB ID: 1YDV is of the normal TIM and the PDB ID: 3PSW is of the mutant TIM, which were used for docking attempts (Fig. 1
                     ). Three-dimensional structures of the current drugs, quinine and chloroquine along with quinine derivatives, acetylquinine, quinine ethylcarbonate, quinine phosphate and quinine valerate as well as, the alkaloids of A. vasica, adhatodine, anisotin, vasicine, vasicinone and vasicolinone were retrieved from databases, PubChem (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pccompound) and ChemSpider (http://www.chemspider.com/). All downloaded compounds were converted from .sdf (dot sdf) to .pdb (dot pdb) files, to facilitate the protein–ligand interactions by softwares, ArgusLab 4.0, AutoDock Vina 4.1 and Discovery studio visualizer 3.1. Combination or adduct forms of chloroquine and individually with five alkaloids were formulated by using ChemSketch software. Softwares, ArgusLab 4.0 and AutoDock Vina 4.1 were used for docking attempts and energy calculations.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Alkaloids of Cinchona sp. have preventive and curative/controlling effects on infection by Plasmodium sp. The detailed chemical information and 3D structures of chloroquine and quinine as well as, four quinine derivatives, acetylquinine, quinine ethylcarbonate, quinine phosphate and quinine valerate are presented (Tables 2 and 3
                     
                     ). Similarly, information of five Adhatoda alkaloids, adhatodine, anisotin, vasicine, vasicinone and vasicolinone was retrieved from the PubChem database (Table 4
                     ). Furthermore, five adduct formulations of chloroquine with individual Adhatoda alkaloids were documented with chemical 2D structures of individual chemicals as well as, adduct formulations with their chemical formulae (Table 5
                     ). Thus, five adduct formulations (chloroquine and individual five alkaloids of A. vasica) were formulated and used for molecular docking work. The docking score values of chloroquine, quinine and their derivatives and adduct formulations against the normal TIM version and the mutant TIM version were recorded (Table 6
                     ).

Three-dimensional construction of protein–ligand interaction of the adduct-1 is demonstrated (Fig. 2
                     ). Molecular docking results of individual Cinchona-alkaloids generated as docking score values with the minimum energy of interaction, for each ligand are presented. For quinine and its derivatives as ligands, docking score values were around −9 to −8kcal/mol; with the highest docking score value, −9.1727kcal/mol for the normal TIM with chloroquine (Fig. 3
                     ). Invariably, all the adduct formulations designed here have the least docking score values with the mutant TIM, in comparison to the normal TIM. For example, the ‘adduct agent-1 with chloroquine and adhatodine’ was more effective with the docking score value, −11.1445kcal/mol, in comparison to that of chloroquine alone having −8.59kcal/mol, against the mutant TIM (Fig. 3).

Molecular docking is a computational approach to locate and verify novel agents for protein–ligand interaction studies, theoretically. The docking score values are based on the minimum energy required for binding a receptor protein as the target and a ligand together; the latter is the future drugable molecule. The main goal of a docking attempt or the in silico computation is to minimize resources and time to be consumed in laboratory trials, during identification of a suitable drug against a disease, herein malaria in principles of comparative effectiveness research. The present computational approach in designing adducts gave a new idea on the pattern of future drugs for the grievous malaria, due to the mutant P. falciparum that could be useful to the drug development sector. Obviously, preparing some avant-garde drug is the coveted goal at least in anti-malaria crusade, today in tropics worldwide, particularly wherein mosquito control is at stake, for example [22]. Moreover, docking attempts predicted the formation of adduct formulations that may overcome the drug resistance problem in malaria [23].

The computational approach of docking of a small molecule, as the ligand, into the structure of a macromolecular protein target, herein TIM, and concomitant recording of scores of the potential complementarity of the small molecule to a suitable binding site of the macromolecule could be used in drug-targeting. The docking process involves the computational prediction of conformation of the ligand and its orientation (or posing) within a suitable binding site of the macromolecule. In general, the aim of a docking study is to predict correctly the activity of the ligand, may be even, the adduct molecule for an enhancement of antimalarial activity. As it is known, evaluation of activity and conformation of the ligand are the crucial aspects of structure-based virtual screening [23,24], as done here.

The docking score values, binding energy estimations of the conformation of ‘ligand and target’, during binding are fit to reproduce experimental data as a sum of several parameterized functions [24]. This is the actual aim of molecular docking, which facilitates a suitable conformation of an adduct agent with the target. The empirical docking score values from individual interactions between target and individual ligands could be compared. Computationally, a force-field of the macromolecule (target protein) facilitates the ligand to fit to its suitable binding site during generation of an adduct formulation. The score value is based on the minimum energy involved in the interaction in between the target and individual ligands. Thus, the minimum-most docking score value of any interaction signifies the highest activity against the target. The docking score values remain in the negative sign, which signifies that more the negative value is the greater the potentiality/efficiency of the ligand is [23,24].

Furthermore, antimalarial drugs have been too isolated from other plants, Erythrina abyssinica and nine species of Uvaria. Recently from African flora, more than eight plants have been reported to have potentiality as sources of antimalarial drugs [25]. In a holistic approach, extracts from 178 Bolivian plants had been screened and several extracts had been recorded to possess antimalarial compounds [26].

In parallel, attempts for vaccine development for malaria had been undertaken. Strategically, the vaccines belong to three categories — mainly attenuated microbes, killed microbes or protein subunits. Those are mostly developed by the synthesis of categorical proteins, using directly even recombinant-DNA tools, for viral diseases. Moreover, 12 approaches to develop vaccines for malaria have been summarized and, the involvement of adduct formulation, including exceptional levels of antibodies, e.g., ‘AS01′ and ‘RTS,S’ vaccines have been developed [26]. But, situations of vaccine development for malaria remain complicated because of the involvement of a vector as well as, unknown mechanisms to evade the response in the parasite, resulting in the survival of infection. As expected, developed vaccines may stimulate an antibody production without any importance in human T-cell [27]. Thus, it being a eukaryotic parasite, the development of vaccines remains a remote possibility.

As an example, the use of crude leaf-extract of the medicinal plant Combretum albidum was documented as having a synergistic action with the antibiotic ceftriaxone on the in vitro control of ceftriaxone-resistant pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa, isolated from clinical samples [28]. The alkaloid berberine (from several plants, species of Berberis, Tinospora, Argemone and a few more) in combination with antibiotics, ampicillin or oxacillin was used in demonstrating synergistic control over the superbug of the health domain, methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
                     [29]. Similarly, phytochemicals were used in a combination with hypoglycemic drugs in the control of diabetes mellitus [30] as well as, the growth of chemo-resistant colon cancer stem cells was synergistically controlled in vitro by the combination of dasatinib and the phytochemical curcumin [31].

The implication of this study is that could it is an example for the development of antibiotics/drugs and a phytochemical in combinations, to be used in several health ailments, such as cancer and controlling multidrug resistant bacterial pathogens. In the present study, designing of an adduct agent with two phytochemicals, chloroquine and adhatodine are suggested with the modern tool of computational drug discovery that should be comparatively more feasible, with uses of techniques of medicinal chemistry, since drugs are modified more often than imagined. This work is based on the vantage point of structure-ligand based in silico molecular screening before attempting chemical-combination attempts for a viable formulation — a unique tool in computational skills developed recently. Moreover, chloroquine and adhatodines have binding sites in the mammalian organism that can be predicted based on their known effects [32,33]. Therefore, binding studies like the one described in this article can be used on mammalian enzymes, to aid the prediction of potential off-target effects and design further applications for the adducts. Clearly, this work would save time and resources in the real drug-designing module by apothecary for this dreadful infection.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Based on docking score values, it was recorded here that adduct agents were more effective than the individual Cinchona alkaloids against mutant TIM. The ‘adduct-1 formulation with chloroquine and adhatodine’ had the effective docking score value, −11.144kcal/mol, in comparison to that of chloroquine alone with the score value, −8.59kcal/mol, against the mutant TIM; the adduct-1 formulation too had the highest docking score value than those of the rest other adduct formulations or Cinchona alkaloids, individually against mutant TIM. Thus, the adduct-1 formulation could be further pursued in pharmacology, for the verification of the findings recorded herein.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

S.S. Swain is a JRF in a MRP in Botany from UGC, New Delhi (grant no. 39-388/2010/SR).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

