@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Development of InSb dry etch for mid-IR applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Chlorine-free low-temperature dry etch of MBE grown InSb on GaAs


                        
                        
                           
                           60° positive sloped or nearly vertical etch depending on mask


                        
                        
                           
                           Non-selective process etching through Insb, GaSb and GaAs


                        
                        
                           
                           Low damage process with potential to replace standard InSb wet etch


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Inductive coupled plasma

Etching

III–V semiconductors

InSb

GaSb

Microfabrication

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               Graphical abstract
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the medium infrared (mid-IR) wavelength range, indium antimonide (InSb), has a high potential for sensing applications and InSb-based Focal Plane Arrays (FPAs) have been demonstrated [1] and commercialised. InSb patterning techniques typically utilise wet-chemical etching, with solutions based on citric acid (C6H8O7), water (H2O) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) being established wet etchants for antimonides [2]. However, the introduction of a consistent and reliable dry etch process could improve several drawbacks encountered with wet etching, such as uniformity and galvanic corrosion issues [3] and the fact that its isotropic nature also limits the minimum pixel size and the fill factor of fabricated detector arrays. Dry etching of InSb was reported in several publications [4–6], and in most cases was achieved through an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) process involving chlorine-containing compounds such as BCl3 and Cl2 
                     [7,8]. However, their use for etching of InSb causes the formation of highly non-volatile indium chloride (InCl3) by-products, which require temperatures in excess of 200°C to be successfully purged. InSb epi-structures grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) on gallium arsenide (GaAs) substrates, which have been subject of increased research interest in recent years, cannot withstand such high temperatures, since antimony desorption phenomena are triggered and result in material degradation causing poor operation of the fabricated devices. In a similar way, the material can deteriorate if it is subject to strong radio frequency (RF) plasmas. These widely reported issues [9–11] make fabrication on MBE-grown InSb particularly challenging. Here we report on a new dry etch process which was successfully used on MBE-grown InSb without related damage. Furthermore, two different etch profiles were obtained depending on the type of mask used.

The structure of this work is the following: Section 2 describes the epi-structure of the material used and the development of technique presented. Section 3 discusses the main results, with the conclusions drawn from them presented in Section 4.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

The material structure used in this work, shown in Fig. 1
                     , was designed to achieve a monolithically integrated mid-IR pixel. It therefore consists of an InSb p–i–n structure for implementation of a mid-IR sensing photodiode (PD), and of an underlying MEtal Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor (MESFET) to be used for switching [12]. Since the PD and the MESFET are to be connected together but a significant non-planarity of the structure exists, a dry etch process able to provide positively sloped sidewalls was sought to facilitate metal interconnects. For the reasons explained in the Introduction, attention turned to chlorine free processes since they were more likely to work at room temperature. The most widely reported chlorine-free process suitable for dry etching of InSb was based on CH4/H2/Ar [13,14] therefore the same gas mixture was chosen as starting point for process development.

The tool used was the Plasmalab 100 Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) 180 etching tool from Oxford instruments. All samples etched were mounted on a 6inch silicon carrier wafer by means of thermal grease, to ensure a good thermal contact. Irreversible temperature indicators were placed on the carrier to monitor the maximum temperature reached in the chamber due to the etching plasma. Samples prepared for etching all underwent the same cleaning procedure consisting of OptiClear™, acetone, isopropyl alcohol soak and de-ionised (DI) water rinse prior to the definition of the mask. Ultrasonic baths were not used during the cleaning procedure in order to avoid inducing damage to the material. Tests were carried out using three types of masks: Silicon nitride (SiNx), deposited at room temperature in an ICP reactor; Hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ), a negative-tone resist patterned by electron beam lithography; and Shipley AZ4562 resist, a positive-tone photolithography resist. The outcome of each etch test was assessed in the first instance by a profilometer, then samples were cleaved and their cross-section examined by Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The etch tests carried out explored a range of chamber pressures, gas flows, ICP and RF power. The results from process optimisation for each of these masks are presented in the next section.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

For all of the investigated etch masks, the best results were obtained with an ICP power of 600W, an RF power of 150W, a chamber pressure of 15mT, and a table temperature of 110°C. These parameters provided a DC bias of −315V. The next subsections will present the results of the various types of etching masks used.

When an AZ4562 photoresist mask was used, the etch profile with a positive slope of approximately 60° shown by the SEM images in Fig. 2
                         was obtained, with a CH4/H2/Ar flow of 15/50/5sccm and a post-development hard bake of the AZ4562. Subjecting the resist mask to a hard bake between lithography and etching was found to be crucial to achieve a positively sloped etch profile; the subsequent resist reflow caused the mask to acquire a dome-shaped profile whose gradual erosion by the RF plasma translated into a sloped etch. This optimised recipe had an 80nm/min average etch rate on InSb and a selectivity of 2:1. The maximum sidewall roughness was estimated from SEM images to be approximately 50nm. This value is most likely due to a direct transfer of the edge roughness of the photoresist mask used, and could be improved by changes in the photoresist reflow process, such as the use of plasma assisted reflow [15] or by the addition of nitrogen to the etching RF plasma [16].

Long etches were also investigated, to assess the potential of the process to etch through the heterogeneous layers composing the material structure, and they proved the non-selectivity of the process for the etching of InSb, GaSb and GaAs, as Fig. 2c and d shows. The developed recipe also etched through the 20nm Al0.15In0.85Sb barrier layer whereas generally aluminium-containing III–V compounds act as etch stop layers for CH4/H2 chemistries [17]. The etching mechanism here is thought to be based on trimethylaluminium formation [18]. With regard to the etching of the InSb layers, despite previous work on different materials showing doping level-dependent etch characteristics [19] and plasma-induced doping type conversion [20], no change in etch rate or slope was observed between the p-doped, intrinsic, and n-doped InSb layers. Samples used for the long etch test were etched for 90min without cooling nitrogen purges in between, and the temperature indicators showed a temperature rising to approximately 145°C by the end of the run. Despite this temperature still well tolerated by our material, for etch rate consistency and etch controllability it is best if the temperature is kept constant through the etch process. This was found to be possible if 5min nitrogen purges were introduced every 15min of etching, in order to keep the chamber at the initial 110°C. Since this temperature is close to the glass transition of AZ4562 [21], the dry etch process is equivalent to a long hard bake, and resist removal following the etch process was found to be problematic. Long soaks in warm (50°C) acetone were found to be ineffective for mask removal, while SVC-14™ resist stripper provided better results, however leaving behind a significant amount of residues which required oxygen plasma to be cleared. Solvents containing n-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) such as MICROPOSIT 1165™ were not tested for AZ4562 removal since they were found to corrode the material epitaxial layers, something that was previously reported for other III–V materials [3]. A slight modification in the process which simplified stripping the resist post-etch was the use of a dual layer mask, consisting of LOR 10A underlying AZ4562. LOR series resists are based on polydimethylglutarimide and have a glass transition temperature of 180°C [22], well in excess of that of AZ4562 and also above the maximum temperature reached during the dry etch process. Fig. 3
                         compares post-etch SEM images from two samples after an overnight soak in SVC-14™, with the stripped mask consisting either of AZ4562 only (Fig. 3a) or of a dual layer of AZ4562 and LOR resists (Fig. 3b): a reduction in resist residue is clearly visible.

When the process parameters described in Section 3.1 were used to etch samples with a SiNx mask, an undercut profile was obtained, as shown in Fig. 4a. A nearly vertical profile (approximately 85 degrees) could instead be achieved with further dilution of the gases used, going from gas flow ratio of 15/50/5sccm to 9/36/3 ratio, which gave the results shown in Fig. 4b. In both cases the etch rate was lower than with the AZ4562 mask, with 57 and 53nm/min for the undercut and nearly vertical etch, respectively. Similar results were obtained by use of an HSQ mask, with the outcome shown in Fig. 4c and d. Again, the process employing more diluted gases provided an etch rate of 50nm/min and a slope of approximately 85°. The smooth profile of the sidewall is a further confirmation that the etch roughness observed for the AZ4562 resist was due to the mask roughness. The use of hard masks was not investigated further since the purpose of this work was to achieve a positively sloped etch to facilitate metal interconnects.

Ion bombardment experienced by the material during plasma processing can cause damage to the exposed surfaces [11] and result in poorer operation of devices fabricated by dry etch when compared to those not subject to RF plasmas. In order to assess the effect of the developed etch process on our material structure, we fabricated two batches of InSb PDs, with the only difference between them being the mesa etching step. The reference wet etched devices underwent the following fabrication processes: mesas were defined using standard photolithography techniques (Shipley Microposit S1818 series Photoresist), then the pattern was transferred onto the material by a subsequent wet etch in a solution of citric acid and hydrogen peroxide, a widespread wet etchant for InSb [2], targeting an etch depth of 3.5μm. The sizes of the fabricated mesa were squares with 800μm side for ease of probing/bonding. Following wet etch and resist strip, Ohmic contacts were defined at the same time for the n-doped and p-doped layers using a bi-layer of photoresist to lift off a Ti–Au film deposited by metal evaporation. The annealing of the contacts was not necessary thanks to the narrow band-gap of InSb (0.17eV at 300K). The fabrication flow for the dry etch devices was identical to the reference ones except that AZ4562 was used as photolithographic mask and that the sample was etched in the ICP 180 tool for 45min with the parameters mentioned in Section 3.1 to achieve a 3.5μm etch depth.

I–V characterisation at room temperature and at 77K was carried out for both samples, with the results shown in Fig. 5
                        . At 300K due to the narrow band-gap of InSb the I–V curve is dominated by thermally excited carriers and no rectification is present. A clear rectifying behaviour is instead observed at 77K. It was observed that the dry etched devices provided better device uniformity with regards to the current measured under reverse bias. At room temperature an average dark current of −2mA was measured under 5mV reverse bias for both wet etch and dry etch cases, decreasing to approximately 100μA (again for both cases) when the InSb PDs were cooled.

The wet etched and dry etched devices were also compared in terms of relative photoresponse at room temperature, measured by means of a Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR spectrometer. Fig. 6
                         compares the photocurrent spectra between wet etched and dry etched devices, and once again the results are comparable. The sudden drop in photoresponse at the wavelength of 4.2μm is caused by carbon dioxide absorption since the measurements were carried out in standard atmosphere.

From the I–V and photoresponse assessment it can be concluded that the inclusion of the developed dry etch process as part of the fabrication flow does not impair the electrical operation of the InSb PDs, nor their ability to detect the mid-IR light.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We developed a low-temperature chlorine-free dry etch process suitable for etching of MBE-grown InSb layers. The process proved its non-selectivity by etching through the entire material stack, consisting of InSb, GaSb and GaAs layers. A positively sloped etched profile was obtained if reflowed AZ4562 photoresist was used as a mask, whereas the use of hard masks (HSQ, SiNx) provided a nearly vertical etch. InSb PDs fabricated by standard wet etch techniques were compared to devices where the mesa was dry etched, and the developed process was found not to hinder the device conduction or its photoresponse. The developed process is thought to have the potential to replace the standard wet etch techniques used in antimonide fabrication.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by EPSRC (Grant No. EP/J018678/1 and EP/M01326X/1). The authors also wish to thank all the technical staff of James Watt Nanofabrication Centre (JWNC) at the University of Glasgow for their assistance.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

