@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The relationship between perceived value and information source use during KM strategic decision-making: A study of 17 Chinese business managers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examine information source use during KM strategic decision-making.


                        
                        
                           
                           We revised De Alwis et al.’s typology of information source preferences.


                        
                        
                           
                           Organizational context is highly determinative of information source use.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Information use

Information utilities

Knowledge management

Chinese business managers

Information source

Value

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The study explores the relationship between value attribution and information source use of 17 Chinese business managers during their knowledge management (KM) strategic decision-making. During semi-structured interviews, the Chinese business managers, half in the telecommunications sector and half in the manufacturing sector, were asked to rate 16 information sources on five-point Likert Scales. The 16 information sources were grouped into internal–external and personal–impersonal types. The participants rated the information sources according to five value criteria: relevancy, comprehensiveness, reliability, time/effort, and accessibility. Open-ended questions were also asked to get at how and why value attribution affected the participants’ use of one information source over another during decision-making. Findings show that the participants preferred internal–personal type of information sources over external–impersonal information sources. The differences in value ratings per information source were striking: Telecommunications managers rated customers, newspapers/magazines, and conferences/trips much lower than the manufacturing managers but they rated corporate library/intranet and databases much higher than manufacturing managers. The type of industrial sector therefore highly influenced information source use for decision-making by the study’s Chinese business managers. Based on this conclusion, we added organizational and environmental categories to revise the De Alwis, Majid, and Chaudhry’s (2006) typology of factors affecting Chinese managers’ information source preferences during decision-making.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Research on information source use in decision-making has a long history. Its theoretical underpinnings are rooted in Simon’s (1955, 1956) bounded rationality theory. According to this theory, the essence of business decision-making for problem solving is correctly identifying the problem, compiling all possible alternative solutions and then selecting the alternative that is the best solution for the business situation at hand (Simon & Associates, 1986). However, even though these decisions can be of enormous importance, they can be urgent, requiring the manager to commit substantial human and financial resources but with little time to investigate the problem thoroughly (Mintzberg, Raisinghani, & Théoret, 1976). Consequently, in real situations, where decisions are made in uncertain environments, human rational behaviour is limited due to the absence of information about the problem, about all the alternative solutions, lack of certainty about all relevant events, and the inability of the business manager to anticipate all possible consequences of the decision (Newell & Simon, 1972; Simon & Associates, 1986).

Strategic decision-making is a sub-set of decision-making. A business manager who makes strategic decisions is commonly in charge of at least one business unit for his or her enterprise with supervisory, policy development, and/or strategy development responsibilities, but can be in middle as well as upper management (Bower, 1970). They are strategic planners responsible for establishing broad policies, directions, and goals for an organization (Gorry & Scott-Morton, 1971), and providing contextual frames for the discussion of strategic issues within the company (Thomas & McDaniel, 1990). As well, strategic decision-makers are responsible for sensing the emergence and meanings of various threats and opportunities (Papadakis, Lioukas, & Chambers, 1998). Knowledge management (KM) is an obvious field to improve strategic managerial decision-making during high uncertainty.

KM, in the business world, can be broadly defined as a series of activities undertaken by an organization to identify, acquire, retain, share, and re-use its knowledge-based assets with the aim of sustaining core competency and innovation capabilities. KM specifically targets procedural or “how to” information decision makers need that is already there in the corporation but is not recorded or codified – this is frequently referred to as tacit knowledge (e.g., Nonaka, 1994). As it is not written down, this tacit corporate knowledge is inaccessible except through face-to-face contact with people within the corporation. Other explicit knowledge may be badly codified or haphazardly stored by individuals on their computers without concern for subsequent access by others. Corporations acknowledge the importance of data bases of information gathered by its employees during past decision events – corporate information, industry information, etc. But KM must also render access to tacit and badly stored explicit knowledge to the manager at the moment of decision-making. One key problem for KM is to develop systems that facilitate the storage, organization, and access to sources of corporate knowledge via the addition of easy to use mechanisms specifically designed so that managers can more effectively make decisions.

The general problem addressed in this study is to analyze the difficulty managers have in accessing tacit and explicit information to make decisions in high uncertainty situations, within the context of the Chinese corporate environment. Although KM has been applied and developed in the Western world for over two decades, certain researchers believe that the concept was not properly explained to China until the late 1990s (Lin & Kwok, 2006; Voelpel & Han, 2005). Even since then, KM has been poorly recognized and applied in China. Jian, Li-Hua, and Moffett (2007) conclude that the lack of empirical evidence supporting the benefits of KM has become a major barrier to the development of KM research in the Chinese academic community. Jian, Li-Hua, and Moffett (2007, p. 207) note that “a majority proportion of Chinese companies either lack [knowledge] of KM theory or still rest upon [i.e. are still stuck in the preliminary stage of] the discussion of KM theory per se [sic]” (for a review, see Lin & Dalkir, 2010).

Information science expands on KM research in Chinese business practices and plays a crucial role in today’s information age. Finding the right information during all stages of a business manager’s decision-making process makes the difference between success and failure. What are the information sources for finding this right information? If we begin to describe what these sources are and how Chinese business managers evaluate these sources, we can establish a starting position for further research into developing retrieval mechanisms so that Chinese managers can efficiently access vital corporate information during high uncertainty decision-making.

There is a paucity of research on the information sources used by Chinese business managers when they are engaged in KM strategic decision-making and how and why they attribute value to these sources. We started this study by asking the following questions:
                        
                           •
                           What information sources are used by Chinese business managers when they make KM strategic decisions?

What is the perceived value of these information sources by Chinese business managers when making KM strategic decisions?

How and why do Chinese business managers attribute value to the information sources they use?

This study, derived from a doctoral dissertation (Lin, 2011), extends existing research on Chinese business managers’ source use and source evaluation behaviour as well as on the influences of source characteristics on source use in strategic decision-making. The study seeks to advance current understanding about Chinese KM strategic decision-making situations by adopting an informational perspective. By defining the relationship between Chinese business managers’ attribution of value to information sources and information source use, the findings of this study can be used to help Chinese business managers make more informed KM strategic decisions, and thus contribute to the promotion of KM practices in China.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

The literature review is divided into the three sections: (a) Western business managers’ use of information sources for strategic decision-making;(b) how Western business managers define the value of information sources; and (c) Chinese research literature on how Chinese business managers use and attribute value to information sources.

In the West, academia has long been interested in business managers’ information source use (De Alwis, Majid, & Chaudhry, 2006). (Another term for source is channel (e.g., Line, 1971), which can be used synonymously with source (Agarwal, Xu, & Poo, 2011). This interest commonly evokes two research questions: how should information sources be classified, and what types of information sources are most favored by business manager? The best recognized classification scheme for information sources was first introduced by Aguilar in 1967, and has been widely adopted and adapted by other scholars (e.g., Agarwal et al., 2011; Choo, 1993; Elenkov, 1997; Xu, Tan, & Yang, 2006; Zimmer, Henry, & Butler, 2008).

According to Aguilar, an information source usually has two dimensions: 1. external versus internal, and 2. personal versus impersonal. The origin of the source – whether it originates from outside or from inside the organization, determines whether a source is classified as external or internal. The personal/impersonal dimension is determined by whether the information is communicated from one individual directly to the other (personal) or whether the information is obtained from a database or some other non-human information system. As an example, a company’s information system as a source of the manager’s information is considered an internal impersonal source because it is accessed within the company and it is obtained indirectly, i.e., via an intermediary, whereas executives of other companies as a source of the manager’s information is regarded as an external personal source.

Past studies indicate that business managers generally prefer personal information sources to impersonal sources (Choo, 1993; Choo, 2001; Daft, Sormunen, & Parks, 1988; Elenkov, 1997; Keegan, 1974; Mintzberg, 1973; Specht, 1987; for exceptions, see Gilbert, 2003; Kefalas & Schoderbek, 1973). However, there is no consensus regarding the internal and external dimension. Some studies report that external sources are more frequently used (El Sawy, 1985; Keegan, 1974; Lackman, Saban, & Lanasa, 2000), while others indicate that internal sources are preferred (Bouchet, Marie-Laure, Hopkins, Kinnell, & McKnight, 1988; Choo, 1993; Frishammar, 2003; Walters, Jiang, & Klein, 2003).

It is notable that due to the advances in information technology, impersonal sources (e.g., company information systems and databases) have become easier to use than in the past. Instead of asking a colleague in the office next door – a personal–internal information source – managers are increasingly going on the Internet or company intranet for this information (an impersonal, external information source and an impersonal internal information source, respectively). The business manager can also easily compare internal practices, obtained from an internal information source, to existing best practices in the industry by going to an external–impersonal information source online. Existing KM literature also emphasizes that it is the heterogeneous knowledge-based assets that determine an organization’s core competency and innovation capabilities (Lin & Dalkir, 2010). Therefore, impersonal–external information sources which serve as a window to what competitors are doing are significantly related to organizational survival and development; thus they are being given increasingly serious managerial attention in decision-making (De Alwis et al., 2006; Zimmer et al., 2008).

In the West, information value as an indicator of information utility has long been a concern. Over 40 years ago, Slamecka (1970, p.567) argued that “the development of a pragmatic measure of information utility must rank as the most important task of information science research in the next decade.” Taylor (1986) emphasized that the way to define the value of information should be user-based and context-based – i.e., an information message is “given value by a ‘user’ who sees its potential ‘usefulness’ because he or she is in a particular environment and can relate the message to the problems and tasks of that environment” (Taylor, 1986, p.15). In other words, information should be about something (i.e., context-dependent) and for someone (i.e., agency-dependent) (Van Benthem & Martinez, 2008).

When assessing the value of an information source, there is often confusion between a source and the information from that source. To the average person, the characteristics of an information source largely depend on the characteristics of the information from the source. For the average person, an example of the characteristics of the information itself (not the source) being a determining factor of information source value is relevance (e.g., Choo, 1993).

However, there are determining characteristics related almost uniquely to the source itself. An example would be the facility of source use by the manager which is partially determined by the manager’s information context-situation. Another example of the independent characteristics of the information source is source accessibility, often defined as the extent to which one can easily approach, contact, or locate the source. For example, Choo (1993) found that Canadian telecommunications executives preferred using internal–personal sources of information instead of external sources if the internal–personal source was easily accessible and of high quality in terms of relevancy and reliability. The internal–personal source, a colleague for example, could be considered reliable as distinct from the reliability of the information from that source, based on the colleague’s characteristics as a person. Relevancy could also be considered a dimension or characteristic of the colleague as an information source rather than the information from that source because the colleague had the ability to shape the information message in terms of the decision-maker’s particular context.

Like Choo, a number of recent studies first characterize an information source in terms of accessibility and quality, and then further characterize quality based on the dimensions of relevancy, reliability, usefulness, understandability, topicality, novelty, and scope (Agarwal et al., 2011; McKinney, Yoon, & Zahedi, 2002; Xu et al., 2006; Zimmer et al., 2008). These quality characteristics, however, are not mutually exclusive. For instance, Xu and Chen (2006) found that topicality, reliability, understandability and novelty were significantly associated with relevancy.

There is still no consensus as to which of the two, information source accessibility or quality, plays a more important role in affecting source use (Agarwal et al., 2011). Some researchers favor the least-effort perspective that describes ease of use (in terms of effort) source accessibility as the dominant factor in source selection (e.g., Andersen, Glassman, McAfee, & Penelli, 2001; O’Reilly, 1982; Yitzhaki & Hammershlag, 2004), while some support the cost-benefit perspective that source quality is more important (e.g., Ashford, 1986; Choo, 1993; Kirsch, Goldfarb, & Gera, 2009; Morrison & Vancouver, 2000). Interestingly, two recent studies by Agarwal et al. (2011) and Zimmer et al. (2008) find that source quality and accessibility are equally significant.

Unfortunately, most studies on the influences of source characteristics on source use are neither specifically concerned with business managers nor framed within the context of strategic decision-making (e.g., Agarwal et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2006; Zimmer et al., 2008). Instead, the existing literature on criteria for information source selection in strategic decision-making (e.g., Dean & Sharfman, 1993; Frishammar, 2003; Williams, 2001) has primarily concentrated on the information-processing perspective:
                           
                              i.e., how business managers seek and use information sources to reduce uncertainties and find better alternatives for decision problems.

This is not the information-utility perspective we highlight in this article:
                           
                              i.e., how the characteristics of information sources affect business managers’ source use in strategic decision situations.

We assume that when Chinese business managers make KM strategic decisions they use and “value” information sources differently than Western business managers. This assumption is based on existing cross-cultural studies that show that, in the process of decision-making, individuals with different socio-cultural backgrounds perceive, organize, and use information differently (Packard, 2006). There is also research evidence that within the managerial context cultural values may substantially influence business managers’ use of information and information sources in decision-making (Bouthillier, 2003). Unfortunately, few studies combine the cultural aspects of managers and the effect of these cultural aspects on these managers’ decision-making.

Most Chinese business managers and employees were brought up in an environment in which people place a greater value on collectivism than individualism, and therefore focus more on means – i.e., on long-term relationships and implicit exchanges with colleagues – than on ends and the intended outcomes (Berrell, Wrathall, & Wright, 2001; Hall, 1976; Mead, 1994). Compared with Western business managers, Chinese business managers think more holistically, emphasize interdependent relationships among different variables, accept multiple realities, assign more value to experience, and prefer analytical reasoning-based decisions (Haley & Haley, 2006). Strategic decisions are made via “informal and uncodified information channels” (Martinsons & Davison, 2007, p. 294). From this evidence, we make the assumption that transferring management knowledge, including KM theory, from the West to China cannot be a linear endeavor, because a linear transfer would be based on false or western assumptions about the nature of knowledge and knowledge transmission in China. The Chinese model involves much more tacit corporate knowledge and experience transferred between social contexts that are significantly different from Western business models (Hofstede, 1994; Newell, 1999; Warner, 1993).

We end the literature review with the only three studies that have specifically looked at Chinese business managers’ perceived value of different types of information sources or the methods these managers used to determine the value of information sources.

The first study is an experimental study undertaken by Packard (2006) which compared the influences of culture and cognitive style on the use of information (not information sources) between Chinese and American managers in decision-making situations. Her findings show that national culture significantly affects the use of holistic information but not that of analytic information, and that culture and cognitive style result in differences in perceived value of holistic information during the process of decision-making.

The second study is a survey study by Chow, Deng, and Yuen (2006) which explored Chinese business mangers’ information needs in decision-making, their assessment of the adequacy of the information available to them, their desired improvements to the information, and their expected barriers for accomplishing such improvements. The majority of the participants in their study were top- and middle-level business managers with considerable decision-making experience at either a strategic or an operational level. These managers were asked to identify the two most important pieces of information they usually used to support their decision-making, and rate the information on ten predetermined information attributes, including “availability, understandability, ability to guide action, reliability, timeliness, accuracy, scope of coverage, comparability over time, ease of access, and overall usefulness” (Chow et al., 2006, p.297). Their study findings indicate that with respect to information needs, Chinese business managers favor external information for marketing, government policies and legislation decisions, and internal information for financial and strategic decisions. On a scale from 1 to 7 (i.e., extremely low to extremely high), the participants’ ratings of the information attributes range from 4.72 (for ease of access) to 5.49 (for availability).

The third study is a combination survey plus in-depth interviews of attendees at conference meetings in Hong Kong and Shanghai by Martinsons and Davison (2007) which compared information system support for Japanese, American and Chinese managers in their strategic decision-making. They defined and then compared the three national groups based on whether decision-making was conceptual decision style, an analytic decision style and a directive decision style. The researchers found that the Chinese business leaders scored the highest of the three groups on directive decision style and lowest on conceptual decision style. Martinsons and Davison conclude that:
                           The directive tendencies of Chinese business leaders can be attributed to their high power distance and high degree of in-group collectivism. In contrast to America’s preoccupation with individual freedom, the Chinese typically seek to maintain social order through a harmony-within-hierarchy arrangement. Consequently, centralized and arbitrary (or discretionary) decisions are common in both mainland and overseas Chinese businesses (Martinsons & Davison, 2007, p. 294).
                        
                     


                        Martinsons and Davison (2007) conclude that because of the importance of social hierarchy and top-down control, Chinese strategic decision makers prefer informal and uncodified information channels for their information. The tone of feedback from subordinates of the decision maker is of utmost importance, according to this study, which means the decision maker favors personal information sources, someone they could “trust,” over “anonymous” impersonal information sources (Martinsons & Davison, 2007, p. 296).

A limitation of the first two studies for our purposes is that both the Packard (2006) and Chow et al. (2006) focused on information instead of information sources. Packard specifically examined what type(s) of information Chinese business managers used, while Chow et al. tried to further understand Chinese business managers’ perceived importance of information attributes to help explain why these managers valued information. An information focus necessarily has a stronger psychological dimension while an information source focus has a stronger sociological dimension. This second sociological dimension is the prime objective of our study.

In Fig. 1
                     , we outline the conceptual framework for the study, based on De Alwis et al.’s (2006) literature review and summary typology of Western managers’ use and value attribution of information sources during strategic decision-making. In their typology, De Alwis et al. broadly divide factors affecting business managers’ source use, located in the center of Fig. 1 model, into four categories: Personal/social–cultural factors; Situational factors; Contextual factors; and Informational factors.

In Fig. 1, Personal/social–cultural factors are comprised of a business manager’s personal characteristics and social–cultural background. Situational factors refer to “variables associated with the company, industry and the competition” (De Alwis et al., 2006, p.371). Contextual factors are more specific than situational factors, referring to the “work-related variables that influence the information behaviour of managers” (De Alwis et al., 2006, p.371). Informational factors refer to the source quality, accessibility, and other characteristics of information and information sources utilized by business mangers during decision-making.


                     De Alwis et al. (2006) emphasize that the four categories of factors affecting business managers’ source preferences “need to be studied as a cohesive whole” (De Alwis et al., 2006, p.374). We have attempted to do this via our study design, which compares and contrasts Chinese managers’ strategic decision-making in two industrial sectors of the Chinese economy: telecommunications and manufacturing. These two sectors were selected because, prima facie, manufacturing and telecommunications provide two very different socio-cultural and situational contexts to study information factors affecting Chinese managers’ source use and value attribution during strategic decision-making. On the face of it, manufacturing is a traditional, old-school, and process-oriented sector where efficiency is the dominating characteristic. Telecommunications, on the other hand, is a new, fast evolving and global industrial sector, where technological innovation is the dominating characteristic. A limitation of our study is that it does not explicitly consider the fourth and last category of De Alwis et al.’s typology of factors affecting business managers’ information source preference: contextual factors. This limitation is addressed in the Discussion section of this article.

The purpose of this study is to revise De Alwis et al.’s (2006) typology model in light of study findings of Chinese business managers’ information source use and how they evaluate or value these information sources in KM strategic decision-making, from an information-utility perspective. The three research questions for the study are:
                        
                           1.
                           What types of information sources do Chinese business managers use when making KM strategic decisions?

Is there a difference between manufacturing and telecommunications industry business managers in what information sources they use?

What are the attributes of “value” when these Chinese business managers evaluate the different types of information sources when making KM strategic decisions?

Is there a difference between manufacturing and telecommunications industry business managers in their attributes of “value?”

How do Chinese business managers value different types of information sources when making KM strategic decisions and why?

Is there a difference between manufacturing and telecommunications industry business managers in how and why they attribute value to information sources?

The purpose of the study is to provide a holistic examination of the constructive processes that underlie Chinese business managers’ information source use and evaluation in a real-life strategic decision situation. Semi-structured interviews were used, made up of a combination of 5-point Likert Scales to obtain the value ratings from the participants for the five attribute values, and open-ended questions to get at the how and why of value attribution and information source use. A small pilot study was also conducted to validate the research design, and a few changes regarding the research questions and interview protocol were made based on the pilot study results and feedbacks.

The interview protocol lists the sixteen information sources from Choo (1993) which had been previously used by Aguilar (1967), Keegan (1974), Culnan (1983), and Daft et al. (1988). We updated Choo’s list to include recent system-based information sources. The participants were then asked to rate frequency of use for each information source. Following Aguilar (1967) and Choo (1993), the information sources were categorized as external and internal sources, and then sub-categorized as personal and impersonal sources. In addition, in order to capture information sources not listed in the interview protocol, the interview subjects were asked to list “other” information sources.

The study participants were then asked to characterize an information source in terms of relevancy, comprehensiveness, reliability, time/effort they devoted to getting information from the source, and accessibility. Choo’s (1993) operationalization of source characteristics was adopted. These are:
                        
                           1.
                           Source relevancy: the extent to which the information from a source is needed and useful with respect to the goals and activities.

Source comprehensiveness: the extent to which the capacity of an information source is thorough and comprehensive.

Source reliability: the extent to which the information from a source is authoritative and dependable.

Source time and effort: the time and effort devoted to approach, contact, or locate the source.

Source accessibility: the extent to which the information source is difficult or easy to access.

The structured questions asked of participants and the points on the Likert Scales for each of the five value attributes (translated from the Chinese) are presented below:
                        
                           1.
                           How relevant do you perceive the information provided by each of the following sources is when you make KM strategic decisions? Please use “√” to indicate your answer in the box.

How thorough or comprehensive do you think the capacity of each of the following sources is when you make KM strategic decisions? Please use “√” to indicate your answer in the box.

How reliable do you think the information of each of the following sources is when you make KM strategic decisions? Please use “√” to indicate your answer in the box.

How much time and effort do you need [i.e., devote] to approach or acquire each of the following information sources when you make KM strategic decisions? Please use “√” to indicate your answer in the box.

How difficult is it for you to access your desired information from each of the following information sources when you make KM strategic decisions? Please use “√” to indicate your answer in the box.

Please explain how you decide:

whether a piece of information is relevant or not. Why? whether a piece of information is comprehensive or not. Why? whether a piece of information is reliable or not. Why?

In general, how do you value different types of information sources when making KM strategic decisions? Why?

What are your major concerns when choosing a particular information source to make the decisions and why?

What characteristics do you think an ideal information source should have and why?

When you make other strategic decisions, such as entering new business ventures, restructuring your organizations, or handling important, unexpected events, do you value information source with the same or similar criteria? Why or why not?

A convenience sampling strategy was used to collect the data. At the beginning, four KM consulting companies and two universities were contacted. One of the consulting companies, the Knowledge Management Center (KMC), facilitated the recruitment of subjects. Later, the primary investigator was given the opportunity to attend two workshops organized by KMC to solicit participants. A further recruiting method was to network with the business managers in charge of their organizations’ KM strategic decisions through a widely known online forum sponsored by KMC. After their online profiles were reviewed, more than 100 invitation letters were sent out by e-mail. Further participants were recruited through personal and referral contacts – a snowball sampling strategy.

In total, eighteen Chinese business managers engaged in KM strategic decision-making for their companies were interviewed. Half of them worked in the Chinese manufacturing industry, and the other half worked in the Chinese telecommunications industry. Both the manufacturing and telecommunications industries are knowledge-intensive and highly competitive (especially after China’s admission to the World Trade Organization in 2001), and considered by policy makers to be fundamental to the Chinese economy. A number of studies find that industry type could greatly affect KM practices in the Chinese community (Chang & Li, 2007; Wang, Wong, & Koh, 2004; Yin & Bao, 2006). Therefore, a comparison of the source use and evaluation behaviour between Chinese manufacturing and telecommunications managers helps better identify and explain the potential relationship between source attributes and source use, thus increasing the power of analysis.

It was essential that all participants be high enough up in their corporate hierarchy to engage in KM strategic decision-making. A manufacturing manager was later removed from this study because it was found that she had never participated in any KM decision-making. The remaining 17 participants were considered to have met the required qualifications for the study.

The primary investigator travelled to Beijing, Nanjing, Dalian, and Shenyang to interview participants in person. The parameters of the interview and a copy of the interview protocol were sent to each participant prior to the interview by e-mail. The participants were encouraged to read over, think about and practice filling in the questions before the interview. The interviews lasted 30–60min and were recorded. Five participants asked to complete the questions after the interviews and return the results by e-mail. Four of these did not answer several questions, which resulted in some incomplete data. The interviews were later transcribed and translated. Further uncertainties with respect to participants’ answers and related corporate documentation were resolved through e-mails or phone calls.

The participants were divided into two industrial sector groups: the manufacturing group and the telecommunications group. Answers for each group of participants were analyzed and then compared to identify similarities and differences during KM strategic decision-making. In order to prevent potential distortion of contextual information and translation biases, all interview data were manually transcribed and analyzed in Chinese first. The analyzed data were then translated into English.

Data collected from the structured queries were analyzed and presented in a percentage form. The participants who had incomplete data for a specific query were excluded when the final percentages for that query were calculated. However, in many cases, a participant’s perspective on certain unasked questions could be indirectly captured from his or her answers to other questions.

The qualitative data (i.e., data collected from open-ended questions for Research Question 3) were analyzed by identifying recurring themes or patterns – what Boyatzis (1998) refers to as “thematic analysis.” In light of the work by Boyatzis (1998) and Corbin and Strauss (2008), sixteen thematic-analysis steps were designed to surface salient themes in the data. In the end, a code book was compiled with a clear definition, a description, and several examples assigned to each code. Constructing the code book was an inductive process involving constant revisions.

Analysis of the qualitative data was performed manually because the total number of interviews was relatively small, which made exploratory manual analysis of the data feasible (analysis software mechanizes category development to a limited but real extent, negatively inhibiting the intuitive exploration of the data (McLafferty & Farley, 2006)). At the end of the process the analyzed results were translated into English.

The findings for each of the three research questions are presented in order after the data summary tables. Table 1
                      presents the findings for Research Question 1 and Research Question 2. Table 2 presents the findings for Research Question 3. The findings were derived from an analysis of the data acquired from the structured queries (summarized in Table 1) and the open ended questions coding themes (summarized in Table 2).

For purposes of effectively summarizing the data, Table 1 shows a percentage number for value attributes only where there was a definite trend in participant selection. When the study participants selected either point four or five on the Likert Scale, we grouped them together and gave the total for the two points a positive percentage (⩾ 50%). When the study participants selected either point one or two on the scale, we again grouped them together but gave the total a negative percentage (⩾ 50%). When reading the table, positive percentage numbers represent positive participant evaluations for value attributes.


                        
                           
                              1.
                              What types of information sources do Chinese business managers use when making KM strategic decisions?

Is there a difference between manufacturing and telecommunications industry business managers in what information sources they use?

The Chinese managers’ use of 16 information sources is shown in Table 1. The study participants indicated their use of each information source on a 5-point Likert Scale. For “use,” Table 1 only shows information sources where 50% or more of the participants ticked the two highest points in the Likert Scale, indicated by a positive number, or the two lowest points in the Likert Scale, indicated by a negative number.

For all participants combined, the most used information sources were internal information sources – Superiors/Board Members and Subordinate managers – while the least used were external information sources – Government officials; Newspapers; Broadcast media; and Industrial associations. The difference for information source use between telecommunications and manufacturing managers was striking. Compared to telecommunications managers, manufacturing managers used external sources more with a much wider variety of external sources.


                        Telecommunications: The two information sources, Subordinate managers and Internal studies/reports, were the internal information sources most frequently used by telecommunications participants (with 88.9% indicating either the 4[th] or 5[th] highest point on the Likert Scale).


                        Manufacturing: The most frequently used information sources for manufacturing participants was Superiors/board members and Customers (87.5%).


                        
                           
                              1.
                              What is the Chinese business managers’ perceived value of different types of information sources when making KM strategic decisions?

Is there a difference between manufacturing and telecommunications industry business managers in their attributes of perceived “value?”


                        Table 1 lists the data collected from the participants concerning the five value attributes for the information sources: 1. Relevancy;2. Comprehensiveness;3. Reliability;4. Time/Effort; and 5. Accessibility. Table 1 gives total value for each value attribute (the bottom row of Table 1) and for each information source. To simplify these total value calculations, Table 1 gives a “0” to value attributes that received no percentage number.

The total value is calculated per value attribute for all information sources combined (the bottom row of Table 1). We will discuss these values further in the Practical Implications section. In summary, the totals indicate that Comprehensiveness is an issue for the Chinese managers when they select an information source during strategic decision-making (0% of the telecommunications managers and 7.8% of the manufacturing managers said this value was difficult to obtain in the information sources), while Accessibility was indicated as not being an issue or problematic by both the telecommunications and manufacturing managers (but especially manufacturing mangers 68.8% of whom marked the Accessibility value as “easy”).

The total value attribution is calculated per information source for telecommunications and manufacturing participants separately. The two information sources accorded the highest value attribution (underlined in Table 1) were:
                           
                              •
                              Internal studies/reports (average 81.1% and 76.1% positive rating from telecommunications and manufacturing participants respectively): This information source was judged as:
                                    
                                       –
                                       relevant: 88.9% rating by the telecommunications and 57.1% rating by the manufacturing participants,

comprehensive: 77.8% rating by telecommunications and 62.5% rating by manufacturing participants,

reliable: 88.9% rating by telecommunications and 85.7% rating by the manufacturing participants,

time/effort devoted to using them: 50% rating by telecommunications and 75% rating by manufacturing participants, and

accessible: 100% rating by telecommunications and 100% rating by manufacturing participants.

Subordinate managers (average 68.9% and 84.3% positive rating from telecommunications and manufacturing participants respectively): This information source was judged as:
                                    
                                       –
                                       relevant: 77.8% rating by the telecommunications and 100% rating by the manufacturing participants,

comprehensive: 55.6% rating by the telecommunications and 75.0% rating by the manufacturing participants,

reliable: 66.7% by the telecommunications and 71.4% rating by the manufacturing participants,

time/effort devoted to using it: 55.6% rating by telecommunications and 75% rating by manufacturing participants), and

accessible: 88.9% rating by the telecommunications and 100% rating by the manufacturing participants.

The standout information source valued negatively by both telecommunications and manufacturing participants was (also underlined in Table 1):
                           
                              •
                              Government officials (average −51.1% and −25% negative rating from telecommunications and manufacturing participants respectively). This information source was judged as
                                    
                                       –
                                       relevant: −55.6% rating by telecommunications with no tendency rating by manufacturing participants,

comprehensive: −88.9% rating by telecommunications and −62.5% rating by manufacturing participants,

time and effort devoted to it: −55.6% rating by telecommunications and −62.5% rating by manufacturing participants,

accessibility: −55.6% rating by telecommunications and no rating tendency by manufacturing participants.

The difference between telecommunications and manufacturing participants was striking for four information sources: Telecommunications participants valued the Corporate library/intranet & databases much more highly than manufacturing participants (57.8% versus 10%), while manufacturing participants valued much more highly: Customers (77.5% versus 33.4%), Newspapers/magazines (37.5% versus 4.4%) and Conferences/trips (72.8% versus 26.7%).

From Table 1, for the information source Competitors, while both telecommunications and manufacturing participants deemed this source relevant and negatively accessible (−100%), for the value attribute 4. Time/effort, telecommunications participants devoted a lot of time/effort to this information source (88.9%) while manufacturing participants did not.


                        
                           
                              3.
                              How and why do Chinese business managers value different types of information sources when making KM strategic decisions?

Is there a difference between manufacturing and telecommunications industry business managers in how and why they attribute value to information sources?

To get at how and why Chinese business managers value different information sources when making KM strategic decisions, we collected qualitative data via the opened ended questions the participants answered during the interviews. Table 2 summarizes the four themes identified from coding the qualitative data.

From Table 2
                        , Theme 1 Source Comprehensiveness (SC): Eleven of 17 participants answered that only a systematic, synthesized review of the information collected from multiple information sources could be considered a complete information search. The following is an illustrative quote from one of the interviews:
                           In fact each information source only reflects one facet of the truth, and no single source is complete. … Therefore … only after synthesizing the information from all information sources, will we have an objective, real, complete point of view (Sales manager of a telecommunications enterprise).
                        
                     

Theme 2 Source Reliability (SR): Six telecommunications participants perceived that by consulting multiple sources they were better able to verify the reliability of a particular piece of information. To illustrate this theme, we quote one participant:
                           One way [of valuing source reliability] is to go to another source to validate it. I get some information from A and then go to B to check if it is true. Once we get the information, we will double check the reliability of the information right away to confirm if it is true. If it is, we will act right after. This is a very usual method. (HR manager of a telecommunications enterprise).
                        
                     

Theme 3 Priority Sequence of Source Characteristics (PSSC): A number of open-ended questions were asked to study how and why participants generally valued information sources. Participants were specifically asked to discuss their major concerns when they chose a particular information source, and further, to rank order the four source characteristics according to their importance. In establishing the highest priority value attribute, a specific theme emerged for 14 of the 17 participants: Source Reliability was the most important attribute, as illustrated in the following quote:
                           Information can be called information only when it is reliable.… Reliability determines whether it is true or false, while comprehensiveness decides its scope (an associate chief economist of a manufacturing enterprise).
                        
                     

Theme 4 Decision Context (DC): The possibility of applying the findings of this study in other strategic decision situations was investigated. Specifically, a question was asked to explore whether participants used the same or similar criteria to value information sources in other strategic decisions, such as business expansion in a different geographical location, restructuring organizations, or handling unexpected important events. The seven participants who indicated this theme preferred to use the same or similar tactics to value information sources in other strategic decision situations. Most of the seven participants noted that it was unnecessary to keep changing information sources or valuing methods in different decision situations, because they only trusted a limited number of information sources for their daily information-searching activities, and for no matter what type of decision always considered them first.
                           It should be the same. In fact, when making decisions, many managers probably do similar things just like what I said, which is to acquire information and check if the information is full, relevant or accurate. It should be this way (a vice president of a manufacturing enterprise).
                        
                     

The only important difference between telecommunications and manufacturing participants was regarding Theme 2: Source Reliability (SR), which was much more important for telecommunications participants than for manufacturing participants (66.7% versus 37.5%).

There were several important findings which have implications for the development of ancillary information services and systems to facilitate access to key corporate knowledge for Chinese business managers during their strategic decision-making processes.


                        
                           
                              •
                              For all participants combined, the most used information sources were internal information sources – Superiors/Board Members and Subordinate managers – while the least used were external information sources – Government officials; Newspapers; Broadcast media; and Industrial associations.

The difference for information source use between telecommunications and manufacturing managers was striking. Manufacturing managers used external sources more and a much wider variety of external sources.

Telecommunications managers used Subordinate managers and Internal studies/reports most (with 88.9% indicating either the 4[th] or 5[th] highest point on the Likert Scale).

Manufacturing managers used the information sources Superiors/board members and Customers (with 87.5% indicating either the 4[th] or 5[th] highest point on the Likert Scale).

The two information sources accorded the highest value attribution by both telecommunications and manufacturing managers were:
                           
                              •
                              Internal studies/reports (average 78.6% positive rating):

Subordinate managers (average 76.6% positive rating):

The standout information source valued negatively by both telecommunications and manufacturing participants was:
                           
                              •
                              Government officials (average −38.1% negative rating).

The difference between telecommunications and manufacturing participants was striking for four information sources:
                           
                              •
                              Telecommunications participants valued the Corporate library/intranet & databases much more highly than manufacturing participants (57.8% versus 10%).

Manufacturing participants valued Customers (77.5% versus 33.4%), Newspapers/magazines (37.5% versus 4.4%) and Conferences/trips (72.8% versus 26.7%) much more highly than telecommunications participants.

Both Telecommunications and Manufacturing participants indicated the information source Competitors relevant and negatively accessible (−100%). However, Telecommunications participants devoted a lot of Time/effort to this information source (88.9%) while manufacturing participants did not.


                        
                           
                              •
                              Theme 1 Source Comprehensiveness (SC): Eleven of 17 participants answered that only a systematic, synthesized review of the information collected from multiple information sources could be considered a complete information search.

Theme 2 Source Reliability (SR): Six telecommunications participants perceived that by consulting multiple sources they were better able to verify the reliability of a particular piece of information.

Theme 3 Priority Sequence of Source Characteristics (PSSC): In establishing the highest priority value attribute, a specific theme emerged for 14 of the 17 participants: Source Reliability was the most important attribute.

Theme 4 Decision Context (DC): The seven participants who answered the question preferred to use the same or similar tactics to value information sources in other strategic decision situations.

The only important difference between telecommunications and manufacturing participants was regarding Theme 2: Source Reliability (SR), which was much more important for telecommunications participants than for manufacturing participants (66.7% versus 37.5%).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The findings of this study indicate that in KM strategic decision-making, participants preferred to use internal information sources over external information sources (Table 1). The least used information source for all participants was the entire category of external impersonal sources (with the exception of electronic information services). The popular belief is that managers prefer personal sources of information, which this study corroborates, but the study also nuances this preference with the finding that Chinese business managers prefer internal personal information sources.

Given the relative “newness” of KM in China, one reason for this may be that there simply are not that many external KM information sources, let alone ones with a proven track record of credibility. From a KM perspective, most maturity models describe initial or pre-KM ready phases as being quite reactive rather than proactive, ad hoc rather than systematic and unorganized rather than guided by policy and procedures.

Another reason for this preference for internal personal information sources is that KM is often considered a defensive strategy to the threat from within (i.e., a strategy that is conservative and responds primarily to the contingencies within an organization’s domain of operations). In this sense, participants may prefer to use internal and personal information sources to better understand the current state of their internal organizational environments in order to best protect their positions in the organization. One participant said, “Regarding the organizational KM, my information sources can tell me the actual situation of the internal environment.” Another said, “It [Use of information sources] has nothing to do with competitors, customers, and business associates, but only with supervisors, subordinate managers and staff, because it [KM] is an organization’s internal activities and has nothing to do with the external environment.” Past research finds that knowledge hoarding, guanxi (i.e., relationship networks), and face saving, as cultural factors, considerably affect Chinese KM practices (Fu, Tsui, & Dess, 2006; Hutchings, 2005; Hutchings & Michailova, 2004; Ramasamy, Goh, & Yeung, 2006; Voelpel & Han, 2005; Weir & Hutchings, 2005). When Chinese business managers have little time to search information, they may turn to the internal sources that they trust or have good guanxi with for help.

Our study findings show differences in source use between manufacturing and telecommunications participants. Manufacturing participants more frequently used the external information sources of Customers, Business/professional associates, and Conferences/trips, and also considered these three external sources more valuable than telecommunications participants. There may be several reasons for this difference.
                           
                              •
                              First, some manufacturing participants indicated that because KM should eventually help their companies serve customers, planning a KM program required them to constantly communicate with customers to understand their needs and concerns.

Second, a large-sized manufacturing company usually has a group of customers with highly defined requirements. The telecommunications industry creates consumer need with technological innovation. Thus, it may be more of a necessity for Chinese manufacturing managers to establish and manage relationships with their customers and obtain needed information from them than for Chinese telecommunications managers.

Thirdly, the manufacturing managers used Conferences/trips as an information source more than telecommunications managers. In the Chinese manufacturing industry, conferences usually refer to those hosted by industrial associations. Since these industrial associations always represent the voice of the government, attending conferences was seen by manufacturing managers as a formal channel to know about the latest government policies.

The fundamental notion underlying this research question is that the Chinese manager participants in the study will award high value ratings to information sources they frequently use. If so, we assume an overall 1:1 relationship between value attribution and information source use. For most of the 16 information sources covered in the study, this was more or less true. However, for both telecommunications and manufacturing participants, study findings indicate negative correlations between use and value for two information sources:
                           
                              •
                              Competitors

Electronic Information Services

For these two information sources, study participants felt they had to refer or use them during strategic decision-making, but they were of low value for the five value attributes covered in the study: Relevancy, Comprehensiveness, Reliability, Time/effort, and Accessibility.

In addition, for manufacturing participants only, there was also high use and negative value attribution for the information sources:
                           
                              •
                              Government Publications

Corporate Library

Whether the participants are in the telecommunications or manufacturing sector seems to be an important variable in the study participants’ KM strategic decision-making, which supports the notion that industry type could greatly affect Chinese managers’ information behaviour during KM practices (Chang & Li, 2007; Wang et al., 2004; Yin & Bao, 2006). This is supported in our study’s findings. From the Table 1’s “Total Value” vertical columns (separate totals for telecommunications and manufacturing participants), study findings indicate four major differences between the manufacturing and telecommunications participants in value attribution for the following information sources:
                           
                              1.
                              Customers (77.5% average value rating for manufacturing participants versus 33.4% for telecommunications).

Newspapers/magazines (37.5% average value rating for manufacturing participants versus 4.4% for telecommunications).

Conferences/trips (72.8% average value rating for manufacturing participants versus 26.7% for telecommunications).

Corporate library/intranet & databases (10% average value rating for manufacturing participants versus 57.8% for telecommunications).

These observed differences between the Chinese manufacturing and telecommunications mangers in the study are consistent with the situational differences – to utilize the term from De Alwis et al. (2006) typology outlined above in Fig. 1 – between these two industrial sectors. Correlating the four study findings from the above list, generally speaking, in both China and the West, the manufacturing sector compared to the telecommunications industrial sector is:
                           
                              1.
                              more customer-oriented and led,

more dependent on information about economic ups and downs available to managers in the business pages of newspapers,

more dependent on government policy announced at conferences, and

less dependent on information concerning product-technology innovation obtained via the corporate library/intranet and information databases.

Why did the Chinese managers in the study value one information source over another when they made strategic decisions? The accepted view in the information science literature is that the user’s selection of an information source is due to his or her personal experience and character, denying the role of context and emphasizing instead relationships and past experiences. According to Agarwal et al., “This could be because of a strong habit established in past experience with each source type” (Agarwal et al., 2011, p. 1102; see also, Bacharach & Lawler, 1980; Bouthillier, 2003; Gilbert, 2003; Hickson, Butler, Cray, Mallory, & Wilson, 1986; Mackenzie, 2005; Pfeffer, 1981; Schwenk, 1984).

The Chinese managers in the study corroborated the “personal experience” motivation for information source use. However, they indicated that they prioritized source characteristics in this personalization. There was strong support among the Chinese managers for Table 2’s Theme 3, “Priority Sequence of Source Characteristics.” Fully 88.9% of the study’s telecommunications participants and 75% of the manufacturing participants indicated this coding theme during their interviews. According to the study data, it is the reliability characteristic of the information source over all other value attributes that controls the order of information sources consulted when the manager seeks information during KM strategic decision-making.

According to Table 2’s Theme 4: “Decision Context,” Chinese managers indicated that the relative importance of value attributes did not vary according to the type of strategic decisions. These participants noted that it was unnecessary to keep changing information sources or value attribution methods in different decision situations, because they only trusted a limited number of information sources for their daily information-searching activities; and no matter what type of decision, they always considered them first.

The literature is critical of this “personalized” information-processing style because it could result in distortion or restriction of information flow (Cyert & March, 1963; Pettigrew, 1973), false interpretations of reality, and disappointing consequences (Dean & Sharfman, 1996).

However, according to Table 2’s Theme 2, “Source Triangulation,” the Chinese managers in the study compensated for their “personal experience” bias by triangulating multiple information sources to ensure reliable and comprehensive information. The participants utilized a variety of information sources during strategic decision-making to achieve the confidence in information reliability needed to make their strategic decisions.

The study contributes to the process of establishing which information sources Chinese business managers use during their strategic decision-making, and how and why these Chinese business managers select to use one information source over another. In this section, we attempt to broaden the findings into a more general description of information source use, to a certain extent operationalizing the findings so that they can be tested and compared to patterns of information source use of other decision makers in other parts of the world.

It is our contention that the study findings contradicts the generally held belief about strategic decision-making, which is based on the assumption that managers conduct an internal cost-benefit analysis to determine which information source to go to during high uncertainty. We find that it is not the case. This leads us to propose a different view departing from both the least-effort and cost-benefit perspective: that Chinese business managers’ information source use during strategic decision-making is determined by a synthesized perception of source characteristics and information seeking strategies on the part of the Chinese managers in the study.

We illustrate this important practical implication of the study findings by inserting the aggregate value attribute totals concerning the five value attributes in quasi-cost-benefit framework. Which attribute would be considered a cost and which a benefit? For a Chinese business manager who is considering seeking information from one information source over another, an a priori prediction is:
                        
                           •
                           Cost: Time/effort and Accessibility

Benefit: Relevance, Reliability and Comprehensiveness

That is, the two predicted “cost” value attributes are, in the aggregate, the Time/effort value attribute and the Accessibility attribute, whereas the three “benefit” value attributes are, in aggregate, the Relevance, Reliability and Comprehensive attributes.

In Table 3
                     , we integrate the actual aggregate value attribute scores taken from the bottom row of Table 1. Participants were asked to indicate low to high value for each of the 5 attribute values on a Likert Scale. We label “low valued” attributes a “cost” and “highly valued” attributes a “benefit.” The “low valued” attributes are the most difficult values to award high values, whereas the “highly valued” attributes are the easiest – i.e., they have the least “cost” during information source use. To ensure a synthetic view of a cost-benefit analysis, the table also includes two strategies – the themes from Table 2: Source Comprehensiveness (SC) for the Comprehensiveness value attribute and Source Reliability (SR) for the Reliability value attribute.

In Table 3, we note that the form of cost-benefit analysis given here contradicts Table 2’s finding of Theme 3 where the participants gave the highest value to the Reliability attribute. Here in Table 3, the participants accord less benefit to the Reliability value BUT they also utilize the Theme 2 strategy of ensuring Source Reliability (SR) by utilizing multiple information sources to cross check the information reliability amongst multiple sources.

The value attribute aggregate totals are similar for the Telecommunications and Manufacturing manager participants, except for the Accessibility attribute value which is awarded a much higher value by the Manufacturing participants. It can be argued from this cost-benefit implication of the study findings that the Relevancy and Accessibility value attributes, rather than Reliability, are the primary value attributes determining information source use during KM strategic decision-making for the study’s participants. This implication is of major practical importance in the provision of information services and the creation of personalized information system facilitating devices devoted specifically to this clientele.

We created a new model for Chinese business managers’ information source use in KM strategic decision-making, which revises De Alwis et al.’s (2006) typology shown in Fig. 1 of the conceptual framework section. We both removed from and added to their typology in our revised model shown in Fig. 2
                     .

The De Alwis et al. (2006) typology of factors was not framed in strategic decision-making, therefore their categories of “situational” and “contextual” – i.e., the user’s work-related task – are not in line with those commonly used in the existing strategic decision-making literature. “Work-related” is quite difficult to explain or define, and not necessarily concerned with the business manager making a strategic decision. Instead, decision-specific factors discussed in the existing strategic decision-making literature and concerned with the specific organizational situation and characteristics of a given decision (e.g., the impetus for the decision, the magnitude of impact brought by the decision, or the urgency associated with the decision), are more appropriate category factors affecting information source use in KM strategic decision-making. We therefore removed “situational” and “contextual” factors from our revised model and added “decision-specific” factors to our model.

Furthermore, the model must also take into account the dramatic differences in information source use and value attribution between the telecommunications and manufacturing participants in the study because this indicates that industry sector is an important factor. Manufacturing managers used external sources more and a much wider variety of external sources than telecommunications managers. Manufacturing managers used Customers as an information source more than telecommunications managers. And while manufacturing managers used the information source Superiors/board members, telecommunications managers used Subordinate managers.

There is also evidence from Chow et al. (2006), Martinsons and Davison (2007), and Packard (2006) that cultural differences are also important – in other words, there are observed differences in information source use and value attribution between the Chinese managers in our study and the findings from studies of the information source use of Western strategic decision-makers. Lin and Dalkir (2010) summarized the factors affecting Chinese KM implementation and organized these factors into four groups: (1) national cultural, (2) policy and institutional, (3) organizational, and (4) individual. Among the national cultural factors that have been identified by previous studies as significant, we believe that the three factors, knowledge hoarding, guanxi (i.e., relationship networks) and face saving, can be used to explain Chinese business managers’ source use and evaluation behaviour.

What would be good generic terms to take these study findings’ factors into account in the revised model? Situational factors, according to De Alwis et al. (2006), consist of two subgroups: organizational and environmental. We incorporated these two subgroups in our revised model as sufficiently generic terms. Furthermore, the strategic decision-making literature utilizes the terms environmental and organizational factors. Environmental factors (e.g., environmental uncertainty, analyzability, complexity, and dynamism) and organizational factors (e.g., organizational strategy, size, age, and information-processing structure) have been shown to be significantly related to business managers’ information source use when the managers are trying to understand and interpret strategic issues, and to make fast and effective decisions in an incomplete and uncertain information environment (Choo, 1993; Choo, 2001; see also, Bourgeois & Eisenhard, 1988; Daft & Weick, 1984; Dean & Sharfman, 1993; Duncan, 1972; Dutton, Fahey, & Narayanan, 1983; Elbanna & Child, 2007; Frishammar, 2003; Hauge, 1997; Hough & White, 2004; Katzer & Fletcher, 1992; Mintzberg et al., 1976; Rajagopalan, Rasheed, & Datta, 1993; Thomas et al., 1990).

In summary, the two most important modifications to De Alwis et al.’s (2006) original typology are:
                        
                           1.
                           De Alwis et al.’s term “Situational factors” are further divided into “Organizational factors” and “Environmental factors,” as both groups are independent, and have been found to significantly influence information source use by Chinese business managers in KM strategic decision-making.

“Contextual factors” are replaced with “Decision-specific factors” in order to align with the existing strategic decision-making literature.

The revised model continues to remain true to de De Alwis et al.’s (2006, p.374) central argument that “source preferences should not be studied in isolation, but need to be studied as a cohesive whole in the social context of their information source use environment.” It encourages a holistic view of business managers’ source-use behaviour, and emphasizes that, to understand what affects business managers’ source preferences in strategic decision-making situations, an in-depth and multi-faceted analysis of the influences of different groups of factors should be carried out.

The study investigated Chinese business managers’ information source use and linked five value attributes to source use in KM strategic decision-making. The findings show that the Chinese business managers prefer to use internal sources rather than external sources, and prefer personal as opposed to impersonal sources. This confirms previous research on Chinese business decision-making such as Martinsons and Davison’s (2007) which showed that Chinese decision makers preferred informal and uncodified – i.e., personal – information channels.

There were two new findings in the study. First, the study participants indicated that only a systematic, synthesized review of the information collected from multiple information sources can be considered comprehensive and reliable, and they also indicated that source reliability is the most fundamental source characteristic affecting source use. However, a closer examination of the data in Tables 2 and 3 allowed us to nuance this finding. Table 2’s strategy analysis based on the qualitative data collected in the study, and Table 3’s quasi-cost-benefit analysis, actually showed the reliability value attribute was obtained by the study participants via information seeking strategies. Relevancy and accessibility were the two value attributes shown in Table 3 to be the “benefit” value attributes while comprehensiveness and time/effort were the most costly value attributes. The reliability value attribute was somewhat in between these high-cost and high-benefit value attributes. This type of data analysis shows great promise in determining the value attributes that are most difficult and easiest in determining information source use, and the supporting strategies that affect this determination.

The second important study finding is that the Chinese business managers’ source use in KM strategic decision-making cannot be determined by source characteristics alone. Instead, it depends on multiple groups of organizational, environmental and decision-making factors. Organizational and environmental context are therefore important when selecting value attributes of one information source over another during KM strategic decision-making. In this regard, the difference between the telecommunications and manufacturing participants in the study was dramatic. Compared to the manufacturing participants in the study, the telecommunications business managers in the study attributed much less value to the information sources: Customers, Newspaper/magazines, and Conferences/business trips, while attributing much more value to the information source: Corporate library/intranet & databases. These value attribution preferences correspond to the distinctive features of the telecommunications versus manufacturing sectors of the economy – i.e., telecommunications is more technology-innovation driven versus manufacturing which is more market driven.

The model we have devised based on our study findings attempts to incorporate these multiple groups of factors, thus revising the De Alwis et al.’s model in light of the particularities of the Chinese business managers’ organizational and environmental context of KM strategic decision-making.

Further research is required to examine the proposed model and the potential inter-relationships among source use, source characteristics, user characteristics, and decision context, in order to arrive at a more systematic interpretation for Chinese versus Western business managers’ information source use in strategic decision-making. What is needed is a large-scale study using a statistical analysis package such as SPSS that would compare information source use and value attribution during KM strategic decision-making for Chinese versus Western manager participants.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

