@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Understanding the adoption of location-based recommendation agents among active users of social networking sites

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We develop a model to examine the adoption of location-based recommendation agents.


                        
                        
                           
                           The theoretical model is developed based on the technology acceptance model.


                        
                        
                           
                           Perceived usefulness, control, and institutional assurance are driving factors.


                        
                        
                           
                           Perceived effort, special treatment, social benefit, and accuracy are antecedents.


                        
                        
                           
                           Perceived usefulness is a significant mediator.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Adoption intention

Local retail

Location-based service

Recommendation agent

Social networking site

Technology acceptance model

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Nowadays, using increasingly granular data, from real-time location information and detailed demographics to consumers-generated content on the social networking sites (SNSs), businesses are starting to offer precise location-based product recommendation services through mobile devices. Based on the technology acceptance model (TAM), this paper develops a theoretical model to examine the adoption intention of active SNS users toward location-based recommendation agents (LBRAs). The research model was tested by using the Partial Least Squares (PLS) technique.The results show that perceived usefulness, perceived control, and perceived institutional assurance are important in developing adoption intention. Perceived effort saving, special treatment, and social benefit have influences on the adoption intention through the mediating effect of perceived usefulness. Perceived accuracy has direct influence on adoption intention.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Recommendation agents (RAs) have the potential to simplify consumers’ research and improve decision-making (Xiao & Benbasat, 2007). RAs refer to “software agents that elicit the interests or preferences of individual users for products, either explicitly or implicitly, and make recommendations accordingly” (Xiao & Benbasat, 2007, p.13). RAs have been widely used in the e-commerce context (Sahoo, Singh, & Mukhopadhyay, 2012). In recent years, with the development of social networking sites (SNSs), location-based services (LBSs), and mobile devices, the service scope of RAs has gone from e-commerce to local retail.

Local retail plays an important role in total retail sales (Retailresearch, 2012). In the traditional local retail context, as consumers are bombarded with information and options, they often struggle to find the products that will best meet their needs (Davenport, Mule, & Lucker, 2011). Nowadays, consumers can rely on personalized product recommendation information to make purchase decisions by using location-based recommendation agents (LBRAs). In the LBRA context, using increasingly granular data, from real-time location information and detailed demographics to consumer-generated content on the SNSs, businesses are starting to offer precise location-based product recommendation services through mobile devices. For example, Facebook has started to help companies place relevant, timely mobile advertising by mining and matching consumers’accumulated personal dataand real-time location information.

The consumers’ acceptance of LBRAs is important in the survival of location-based product recommendation services. Although certain studies have examined the adoption of LBSs (Gerpott & Berg, 2011; Zhou, 2013) and online RAs (Komiak & Benbasatm, 2006; Lee, Lee, & Sanford, 2010; Qiu & Benbasat, 2010), the adoption of LBRAs in the SNS context has been largely ignored by academic literature. LBRA in the SNS context is different from online RA. Consumers receive recommendation information mainly through mobile phones in LBRA and computers in online RA. The difference between the mobile phone and the computer, such as the size of the screen and its functions, results in dissimilar information presentation formats. This may affect decision-making (Vessey, 1991). As the well running of LBRAs depends on consumer-generated contents on the SNSs, active SNS users arethemainusersof LBRAs. Therefore, based on the technology acceptance model (TAM), this paper proposes a theoretical model to examine the adoption of LBRAs of active SNS users. The findings can help SNS providers develop more effective mobile advertising.

LBRAs depend on information technology. TAM is the most employed model in the study of information technology adoption (Yousafzai, Foxall, & Pallister, 2007). According to TAM, users’ behavioral intention is determined by perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use, which are determined by external variables (Davis, 1989). In the present study, perceived usefulness of LBRAs can be regarded as driving factor of adoption intention, and the potential benefits (perceived effort saving, perceived accuracy, perceived special treatment, and perceived social benefit) of LBRAs can be regarded as external variables. Thus, the present study employs the TAM to examine the adoption of LBRAs by active SNS users. In addition, considering the control and private risk characteristics of LBRAs, two other driving factors (perceived control and perceived institutional assurance) have been added. Fig. 1
                     
                     shows the research model.

In the TAM, perceived usefulness is a strong driving factor of behavioral intentions (Davis, 1989). In the present study, the perception of usefulness of an LBRA by active SNS users is likely to influence adoption intention. Perceived ease of use is the other driving factor in the TAM, which has a less stable effect on individual behavioral intention across studies (Yousafzai et al., 2007). Kowatsch and Maass (2010) have found that perceived ease of use has no significant relation with the intention to use mobile RA. This study excludes the factor of perceived ease of use. Thus, the present study only proposes that perceived usefulness positively affects the adoption intention of LBRA by active SNS users. The hypothesis is this:
                           H1
                           Perceived usefulness has a significant influence on the adoption intention of LBRA by active SNS users.

A previous study discovered that perceived control is an important driving factor of behavioral intention (Collier & Sherrell, 2010). With LBRAs, perceived control pertains to the extent to which a consumer believes that he or she has the ability to adapt to and direct the LBRAs to fulfill service needs (Zhu, Nakatabl, Sivakumar, & Grewal, 2013). In order to meet individual needs, customers need to believe that they have the ability to determine the service offering instead of accepting a standardized design of theoriginal service(Collier & Sherrell, 2010). For example, if a consumer does not believe herself can determine the nature of the information flow, the mode and time of information transfer, or the disclosure level of personalinformation when using an LBRA, she may have no intention to adopt the LBRA. Thus, the present study proposes that perceived control positively affects the adoption intention of LBRA by active SNS users. The hypothesis is this:
                           H2
                           Perceived control has a significant influence on the adoption intention of LBRA by active SNS users.

Extant research has found that perceived institutional assurance is a significant antecedent of trust in online product recommendations (Hsiao, Lin, Wang, Yu, & Lu, 2010). With LBRAs, perceived institutional assurance refers to the extent to which a consumer believes the quality of the LBRA’s protective legal and technological structures ensure personal information security (Hsiao et al., 2010). The adoption of an LBRA means that the service provider is allowed to gather, store, process, and use the personal information of a consumer (e.g., identity, self-presentation data, behavior data, and real-time location information). As information privacy is a critical concern for many individuals (Xu, Teo, Tan, & Agarwal, 2012), perceived institutional assurance may be related to the adoption of LBRAs. Hence, the present study proposes that perceived institutional assurance positively affects the adoption intention of LBRA by active SNS users. The hypothesis is as follows:
                           H3
                           Perceived institutional assurance has a significant influence on the adoption intention of LBRA by active SNS users.

Based on the effort-accuracy framework, previous studies have posited that the potential benefits of RAs include simplifying decision making and making it more effective (Häubl & Trifts, 2000; Lee & Benbasat, 2011). Lee and Benbasat (2011) have demonstrated that perceived effort and accuracy are significant antecedents of user acceptance of RAs in web stores. In the present study, LBRAs also have the potential benefits of saving the effort required in shopping and making better decisions. Thus, the present study proposes that perceived effort saving and perceived accuracy have positive influence on perceived usefulness.

Special treatment benefitis important in consumer decisions (Dagger, David, & Ng, 2011). Consumers may expect to receive specialtreatmentbenefit by adopting LBRAs. Thus, the present study proposes that perceived special treatment has positive influence on perceived usefulness.

The value of SNS lies in that it helps users to capitalize on their social networks (Chang & Zhu, 2012). As an application of SNSs, users may also expect to receive social benefits from LBRAs. Therefore, the present study proposes that perceived social benefit has positive influence on perceived usefulness.

In addition, as perceived usefulness is a robust determinant of adoption intention (Yousafzai et al., 2007), the present study proposes that perceived usefulness has a mediating role in the relationships between the antecedents of perceived effort, accuracy, special treatment, and social benefit and the consequence of adoption intention.

The hypotheses are:
                           H4
                           Perceived effort saving has a significant influence on the perceived usefulness of LBRAs.

Perceived accuracy has a significant influence on the perceived usefulness of LBRAs.

Perceived special treatment has a significant influence on the perceived usefulness of LBRAs.

Perceived social benefit has a significant influence on the perceived usefulness of LBRAs.

Perceived usefulness is a mediator between: (a) perceived effort saving and adoption intention; (b) perceived accuracy and adoption intention; (c) perceived special treatment and adoption intention; and (d) perceived social benefit and adoption intention.

@&#METHOD@&#

A questionnaire was used to collect data from the users of Renren (a famous SNS in China). Participants included 250 undergraduate students aged 19- to 22-years-old from a large university in China. Students are the largest number of SNSs. Previous studies about SNSs have used the method of collecting data from students of one university with similar ages (Kim, Kim, & Nam, 2010; Smock, Ellison, Lampe, & Wohn, 2011).

Before taking the surveys, all participants read an informed consent document letting them know that their participation was voluntary and that they could stop participating at anytime without penalty. After giving their permission, participants read background material about a virtual case of LBRA in the Renren context. Then participants were asked to fill out measures regarding their age, gender, frequency of visiting Renren, and their benefit perceptions, driving factors and adoption intention toward the LBRA described in the background material.

The background material was as follows: Mei is an active user of Renren. She has adopted the LBRA application in Renren. Mei likes sports clothes of Nike. She often discusses Nike with friends in Renren. One morning, Mei posted the message “I will start jogging every morning” on her profile in Renren. That afternoon, Mei went to ashopping center. When Mei checked in on Renren using her mobile phone at theshopping center, she received a recommendation message with an electronic coupon. The message said that the Nike specialty shop located at the shopping center has just launched new products and has an end-of-season sale. With the electronic coupon, Mei would be given a pair of Nike socks if she purchases something in the store that day.

The final effective sample size is 216. Thirty-four questionnaires were discarded because the respondents did not visit Renren in the last seven days. There were 90 males (42%) and 126 females (58%) with the mean age of 21-years-old.

Eight constructs were measured in the present study: perceived effort saving, perceived accuracy, perceived special treatment, perceived social benefits, perceived control, perceived institution assurance, perceived usefulness, and adoption intention. All scale items used five-point Likert scales anchored between “strongly disagree (1)” and “strongly agree (5)”.

Perceived effort saving pertains to the degree to which a consumer believes that an LBRA would save the effort required to make purchase decisions. Measurements for perceived effort saving were adapted from the scale of Lee and Benbasat (2011).

Perceived accuracy pertains to the degree to which a consumer believes that an LBRA would recommend accurate product information. Measurements for perceived accuracy were adapted from the scales of Lee and Benbasat (2011) and Komiak and Benbasat (2006).

Perceived special treatment pertains to the degree to which a consumer believes that he/she would receive tangible benefits from retailers by adopting an LBRA. Measurements for perceived special treatment were adapted from the scales of Evanschitzky et al. (2012).

Perceived social benefits pertains to the degree to which a consumer believes that adopting an LBRA would enhance his/her interpersonal relationship. Measurements for perceived social benefits were adapted from the scales of Chang and Zhu (2011).

Perceived control refers to the degree to which a consumer believes that he/she has the ability to adapt to and direct an LBRA to fulfill service needs. Measurements for perceived control were adapted from the scale of Zhu et al. (2013).

Perceived institution assurance refers to the degree to which a consumer believes that an LBRA provider would afford protective legal and technological structures to ensure personal information security. Measurements for perceived institution assurance were adapted from the scale of Hsiao et al. (2010).

Perceived usefulness pertains to the degree to which a consumer believes that adopting an LBRA would be beneficial. Measurements for perceived usefulness were adapted from the scale of Davis (1989).

Adoption intention refers to the possibility for a SNS active user to adopt an LBRA. Measurements for adoption intention were adapted from the scale of Dodds, Monroe, and Grewal (1991).

@&#RESULTS@&#

A structural equation modeling technique called Partial Least Squares (PLS) was employed to test the research model. The PLS-Graph 3.0 software is used (Chin, 2001).

Reliability tests used the Cronbach’s Alpha value to measure the internal consistency of the items. According to the evaluation criterion of Nunnally (1978), the threshold level of Cronbach’s Alpha value is 0.7. The results show that all the Cronbach’s Alpha values are above 0.8 (Table 1
                        ). The values of composite reliability (CR) were also examined. The results show that all the values of CR are above 0.8 (Table 1), meeting the criterion of strong reliability (Chin & Gopal, 1995). The high values of Cronbach’s Alpha and CR demonstrated the reliability of the measurement model.

The factor loading and average variance extracted (AVE) were used to measure convergent validity. The results show that the factor loading of all items are above 0.7 and the AVE value of all items are higher that 0.6 (Table 1). The results supported the convergent validity of the measurement model (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). In addition, the squared correlations between all latent constructs are significantly less than the corresponding AVE (Table 2
                        ), which supported the discriminant validity of the measurement model (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). All the criteria demonstrated the construct validity of the measurement model.

A structural model was used to test the hypotheses. Fig. 2
                         shows that perceived usefulness (β
                        =0.594, p
                        <0.01), perceived control (β
                        =0.143, p
                        <0.05), and perceived institutional assurance (β
                        =0.169, p
                        <0.05) are predictors of adoption intention, accounting for 69.6% of variance explained. As we hypothesized that perceived usefulness, perceived control, and perceived institutional assurance would significantly affect adoption intention, hypotheses H1, H2, and H3 are supported. Perceived effort saving (β
                        =0.236, p
                        <0.01), perceived special treatment (β
                        =0.476, p
                        <0.01), and perceived social benefit (β
                        =0.279, p
                        <0.01) are strong predictors of perceived usefulness, accounting for 77.0% of variance explained. As for the paths from perceived effect saving, accuracy, special treatment, and social benefit to perceived usefulness, the results were somewhat mixed. Hypotheses H4, H6 and H7 are supported, while hypothesis H5 is not.

A mediation analysis was used to test the mediating role of perceived usefulness in the relationships between the antecedents of perceived effort, accuracy, special treatment, and social benefit and the consequence of adoption intention.

In Table 3
                        , the model 1 shows that there are significant relations between the independent variables (i.e., perceived effort saving, perceived accuracy, perceived special treatment and perceived social benefit) and the dependent variable (i.e., adoption intention). The model 2, model 3 and model 4 show that: (1) the effect of perceived effort saving on perceived usefulness (β
                        =0.238, p
                        <0.01), perceived special treatment on perceived usefulness (β
                        =0.476, p
                        <0.01), and perceived social benefit on perceived usefulness (β
                        =0.278, p
                        <0.01) are statistically significant; (2) the effect of perceived usefulness on adoption intention (β
                        =0.813, p
                        <0.01) is statistically significant; and (3) when the paths from independent variables to perceived usefulness and from perceived usefulness to adoption intention are controlled, a previously significant relations (in model 1) from perceived effort saving and perceived special treatment to adoption intention are no longer significant (in model 4); though the previously significant relations (in model 1) between perceived social benefit and adoption intention is still significant, the coefficient (in model 4) has a significant reduction. In addition, as perceived accuracy has a significant effect on adoption intention (in model 1) but has none on perceived usefulness (in model 2), a Sobel test was used to measure the mediating role of perceived usefulness in the relationship between perceived accuracy and adoption intention. The result shows that perceived usefulness has no significant mediating effect between perceived accuracy and adoption intention (z
                        =0.415, p
                        >0.05).

These results demonstrate that perceived usefulness is a full mediator in the relationship between perceived effort saving and adoption intention (H8a) and between perceived special treatment and adoption intention (H8c); and it is a partial mediator in the relationship between perceived social benefit and adoption intention (H8d). Hypotheses H8a, H8c and H8d are supported, while hypothesis H8b is not.

Perceived effort saving has a significant positive effect on adoption intention through the mediator of perceived usefulness. Information overload makes consumers spend considerable effort in making purchase decisions. Overcoming information overload is useful for consumers. RAs play an important role in reducing the negative impact of information overload (Ortega, Bobadilla, Hernando, & Gutiérrez, 2013). In the LBRA context, when consumers believe that an LBRA would save the effort required to make purchase decisions, they may believe it is useful, and they may have the intention to adopt the LBRA. It suggests that LBRA providers should emphasize the benefit of saving the effort of SNS users in making purchase decisions.

Perceived accuracy has a direct positive effect on adoption intention. In the LBRA context, the mobile phone is the primary device for consumers to receive recommendation information. The screen size of the mobile phone is small. Consumers cannot overlook the recommendation information on their mobile phones. Though RAs can help consumers find the products they are likely to like from the thousands of items which they would not have the resources to evaluate (Sahoo et al., 2012), inaccurate recommendation information will irritate consumers. Hence, perceived accuracy has a direct effort on adoption intention without through the mediating effect of perceived usefulness. It suggests that LBRA providers should be careful in recommending personalized information to users, avoiding blind recommendations.

Perceived special treatment has a significant positive effect on adoption intention through the mediator of perceived usefulness. Consumers always hope to receive special treatment benefits in shopping (Dagger et al., 2011). Hence, if consumers believe they would receive tangible benefits from retailers by using an LBRA, they would think the LBRA is useful, and therefore adopt the LBRA. It suggests that LBRA providers should preferentially cooperate with local retailerswho are willing to offer special promotions to the users.

Perceived social benefit has a significant positive effect on adoption intention through the mediator of perceived usefulness. Users are interested in using SNSs to improve their interpersonal relationships (Chang & Zhu, 2011). As an application of SNSs, the process of using an LBRA can be shown as dynamic information on SNS users’ profiles to help them communicate with other users. Hence, if consumers believe that an LBRA would enhance their interpersonal relationships, they would think the LBRA is useful, and then adopt the LBRA. It suggests that LBRA providers can introduce the benefit of enhance social networks to SNS usersto arouse their intention to adopt.

Perceived control has a significant positive effect on adoption intention. This conclusion is similar with the finding of Collier and Sherrell (2010). Consumers care about their ability to direct the LBRA to fulfill their service needs. It suggests that LBRA providers should be concerned regarding the humanization of the design to make it easy for users to personalize the service.

Perceived institutional assurance has a significant positive effect on adoption intention. Information privacy is an increasingly critical concern for many people (Xu et al., 2012). The protective legal and/or technological structures of LBRAs with low quality will make possible invasions of personal privacy, which will get users into trouble. Therefore, consumers care about the institutional assurance of LBRAs before they adoption it. It suggests that LBRA providers should devote much attention in providing a secure environment for users to adopt the services.

The advent of SNSs, LBSs and mobile services allow RA providers to utilize the personal information provided by users on SNSs and spatial location information to provide value-added services. This study examined the LBRA adoption intention of active SNS users. Results indicate that perceived usefulness, control, and institutional assurance are important in developing adoption intention. Perceived effort saving, special treatment, and social benefit have positive influences in the adoption intention through the mediating effect of perceived usefulness. Perceived accuracy has direct influence on adoption intention. These findings fill the gap of LBRA adoption intention in the product recommendation literature.

Although the findings of this study are meaningful, several limitations exist, and they should be addressed in future research. First, as the main aim of the present study is to test active SNS users’ adoption intention, inactive SNS users and non-SNS users were not tested. Future research could consider their adoption intention. Second, participants are undergraduate students in China. Consumers outside of school and in other countries should be considered in future research. Third, only a single scenario was presented in the present study, future research should consider more scenarios and further examine other meaningful factors (such as age, gender, self-regulation, and the level of use of social media). Fourth, while this study has followed some other studies in this domain, in using scale questions all of which have the same order, we now feel that validity would be increased by following the more standard practice of the social sciences generally, which requires that questions randomly alternate the sense of the scale, so that large values do not always represent the same polarity of assessment.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (71302093; 71372132) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2013M531702).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

